


Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Chapters:

1.01    Code Adoption

1.04    General Provisions

1.08    Repealed

1.12    General Criminal Penalty

1.13    Code Enforcement

1.15    Initiative and Referendum

1.16    City Classification


Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION

Sections:

1.01.010    Adoption.

1.01.020    Title – Citation – Reference.

1.01.030    Codification authority.

1.01.040    Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the code.

1.01.050    Reference applies to all amendments.

1.01.060    Title, chapter and section headings.

1.01.070    Reference to specific ordinances.

1.01.080    Effect of code on past actions and obligations.

1.01.090    Effective date.

1.01.100    Constitutionality.


1.01.010 Adoption.

Pursuant to the provisions of RCW 35A.21.130 and 35.21.500 through 35.21.570, there is adopted the “Sequim Municipal Code,” as compiled, edited and published by Code Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 98-003 § 1; Ord. 514 § 1, 1987)


1.01.020 Title – Citation – Reference.

This code shall be known as the “Sequim Municipal Code” and it shall be sufficient to refer to the code as the “Municipal Code” or “City Code” or “SMC” in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the “Sequim Municipal Code.” Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the “Sequim Municipal Code” and such reference shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in the code. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 514 § 2, 1987)


1.01.030 Codification authority.

This code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the administrative ordinances of the city of Sequim, Washington, codified pursuant to the provisions of RCW 35A.21.130 and 35.21.500 through 35.21.570. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 514 § 3, 1987)


1.01.040 Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the code.

The last ordinance included in the initial code is Ordinance 510, passed January 7, 1987. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 514 § 4, 1987)


1.01.050 Reference applies to all amendments.

Whenever a reference is made to this code as the “Sequim Municipal Code,” “City Code,” or “SMC,” or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city of Sequim, Washington, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions made before, as of or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 514 § 5, 1987)


1.01.060 Title, chapter and section headings.

Title, chapter and section headings contained in this code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section of this code. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 514 § 6, 1987)


1.01.070 Reference to specific ordinances.

The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 514 § 7, 1987)


1.01.080 Effect of code on past actions and obligations.

Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendment hereby of any ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the city of Sequim shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee, or penalty at that effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee, or penalty, or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof, required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance, and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 514 § 8, 1987)


1.01.090 Effective date.

This code shall become effective on the date the ordinance adopting this code as the “Sequim Municipal Code” shall become effective. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 514 § 9, 1987)


1.01.100 Constitutionality.

If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The council hereby declares that it would have passed this code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this code should be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinances or orders shall be in full force and effect. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 514 § 10, 1987)


Chapter 1.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

1.04.010    Definitions.

1.04.020    Title of office.

1.04.030    Interpretation of language.

1.04.040    Grammatical interpretation.

1.04.050    Acts by agents.

1.04.060    Prohibited acts include causing and permitting.

1.04.070    Computation of time.

1.04.080    Construction.

1.04.090    Repeal shall not revive any ordinances.


1.04.010 Definitions.

The following words and phrases, whenever used in the ordinances of the city, shall be construed as defined in this section unless from the context a different meaning is intended or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases:

A. “City” and “town” each mean the city of Sequim, or the area within the territorial limits of the city of Sequim, Washington, and such territory outside the city of Sequim over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision.

B. “Council” means the city council of the city. “All its members” or “all councilmen” means the total number of councilmen holding office.

C. “County” means the county of Clallam.

D. “Law” denotes applicable federal law, the Constitution and statutes of the state of Washington, the ordinances of the city of Sequim, and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder.

E. “May” is permissive.

F. “Month” means calendar month.

G. “Must” and “shall” are both mandatory.

H. “Oath” includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the words “affirm” and “affirmed.” An oath or affirmation, when required in writing, may be a “statement under penalty of perjury,” pursuant to RCW 9A.72.085.

I. “Owner,” applied to a building or land, includes every part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land.

J. “Person” includes a natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them.

K. “Personal property” includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt.

L. “Preceding” and “following” means next before and next after, respectively.

M. “Property” includes real and personal property.

N. “Real property” includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.

O. “Sidewalk” means that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.

P. “State” means the state of Washington.

Q. “Street” includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs or other public ways in this city which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this state.

R. “Tenant” and “occupant,” applied to a building or land, include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.

S. “Written” includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed, multigraphed, photocopied or otherwise reproduced in permanent visible form.

T. “Year” means a calendar year. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 491 § 1, 1986)


1.04.020 Title of office.

Use of the title of any officer, employee, department, board or commission means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the city of Sequim. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 491 § 2, 1986)


1.04.030 Interpretation of language.

All words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to that peculiar and appropriate meaning. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 491 § 3, 1986)


1.04.040 Grammatical interpretation.

The following grammatical rules shall apply in the ordinances of the city of Sequim, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended:

A. Gender. Each gender includes the masculine, feminine and neuter genders.

B. Singular and Plural. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular.

C. Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and the future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 491 § 4, 1986)


1.04.050 Acts by agents.

When an act is required by an ordinance, the same being such that it may be done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts performed by an authorized agent. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 491 § 5, 1986)


1.04.060 Prohibited acts include causing and permitting.

Whenever in the ordinances of the city of Sequim any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing the fact of such act or omission. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 491 § 6, 1986)


1.04.070 Computation of time.

Except when otherwise provided, the time within which an act is required to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day is Saturday, Sunday or a holiday, in which case it shall also be excluded. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 491 § 7, 1986)


1.04.080 Construction.

The provisions of the city of Sequim, and all proceedings under them, are to be construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote justice. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 491 § 8, 1986)


1.04.090 Repeal shall not revive any ordinances.

The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 491 § 9, 1986)


Chapter 1.08 OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER

(Repealed by Ord. 2005-024)


Chapter 1.12 GENERAL CRIMINAL PENALTY

Sections:

1.12.005    Enforcement.

1.12.007    Adoption by reference.

1.12.010    Violation – Penalty.

1.12.015    Other enforcement not precluded.


1.12.005 Enforcement.

Misdemeanor and gross misdemeanor offenses committed by adults within the Sequim city limits and referred by city law enforcement officers or law enforcement agencies, whether filed under state law or city ordinance, may be prosecuted, adjudicated, sentenced, and incarcerated in accordance with contracts and agreements with Clallam County. The city also reserves the right to utilize the jail from the city of Forks, Washington, in accordance with contracts or agreements with the city of Forks. Nothing in this section is intended to prevent or prohibit the city from establishing its own municipal court and jail facilities, reinstating prosecution, defense, or other services, or from entering into contracts and agreements for such facilities and services with any other Washington county or city. (Ord. 2017-009 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-011 § 1; Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2005-016; Ord. 97-001 § 1)


1.12.007 Adoption by reference.

The city of Sequim hereby adopts by reference all of the crimes defined as gross misdemeanors or misdemeanors in the Revised Code of Washington, as now enacted or hereafter amended, including, but not limited to, RCW Titles 9, 9A, 10, 13, 16, 46, 66, 68, 69 and 77. (Ord. 2011-011 § 1)


1.12.010 Violation – Penalty.

A. Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of the Sequim Municipal Code is guilty of a misdemeanor unless otherwise specified. Except in cases where a different punishment is prescribed by any city ordinance, any person convicted of a gross misdemeanor under city ordinances may be punished by up to 365 days’ imprisonment or up to a $5,000 fine, or by fine and imprisonment. Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under city ordinances may be punished by up to 90 days’ imprisonment or up to a $1,000 fine, or fine and imprisonment. However, the punishment for any city criminal ordinance is the same as the punishment provided in state law for the same crime.

B. Each such person is guilty of a separate infraction, violation or offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any city ordinance is committed or permitted by any such person and may be punished accordingly. (Ord. 2017-009 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-011 § 1; Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 490, 1986; Ord. 486 § 1, 1986; Ord. 357 § 26, 1977)


1.12.015 Other enforcement not precluded.

Enforcement under this chapter, or any criminal enforcement proceedings, or sanctions of any code provision, is in addition to and does not preclude or limit any other forms of enforcement available to the city. This provision includes, without limitation, enforcement under any other provisions of the Sequim Municipal Code, nuisance actions, actions for injunctions, or any other civil or equitable actions to abate, discontinue, or correct acts in violation of this code. (Ord. 2017-009 § 1 (Exh. A))


Chapter 1.13 CODE ENFORCEMENT

Sections:

1.13.010    Purpose and intent.

1.13.020    Definitions.

1.13.030    Violations.

1.13.040    Joint and several responsibility and liability.

1.13.050    Responsibility to enforce.

1.13.060    Guidelines regarding responses to potential violations.

1.13.070    Right of entry and warrants.

1.13.080    Investigation – Notice and order – Separate violations – Service of process.

1.13.090    Other actions – Additional notice – Recording – Amendment – Administrative conference.

1.13.100    Extensions.

1.13.110    Denial of permits based on existing code violation – Exceptions.

1.13.120    Stop work orders.

1.13.130    Emergency orders.

1.13.140    Notice – Do not occupy.

1.13.150    Administrative appeals.

1.13.160    Administrative appeal fee waiver.

1.13.170    Administrative appeal hearing.

1.13.180    Civil penalty.

1.13.190    Additional relief.

1.13.200    Penalties for subdivision and planned residential development violations.

1.13.210    Criminal penalties.

1.13.220    Judicial appeals.


1.13.010 Purpose and intent.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish a uniform and efficient system to enforce city regulations, provide an opportunity for a prompt hearing and decision on alleged violations and establish penalties for violations. This chapter is for the benefit of the general public’s health, safety and welfare and not for the benefit of any person or class of persons. This chapter intends to place the duty to comply with its requirements upon the owner, occupier, or other person responsible for the condition of the land and buildings within the scope of the Sequim Municipal Code. Nothing in this chapter is intended to impose any duty, including without limitation a duty to enforce, upon the city or any of its officers, employees, or volunteers that would subject them to damages in a civil action. (Ord. 2019-013 § 1 (Exh. A))


1.13.020 Definitions.

A

“Aggrieved party” means a person whose ownership, financial, or personal rights are substantially affected by a violation of this chapter.

D

“Director” means the city department head or designee responsible for enforcing violations of this chapter.

E

“Emergency order” means an order imposed by the city requiring the immediate halt to all ongoing use or activity in violation of the Sequim Municipal Code which threatens the health and safety of the occupants of the premises or any member of the public.

F

“Final decision” means the ultimate conclusion of the appropriate reviewing body or individual.

N

“Notice and order” means a document that includes the final decision of a director concluding that a violation has occurred, describing the violation as well as penalties and deadlines for compliance.

O

“Order” includes either a stop work order or an emergency order.

P

“Party of record” means the responsible party; any person who can demonstrate that the person is aggrieved by a violation or a decision on the violation; and the director or city manager.

R

“Repeat violation” means a violation of the same regulation in any location by the same person for which voluntary compliance previously has been sought within two years or a notice of civil violation has been issued within two years of the new violation.

“Responsible party” means the property owner and/or the person(s) responsible for the condition of the property on which a violation has been committed.

S

“Stop work order” means an order imposed by the city requiring an immediate halt to all ongoing use or activity in violation of the Sequim Municipal Code. (Ord. 2019-013 § 1 (Exh. A))


1.13.030 Violations.

A. It is a violation of the Sequim Municipal Code for any person to initiate, maintain or cause to be initiated or maintained the use of any structure, land or property within the city without first obtaining the permits or authorizations required for that use.

B. It is a violation of the Sequim Municipal Code for any person to use, construct, locate, demolish or cause to be used, constructed, located, or demolished any structure, land or property within the city, in any manner that is not permitted by the terms of the permit or authorization issued pursuant to the Sequim Municipal Code if the terms or conditions are explicitly stated on the permit documents, the approved plans, or other city decision containing conditions of approval.

C. The provisions of this chapter are not exclusive and may be used in addition to other code enforcement provisions authorized by the Sequim Municipal Code or other applicable law or regulation.

D. If there is a conflict between this chapter and any other provision of the Sequim Municipal Code or city ordinances providing for a civil penalty, this chapter prevails. (Ord. 2019-013 § 1 (Exh. A))


1.13.040 Joint and several responsibility and liability.

Responsibility for code violations enforced under this chapter is joint and several. The city may take action against (A) one party even if other persons may also be potentially responsible for a violation or (B) some or all parties potentially responsible for a violation. (Ord. 2019-013 § 1 (Exh. A))


1.13.050 Responsibility to enforce.

The community development director, the public works director, the police chief, and the administrative services director (collectively, director) have the responsibility to enforce this chapter, pursuant to the code provision(s) cited as the basis for enforcement. A director may call upon any other appropriate city department or public agency to assist in enforcement, including without limitation the Clallam County Fire District No. 3, Clallam County environmental health department, Washington State Department of Ecology, and/or other appropriate agencies. (Ord. 2019-013 § 1 (Exh. A))


1.13.060 Guidelines regarding responses to potential violations.

A. It is the city’s policy to investigate and to attempt to resolve all potential code violations. At the director’s discretion, potential violations may be processed in any order that maximizes the enforcement efficiency. However, at times when not all potential code violations can be investigated due to lack of resources or otherwise, the most serious potential violations should be addressed before less serious potential violations. The following priorities apply when responding to potential violations:

1. Violations that present an imminent threat to public health or safety.

2. Violations that present a high risk of damage to public resources or facilities.

3. Violations involving a regulated use or activity under the Sequim Municipal Code, such as provisions covering critical areas, floodplain management, shorelines or shorelands.

4. Violations that may result in damage to real or personal property.

5. Violations that do not fit within any of the previous categories and have only minor public impacts. These potential violations should be processed in the order in which they are received and as resources allow.

B. As a guideline and as resources allow, all potential violations should be investigated within 60 calendar days and enforcement actions should be initiated within 120 calendar days of coming to the city’s attention. Failure to meet these guideline response dates does not in any way constitute city liability or prevent the director from investigating and enforcing potential violations outside of these response times. (Ord. 2019-013 § 1 (Exh. A))


1.13.070 Right of entry and warrants.

A. Any entry made to private property to inspect for code violations must be accomplished in conformity with Constitutional and statutory constraints on entry. The director is authorized to enter upon any property to administer this chapter provided such entry is consistent with the Constitutions and laws of the United States and the state of Washington.

B. Upon presentation of proper credentials, a director may, with the consent of the owner or occupier of a building or premises, enter at reasonable times any building or premises subject to the consent or warrant to perform the responsibilities imposed by this chapter. If the property is occupied, the director must ask permission of the occupants before entering the property. If an owner, occupant, or agent refuses permission, the director may seek an administrative or criminal search warrant. Owner consent is not required where enforcement procedures are related to publicly accessible portions of a business or pursuant to a lawfully issued administrative warrant.

C. The director is authorized to enter upon property or premises to determine whether city codes are being followed and to obtain supporting documentation as may be necessary to determine such adherence. This documentation may include, without limitation, photographs, digital images, videotapes, video images, audio recordings, samples, or other physical evidence. All inspections, entries, examinations, studies, and surveys will be done in a reasonable manner.

D. The Sequim city attorney may request that a court of competent jurisdiction issue an administrative warrant. The request must be supported by an affidavit of a person having knowledge of the facts sworn to before the judge and establishing the grounds for issuing the warrant.

1. If the judge finds that the affidavit given upon proper oath or affirmation shows probable cause to believe that a Sequim Municipal Code provision has been violated, the judge may issue an administrative warrant to conduct administrative inspections or gathering of evidence. The warrant must:

a. State the grounds for its issuance and the name of each person whose affidavit has been taken in support of the warrant;

b. Be directed to the director or a person authorized by the relevant code to execute it;

c. Command the person to whom it is directed to inspect the area, premises, or building identified for the purpose specified and the evidence that may be gathered;

d. Direct that it be served during normal business hours or at reasonable times if the inspection is not for a business.

2. When executed, a copy of the warrant must be left on the property or the premises searched.

3. A warrant issued under this section must be executed and returned, accompanied by a written inventory of any evidence taken, within 10 calendar days of its issuance date unless, upon a showing of a need for additional time, the court orders otherwise.

4. If evidence is seized pursuant to a warrant, a copy of the written inventory of any evidence taken must be provided to the person from whom or from whose premises the evidence was taken, together with a receipt for the evidence taken.

5. The judge who issued a warrant must attach a copy of the “return” (the endorsement made by the person executing the warrant, stating the actions taken and the time and mode of service, etc.) and all papers returnable in connection therewith and file them with the clerk of the court in which the warrant was made.

E. Any search warrant obtained pursuant to criminal sections authorized under this chapter is governed by appropriate Washington State statutes and court rules. (Ord. 2019-013 § 1 (Exh. A))


1.13.080 Investigation – Notice and order – Separate violations – Service of process.

A. Investigation. In accordance with this chapter, a director is authorized to investigate any structure, use, or practice which the director reasonably believes is in violation of the standards and requirements of the applicable provisions of the Sequim Municipal Code.

1. The city will determine whether a violation has occurred based upon information derived from sources such as field observations, witness statements, relevant documents, data systems for tracking violations, and applicable city codes and regulations. As soon as the city has reasonable cause to determine that a violation has occurred, the violation will be documented, and the responsible party promptly notified.

2. Except as provided in this chapter, a warning will be issued verbally or in writing promptly when a field inspection reveals a violation or as soon as the city otherwise determines a violation has occurred. The warning will inform the responsible party of the violation and allow the person(s) an opportunity to correct it or enter into a voluntary correction agreement as provided for in SMC 8.04.051. Verbal warnings will be logged and followed up with a written warning within five business days, and the site will be reinspected within 14 business days.

3. Nothing in this chapter adversely affects the rights of the owner, lessee, or occupant of any property to recover all costs and expenses incurred and required by this chapter from any person causing such violation.

4. The city may waive one or more code compliance provisions to avoid a substantial injustice. An example of a substantial injustice would be when a person owning property that is the subject of a code violation receives no apparent benefit from the code violation and all necessary remediation is being promptly provided. Any determination of substantial injustice must be made in writing supported by appropriate facts. For purposes of this section, substantial injustice cannot be based exclusively on financial hardship.

5. Any investigation fees that may be assessed by the city are in addition to penalties assessed in accordance with this chapter.

B. Notice and Order. If, after investigation, a director determines that the standards or requirements of the Sequim Municipal Code have been violated, the director may serve a notice and order upon the responsible party. The director may determine that a violation exists based on reliable information, including but not limited to a site visit authorized by the property owner, access to publicly accessible portions of a business, view from the public right-of-way or publicly owned property, aerial photographs, view from neighboring properties with the consent of the neighboring property owner, publicly available information on the Internet, citizen complaints, and public records. The notice and order must contain, at a minimum, the following information:

1. The name and address of the person to whom it is directed;

2. The location and specific description of the violation;

3. A statement that the notice and order is effective immediately upon posting at the site or service on the person to whom it is directed;

4. A specific identification of each standard, code provision or requirement violated;

5. A specific description of the actions required to correct, remedy or avoid the violation or to comply with the standards, code provision or requirements, including but not limited to replacement, repair, supplementation, revegetation or restoration;

6. The deadline for compliance;

7. A statement that the violation may result in the imposition of penalties, and if the violation is not already subject to criminal prosecution that any subsequent violations may result in criminal prosecution as provided in the Sequim Municipal Code or at the discretion of the Sequim city attorney or city prosecutor;

8. A statement that, if a director decides that it is appropriate, the violation may be referred to the city prosecutor for possible criminal prosecution;

9. A statement that failure to comply with the notice and order may result in further enforcement actions and civil fines;

10. A statement that on failure to attain compliance pursuant to the compliance schedule contained within the notice and order, a supplemental notice and order may be issued and additional penalties may accrue during the period of violation;

11. A statement that if compliance is not achieved within the deadline set forth within the notice and order, a director may obtain a warrant of abatement to abate the conditions on the property;

12. A statement that a lien may be filed against the property for any costs of abatement, civil penalties imposed, and/or for reasonable attorney’s fees and costs;

13. A statement that the notice and order represents a determination that a violation exists on property owned or occupied by the person named in the notice and order or has been committed by the person named in the notice and order, and that the determination for the notice and order and the imposition of any civil penalties is final unless timely appealed as provided in SMC 1.13.150;

14. A statement that in order to achieve compliance, a responsible party must submit written notice to the director that all necessary requirements for compliance have been met, and the director must assess and confirm that compliance has been achieved.

15. The following provisions may be added to the notice and order:

a. The notice and order may include or reference an order requiring that the violation immediately cease, and list steps to correct the violation;

b. The notice and order may include or reference an order requiring that the person stop work (“stop work order”) until specifically authorized by the director issuing the stop work order;

c. A statement that a civil penalty has been imposed pursuant to SMC 1.13.180; and

d. If an emergency condition exists, a statement that the emergency condition has resulted from the violation which appears to cause or constitute an imminent or immediate danger to the health and safety of the public, and that, if the responsible party cannot be contacted or refuses to immediately abate the same, a director, upon city manager’s or designee’s approval, will without notice abate the same in a manner allowed by law.

C. Service of Process. The director must serve or cause to be served the notice and order upon the responsible party personally or by mailing a copy of the notice and order by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to the person’s last known address, or by other available mail services. If the person cannot be personally served within the city of Sequim, or if an address for mailed service cannot be reasonably ascertained, or the address is a United States Postal Service or comparable post office box, notice must be served by conspicuously posting a copy of the notice and order on the violating property or by leaving a copy of the notice and order at the person’s residence with a person at least 18 years old and who resides there. Service directed to the landowner and/or occupant of the property may be made by posting the notice and order in a conspicuous place on the property where the violation occurred and concurrently mailing notice as provided in this chapter. The hearing examiner or other entity cannot require additional proof of service beyond the requirements of this chapter. Any failure by the responsible person(s) to see any document served by posting does not invalidate service nor does it invalidate the document. (Ord. 2019-013 § 1 (Exh. A))


1.13.090 Other actions – Additional notice – Recording – Amendment – Administrative conference.

A. Other Actions May Be Taken. Nothing in this chapter limits or precludes the city from taking any action or proceeding pursuant to stop work orders, emergency orders, penalties for subdivision violations, or civil or criminal penalties, or pursuant to the Sequim Municipal Code.

B. Additional Notice to Others. A director may mail or cause to be delivered to all residential and/or nonresidential rental units in the structure, or post at a conspicuous place on the property, a notice which informs each recipient or resident about the notice and order, stop work order or emergency order and the applicable requirements and procedures.

C. Recording. After consultation with the city attorney, a copy of the notice and order may be recorded with the county auditor as a notice to title when the responsible party fails to correct the violation and no appeal is filed or if a director requests that the city attorney take appropriate enforcement action. A director may choose not to record the notice to title if the notice and order is directed only to a responsible person other than the property owner. If a copy of the notice and order has been recorded and compliance has been achieved, the city will issue a notice of compliance and record the same with the county auditor within 30 calendar days.

D. Amendment. A notice and order may be amended at any time to:

1. Correct clerical errors;

2. Cite additional authority for a stated violation;

3. Add, remove, or modify a civil penalty (provided, that the city must state in writing the basis for a decision to waive penalties and such statement becomes part of the public record unless privileged);

4. Add new material information warranting waiver that was presented to the city after the notice and order or stop work order was issued; or

5. Promote resolution of litigation.

E. Administrative Conference. An informal administrative conference may be conducted by the city at any time to facilitate communication among concerned persons and provide a forum for efficient resolution of any violation. Interested parties will not unreasonably be excluded from such conferences. Administrative conferences are not considered part of the record and the meeting will not be recorded or transcribed. Any resolutions identified in the administrative conference will be reduced to writing and made part of a voluntary compliance agreement signed by the city and the person(s) receiving the notice and order. Voluntary compliance agreements are part of the record. (Ord. 2019-013 § 1 (Exh. A))


1.13.100 Extensions.

A director has discretion to grant a one-time extension of the compliance schedule set forth in a notice and order if the responsible party has made a good faith effort to comply with the requirements of the notice and order or if the original time frame is inadequate in the opinion of the director. When calculating a reasonable time for an extension of the compliance schedule, the director must consider the following criteria:

1. The type and degree of violation cited in the notice;

2. The stated intent, if any, of a responsible party to take steps to comply;

3. The procedural requirements for obtaining a permit to carry out corrective action;

4. The complexity of the corrective action, including seasonal considerations, construction requirements and the legal prerogatives of landlords and tenants;

5. Any other circumstances beyond the control of the responsible party. (Ord. 2019-013 § 1 (Exh. A))


1.13.110 Denial of permits based on existing code violation – Exceptions.

A. The city may deny a permit when, with regard to the site or project for which the permit is submitted:

1. Any person owning the property or submitting the development proposal has been found in violation of any city ordinance, resolution, regulation, or public rule that regulates or protects the public health, safety, and welfare, or the use and development of land and water; or

2. Any person owning the property or submitting the development proposal has been found in violation and remains in violation of the conditions of any permit, notice and order, or stop work order issued pursuant to any such ordinance, resolution, regulation, or public rule.

B. To further the remedial purposes of this chapter, denial may continue until the violation is cured by restoration, accepted as complete by the city, and all civil penalties imposed for the violation have been paid.

C. Exceptions. Any permits or approvals will be granted to the extent necessary to accomplish any required restoration or cure. (Ord. 2019-013 § 1 (Exh. A))


1.13.120 Stop work orders.

A. After attempts to resolve the issue have failed, a director has the authority to issue a stop work order prohibiting any work or other activity at the site for violation of applicable code provisions under any of the following circumstances:

1. To avoid material impairment of the director’s ability to secure compliance;

2. To avoid threats to public health or safety;

3. To avoid damage or impact to sensitive environmental areas; or

4. If the mitigation costs of the violation impacts would otherwise be the city’s responsibility.

The stop work order must be in writing and served upon persons engaged in doing such work or causing such work to be done. Notice of a stop work order must be immediately posted at a conspicuous place on the property where the violation is occurring. The stop work order must identify the violation that has been committed and state the specific location where the entire stop work order may be reviewed. Failure to comply with a stop work order constitutes a violation of this chapter.

B. A stop work order must include all information required in SMC 1.13.080(B).

C. If no appeal is filed and compliance is not achieved by the compliance schedule set forth in the order:

1. The director may ask the city attorney to seek additional relief; and/or

2. The director may file a notice and order, if one has not already been issued, or a supplemental notice and order, if one has already been issued, for the violation pursuant to this chapter and impose additional monetary penalties.

D. Nothing in this section should be interpreted to prevent a director from issuing a notice and order and imposing monetary penalties simultaneously with the issuance of a stop work order in accordance with this chapter.

E. Appealing a stop work order stays the imposition of additional civil penalties until the hearing examiner issues a decision. Additionally, any condition described in the stop work order that is not corrected within the specified time is deemed a public nuisance, and a director may ask the city attorney to take action in superior court to get a warrant of abatement for the property. The owner or responsible party (or both) is responsible for costs associated with the abatement in the manner provided by law.

F. In an appeal of a stop work order, the hearing examiner’s determination that a violation has been committed is a final decision for the purposes of an additional appeal.

G. To the extent that this chapter is inconsistent with the city’s adoption by reference of the International Building Code and International Residential Code or any other adopted Uniform or International Code and those codes’ enforcement procedures related to stop work orders, the provisions of this chapter prevail.

H. Defacing, destroying, or removing a stop work order is a criminal offense and may be referred to the city prosecutor. (Ord. 2019-013 § 1 (Exh. A))


1.13.130 Emergency orders.

A. Whenever any use or activity in violation of the Sequim Municipal Code threatens the health and safety of the occupants of the premises or any member of the public, a director has the authority to issue an emergency order directing that the use or activity be discontinued and that the condition be corrected. When such emergency conditions exist, a director, upon city manager approval, may summarily and without notice abate the condition in accordance with this chapter. The emergency order must be in writing and served upon the responsible party engaged in the use or activity or causing the use or activity to be done. The emergency order must be immediately posted in a conspicuous place on the property. Failure to comply with an emergency order constitutes a violation of this chapter.

B. The emergency order must include all the information in SMC 1.13.080(B).

C. The provisions of SMC 1.13.120(C) through (H) apply with equal force in this section. (Ord. 2019-013 § 1 (Exh. A))


1.13.140 Notice – Do not occupy.

In addition to any remedy provided for in this chapter, the director may issue a “do not occupy” notice whenever a condition exists that is immediately dangerous to life, limb, property or safety of the public or occupants of the property. The notice must contain substantially the same information as required by SMC 1.13.080 (Notice and order) and may be appended to, or incorporated by reference in, a notice and order. The notice is deemed served upon posting of the notice as required under this chapter and is effective upon service. Violation of a do not occupy notice constitutes a separate violation from any other code violation. (Ord. 2019-013 § 1 (Exh. A))


1.13.150 Administrative appeals.

A. Appeal Hearings. A responsible party may file an appeal for notice and orders, orders, and/or imposition of civil penalties in accordance with this chapter. Such an appeal may be filed in conjunction with an associated notice and order or order, the imposition of civil penalties, or both. If no appeal is filed with the director, the notice and order or order will become the director’s final order. The final order, including the collection of penalties, may be enforced by the city attorney in superior court.

B. Procedure for Potential Settlement. The hearing examiner has the discretion to grant a 60-day extension to the appeal deadline to allow for settlement discussions. The hearing examiner may extend that period upon a showing of good cause and upon agreement of all parties. If no settlement can be reached within 120 days of the original grant of extension, the appeal process must immediately commence in accordance with this chapter.

C. Standing to File Appeal.

1. Notice and Order. Only parties of record have standing to file an appeal of a notice and order. Parties of record are defined in SMC 1.13.020.

2. Stop Work Order and Emergency Order. Only the property owner or the responsible party as defined in SMC 1.13.020 may request an appeal hearing for a stop work order or emergency order.

D. Deadline for Filing Appeal. Appeals must be filed with the director within 10 calendar days of service of the notice and order or order.

E. Appeal Deadline/Methods of Service. For purposes of computing the time for filing an appeal, the day the decision is issued is not counted. If the last day of the deadline for filing the appeal is a Saturday, Sunday or holiday designated by RCW 1.04.070 or city ordinance, then the appeal must be filed on the next business day. Appeals must be delivered to the city clerk by mail or personal delivery before 4:00 p.m. on the last business day of the appeal period and must contain the appropriate appeal fee unless a waiver has been requested in accordance with SMC 1.13.160. Appeals received by regular mail or email after 4:00 p.m. on the last day of the appeal period or without the applicable fee or fee waiver request will not be accepted, no matter when such appeals were mailed or postmarked. Emailed appeals will not be accepted without express, prior written consent from the director.

F. Content of Appeal/Fees. Appeals must be in writing, be accompanied by the required appeal fee pursuant to the city’s rates and fees schedule (Chapter 3.68 SMC), and contain the following information:

1. Appellant’s name, address, phone number, and email address (if available);

2. A statement describing appellant’s standing to appeal and how the appellant is personally aggrieved by the decision;

3. Appellant’s statement of grounds for appeal and the facts upon which the appeal is based with specific references to the facts alleged in the notice and order or order;

4. The specific relief sought;

5. A statement under penalty of perjury under the laws of the state of Washington that the appellant has read the appeal and believes the contents to be true, followed by the appellant’s signature, the date of signing, and the city and state where signed.

G. Effect. The timely filing of an appeal stays any enforcement action based on a stop work order or notice and order until the hearing examiner’s decision is issued. The effect will not lift or remove a stop work order, but merely stay any further enforcement action such as the continued assessment of civil penalties. (Ord. 2019-013 § 1 (Exh. A))


1.13.160 Administrative appeal fee waiver.

A. Indigent persons may make a written request for waiver of the appeal fee of any code enforcement decision made pursuant to this chapter. Indigent status exists when:

1. The person is currently receiving assistance under a needs-based, means-tested assistance program including, but not limited to, the following: Federal Temporary Assistance for Needy Families; state-provided general assistance for unemployable individuals; Federal Supplemental Security Income; federal poverty-related veteran’s benefits; and food stamps programs; or

2. The person’s household income is at or below 125 percent of the federal poverty guideline; or

3. The person’s household income is above 125 percent of the federal poverty guideline and the applicant has recurring basic living expenses (as defined in RCW 10.101.010(2)(d)) that render the person without the financial ability to pay the appeal fee.

B. A person seeking waiver of the appeal fee of a code enforcement decision must use a form provided by the city and provide documentation of indigent status in the written waiver request. Incomplete forms or forms provided without supporting documentation will be rejected.

C. The city manager or designee will consider and make a written determination of the waiver request before the appeal hearing. The city may schedule a hearing while the waiver request is being processed. However, no hearing will be conducted unless and until the fee waiver has been granted or the fee has been paid. Any hearing scheduled under this section will be cancelled if required fees are not paid with 30 days’ written notice. (Ord. 2019-013 § 1 (Exh. A))


1.13.170 Administrative appeal hearing.

A. The hearing examiner has the authority to hear all appeals under this chapter. Hearings must follow the procedures set forth in Chapter 2.10 SMC.

B. The public hearing on an appeal of a notice and order, order and/or the imposition of civil penalties must include the following elements and be conducted as follows:

1. The community development department, upon agreement with a director and appellant, will coordinate with the hearing examiner to set the time and place of an appeal hearing, and to arrange for providing notice of the public hearing as set forth in Chapter 20.01 SMC. Appeals of enforcement actions require a public hearing and are processed as an appeal of a Type A-1 decision pursuant to SMC 20.01.240.

2. Parties to the hearing may represent themselves or be represented by a designated agent or an attorney.

3. If the person requesting the hearing fails to attend or participate in the hearing (even if a representative is present), the hearing examiner may issue a default order of dismissal in accordance with SMC 2.10.120.

4. The hearing examiner must, at the appropriate stage in the proceeding, give all parties full opportunity to submit and respond to motions and file briefs and objections.

5. The scope and standard of review is de novo. The city has the initial burden of proof in cases involving notice and orders, orders, or penalties to demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence a violation exists and/or that the legal standard for imposing the penalty has been met. The hearing examiner will decide what weight should be granted to witness testimony.

6. At or after the appeal hearing on a notice and order, the hearing examiner may:

a. Uphold the notice and order, order, and/or imposition of civil penalties;

b. Set aside or order the city to withdraw the notice and order or order;

c. Leave the record open at the conclusion of the public hearing and continue the review to a date certain for receipt of additional information;

d. Modify the notice and order or order, which may include an extension of the compliance date;

e. Modify the civil penalty imposed.

C. If the hearing examiner issues a decision in favor of the city, the responsible party is required to pay any civil penalty imposed within 30 calendar days. If the responsible party fails to pay the penalty within the specified time period, the city attorney may ask that the Clallam County Superior Court enter summary judgment against the responsible party for the amount due or for such other relief as allowed by law.

D. To appeal the hearing examiner’s decision on a notice and order, stop work order, emergency order, or the imposition of civil penalties, a person with standing to appeal must file an appeal of the decision to Clallam County Superior Court within the required statutory time frame, or if subject to the Land Use Petition Act, as provided under Chapter 36.70C RCW, within the deadline set forth in RCW 36.70C.040.

E. Following the hearing examiner’s finding that a violation exists, a director may issue a supplemental notice and order and impose additional penalties for a continuing violation. Continuing violation penalties may accrue for each day of violation. The imposition and accrual of per-day penalties for a continuing violation must be accompanied by an initial notice and order (at the time a director determines that additional per-day penalties will accrue) with an additional opportunity for an appeal hearing. (Ord. 2019-013 § 1 (Exh. A))


1.13.180 Civil penalty.

A. In addition to any other sanction or remedial procedure that may be available pursuant to this chapter, any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of the code chapters that adopt this chapter by reference is subject to an initial civil penalty as set forth below.

1. First violation (each offense) $250.00;

2. Second violation (each offense) $300.00;

3. Third violation (each offense) $350.00;

4. Fourth violation (each offense) $400.00;

5. Each additional day of each violation beyond four days, $500.00 per violation.

Penalties for violations of SMC Titles 13 and 15 are double the amounts specified above.

After a compliance deadline has passed, civil penalties may be imposed and accrue per day in conjunction with a supplemental notice and order in accordance with this chapter. To achieve compliance, a responsible party must submit written notice to the director that the responsible party has met all necessary requirements for compliance, and the director must assess and confirm that compliance has been achieved.

B. The director has the discretion to reduce or eliminate a civil penalty considering certain mitigating factors, including but not limited to the following:

1. A responsible party’s financial hardship or inability to pay; or

2. That the violation giving rise to the action was caused by the willful act, neglect, or abuse of another; or

3. A responsible party’s unavailability or inability to respond during the initial penalty phase, if the responsible party undertakes correction of the violation promptly upon receipt of the notice thereof; or

4. A responsible party’s inability to attain full compliance within the time specified because of an inability to obtain necessary materials or labor, inability to gain access to the subject structure, or other condition or circumstance beyond the control of the responsible party; or

5. Any other conditions or circumstances beyond the control of the responsible party that a director deems sufficient to warrant a reduction or elimination of a civil penalty; or

6. A responsible party’s timely actions in achieving full compliance within the time frame for corrective action provided by the notice and order or stop work order.

The person(s) named in the notice and order who seek a reduction of the monetary penalty have the burden of proving that the violation has been corrected and the date of correction, including verification by the director.

C. Monetary penalties will not be reduced in the case of a repeat violation as defined in SMC 1.13.020.

D. Nothing in this section obligates the director to reduce any monetary penalties.

E. The penalty imposed by this section, if not timely remitted by the responsible party, will be collected by civil action brought in the name of the city or pursuant to RCW 7.80.010(5), 35A.21.160, or 35.22.280(3). A director must notify the city attorney in writing of the name of any person subject to the penalty, and the city attorney, with the director’s assistance, will take appropriate action to collect the penalty, which action must be filed in Clallam County Superior Court. If the city is forced to take action for the collection of penalties, the city is entitled to reasonable attorney’s fees and costs.

F. After the compliance deadline, each day that the city documents a violation is a separate violation for which a criminal citation may be issued, additional civil penalties may be imposed and accrue during the period of violation, or both. However, no additional fines for a continuing violation may be assessed without providing notice and an opportunity for an appeal hearing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

G. Penalties must be paid to the general fund unless a specific utility is identified in the notice and order, in which case penalties must be paid to said utility fund. (Ord. 2019-013 § 1 (Exh. A))


1.13.190 Additional relief.

A. A director may ask the city attorney to seek legal or equitable relief to enjoin any acts or practices and abate any condition which constitutes or will constitute a violation of any of the code provisions that incorporate this chapter by reference, when civil or criminal penalties are inadequate to effect compliance. Such legal or equitable relief includes, without limitation, any of the following:

B. An action in superior court to obtain a warrant of abatement pursuant to RCW 7.48.260 if there is no appeal as authorized under SMC 1.13.150, or if after appeal the hearing examiner determined a violation was committed and did not authorize a delay and there has been no appeal to Clallam County Superior Court, and correction has not been made within the compliance deadline. Upon obtaining a warrant from the superior court the city may proceed to abate the condition in any reasonable manner.

C. Following affirmative review by the city manager and the city attorney, and in accordance with Washington State law, the city may impose a lien against the real property described in the civil penalty or abatement, for any civil penalty and/or for the cost of any work of abatement done pursuant to this chapter, together with interest and reasonable attorney’s fees and costs. The monetary penalties and abatement costs constitute a personal obligation of the responsible party.

The lien will be subordinate to all existing special assessment liens previously imposed upon the same property and superior to all other liens, except for state and county taxes, with which it will be on parity.

A director may cause a claim for lien to be recorded with the county auditor within 90 days from the date the city completes the work or abatement. The claim of lien must contain the following:

1. The authority for imposing a civil penalty of proceeding to abate the violation, or both;

2. A brief description of the civil penalty imposed or the abatement work done, or both, including the violations charged and the duration thereof, the time the work is commenced and completed and the name of the responsible party performing the work;

3. A legal description of the property to be charged with the lien;

4. The name of the known or reputed owner; and

5. The amount, including lawful and reasonable costs, for which the lien is claimed.

The lien may be foreclosed in Clallam County Superior Court.

D. When a director concludes that a violation has been committed that results in an emergency condition or reasonably appears to cause or constitute an imminent or immediate danger to public health and safety, and the responsible party cannot be contacted or refuses to immediately abate the same, the director has authority to summarily abate the violation without notice. A director must make all reasonable efforts to contact the responsible party before commencing emergency abatement action. Notice of the abatement action must be given to the responsible party as soon thereafter as possible and the city will be entitled to recover the abatement costs as provided in subsection C of this section.

E. A director has the ability to suspend or revoke any approvals or permits issued to the same property and/or responsible party for a violation of this chapter or any of the code sections that incorporate this chapter by reference. (Ord. 2019-013 § 1 (Exh. A))


1.13.200 Penalties for subdivision and planned residential development violations.

Violations of any provision of the Sequim Municipal Code regarding subdivisions and planned residential developments are subject to the enforcement procedures and penalties found in this chapter and any other applicable supplemental enforcement procedures and penalties found in the Sequim Municipal Code. (Ord. 2019-013 § 1 (Exh. A))


1.13.210 Criminal penalties.

A. Any person who has been found to have committed five or more civil violations pursuant to this chapter within the past five years will be deemed to have committed a misdemeanor and is subject to criminal prosecution and a fine in a sum not exceeding $1,000 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. Every day of continued noncompliance with a notice and order or order enforced in accordance with this chapter or any of the code provisions that incorporate this chapter by reference is a separate offense.

B. The above criminal penalty may also be imposed:

1. For any other violation of any of the code provisions that incorporate this chapter by reference; and

2. For any willful, intentional, or bad faith failure or refusal to comply with the standards or requirements of any of the code provisions that incorporate this chapter by reference. (Ord. 2019-013 § 1 (Exh. A))


1.13.220 Judicial appeals.

After a party has exhausted administrative remedies under this chapter, the city or appellant may appeal the hearing examiner’s final order to superior court under the procedures of the Land Use Petition Act, Chapter 36.70C RCW. If Chapter 36.70C RCW does not apply, the city or appellant may appeal the hearing examiner’s final order to superior court under the procedures of Chapter 7.16 RCW. (Ord. 2019-013 § 1 (Exh. A))


Chapter 1.15 INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM

Sections:

1.15.010    Power of initiative and referendum adopted.

1.15.020    Repealed.


1.15.010 Power of initiative and referendum adopted.

The city of Sequim hereby adopts the power of initiative and referendum for the qualified electors of the city as provided pursuant to RCW 35A.11.080 through 35A.11.100. The powers are limited as provided by other statutes and by case law. Such powers are to be exercised in the manner provided in the above-referenced sections of the Revised Code of Washington as they now exist or may be amended from time to time and said sections are hereby incorporated in full by this reference. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 96-022 § 1)


1.15.020 Administrative procedures and citizen guidelines.

Repealed by Ord. 2009-036. (Ord. 96-022 § 1)


Chapter 1.16 CITY CLASSIFICATION

Sections:

1.16.010    Noncharter code city classification adopted.

1.16.020    Copy of ordinance to state.


1.16.010 Noncharter code city classification adopted.

There is adopted for the city of Sequim, Washington, the classification of noncharter code city retaining the same general plan of government under which the city of Sequim is currently organized but governed according to Chapter 35A.13 RCW, council-manager, of the Optional Municipal Code. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-026 § 1; Ord. 93-018 § 1)


1.16.020 Copy of ordinance to state.

The city clerk is hereby authorized and directed to forward to the Secretary of State a certified copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter for filing pursuant to RCW 35A.02.040. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 93-018 § 2)


Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL

Chapters:

2.02    Repealed

2.04    City Council

2.06    City Manager

2.08    City Attorney

2.10    Hearing Examiner

2.12    City Clerk

2.14    Other Officers – Finance Officer

2.16    Officers’ Bonds

2.18    City Offices

2.20    Repealed

2.24    Police Department

2.28    Repealed

2.34    Design Review Board

2.36    Planning Commission and Department of Community Development

2.38    Repealed

2.40    Civil Service for City Police

2.44    Social Security for City Employees

2.48    Compensation for Officers and Employees

2.50    Public Records Disclosure

2.52    Legal Representation for City Officers and Employees

2.60    Emergency Management

2.62    Parks, Arbor and Recreation Board

2.64    City Arts Advisory Commission

2.66    Repealed

2.68    Lodging Tax Advisory Committee

2.70    Transportation Benefit District


Chapter 2.02 INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM

(Procedure ordinance repealed by vote of the people, 11/3/98)


Chapter 2.04 CITY COUNCIL

Sections:

2.04.010    Regular meetings.

2.04.020    Study sessions.

2.04.030    Special meetings.


2.04.010 Regular meetings.

The Sequim city council must conduct a regular meeting at least once per month. Regular meetings will be held on the second and fourth Mondays of each month, unless canceled by the city council. Meetings will begin at 6:00 p.m. at the Sequim Civic Center, 152 West Cedar, Sequim, Washington. If a regular council meeting falls upon a legal holiday, the meeting will be held the subsequent business day. (Ord. 2017-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2015-007 § 1; Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-003 § 1; Ord. 2006-017 § 1; Ord. 2006-001 § 1)


2.04.020 Study sessions.

For purposes of this section, a “study” session means the same as a “work” session. If a study session is scheduled, it will be held immediately prior to a regular meeting. Notice of a study session may be made by posting on the city website. Study sessions are held at the Sequim Civic Center. Study sessions may also be scheduled according to the council’s rules of procedure with appropriate notice, and with the above exceptions for legal holidays. Study sessions are primarily for nonaction discussions, but action may be taken. (Ord. 2017-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2015-007 § 1; Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-003 § 2)


2.04.030 Special meetings.

Special city council meetings may be scheduled in accordance with the council’s rules of procedure and applicable state law. (Ord. 2015-007 § 1; Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-003 § 3; Ord. 2006-017 § 3; Ord. 2006-001 § 3)


Chapter 2.06 CITY MANAGER

Sections:

2.06.010    Office created.

2.06.020    Duties.

2.06.030    Compensation.


2.06.010 Office created.

There is created the office of the city manager, which officer shall be subject to appointment or removal by the city council, as provided by Chapter 35A.13 RCW. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-014)


2.06.020 Duties.

The duties of the city manager shall be those defined in RCW 35A.13.080 and other statutes and those duties assigned by the city council. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-014)


2.06.030 Compensation.

The city manager shall be compensated pursuant to an employment contract. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-014)


Chapter 2.08 CITY ATTORNEY

Sections:

2.08.010    Office created.

2.08.020    Duties.

2.08.030    Compensation.


2.08.010 Office created.

There is created the office of the city attorney, which officer shall be subject to appointment or removal by the city manager, as provided by RCW 35A.13.090 through 35A.13.120. The city manager may make provision for obtaining legal counsel for the city either by appointment of a city attorney on a full-time or part-time basis, or by any reasonable contractual arrangement for such professional services pursuant to RCW 35A.13.090, subject to confirmation by the city council. The city council may elect to select legal counsel by contract either as the sole legal representation of the city or in addition to the above selection process. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-012; Ord. 29 § 1, 1915)


2.08.020 Duties.

It is the duty of the city attorney to act as legal counsel for the city of Sequim and to advise the city authorities and officers in all legal matters pertaining to the business of the city. The city attorney is authorized to bring suit in the name of the city in the proper court for the collection of any tax, delinquent utility payment, to defend the city in any lawsuit, and to bring suit in any other matter ordered by the council. The city attorney shall perform such other legal services as may be required on behalf of the city when ordered by the city manager, city council or as required by statute. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-012; Ord. 29 § 2, 1915)


2.08.030 Compensation.

The city attorney shall be compensated either according to an employment contract, a consultant contract or as a salaried or hourly employee as determined by the city council. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-012; Ord. 29 § 3, 1915)


Chapter 2.10 HEARING EXAMINER*

Sections:

2.10.005    Purpose.

2.10.010    Position established.

2.10.020    Appointment and removal.

2.10.030    Appointment of pro tempore hearing examiners.

2.10.040    Support services.

2.10.050    Rules of procedure.

2.10.060    Hearing examiner – Conflict of interest and freedom from improper influence.

2.10.070    Powers and duties – Designated.

2.10.080    Decision.

2.10.090    Final decision.

2.10.100    Reconsideration.

2.10.110    Failure to appear – Default judgment.

2.10.120    Payment of cost for transcription of verbatim transcript.

2.10.130    Hearing examiner’s report.

*Prior legislation: Ords. 97-019, 2007-010, 2009-036 and 2014-002.


2.10.005 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide an administrative hearing and appeal system that best satisfies the following basic needs:

A. Separate the application of regulatory controls in project permits from planning policy efforts;

B. Protect community health, safety, and welfare;

C. Assure the principles of fairness and due process of law in regulatory enforcement; and

D. Provide a civil enforcement system to enforce violations of the Sequim Municipal Code. (Ord. 2019-004 § 1 (Exh. A))


2.10.010 Position established.

Pursuant to RCW 35A.63.110 and 35A.63.170, and SMC 2.36.021, the city council creates the position of hearing examiner and vests in the hearing examiner authority to hear and decide the items listed in RCW 35A.63.110(1), (2), and (3) (board of adjustment). The hearing examiner’s role is to serve as the review authority on certain quasi-judicial applications, conduct appeals hearings and to interpret, review, and implement regulations as provided in this chapter. Unless the context requires otherwise, the term “hearing examiner” used in this chapter includes hearing examiners pro tempore. The hearing examiner is separate and distinct from any city officer or department. Whenever the term “board of adjustment” appears in the Sequim Municipal Code, such term refers to the hearing examiner. (Ord. 2019-004 § 1 (Exh. A))


2.10.020 Appointment and removal.

A. The hearing examiner will be appointed by the city manager and confirmed by majority vote of the city council. The hearing examiner will be appointed solely based upon the hearing examiner’s qualifications for the duties of the office. The hearing examiner must have training or experience that qualifies the hearing examiner to competently discharge those duties.

B. The hearing examiner cannot hold any other elective or appointed office or position in the city.

C. The hearing examiner will be retained as an independent contractor pursuant to a contract prepared by the city attorney and approved by the city council. The term of appointment, scope of work, compensation, and other requirements will be as established pursuant to contract and in accordance with this chapter. Appointment terms may not exceed three years.

D. The hearing examiner and hearing examiners pro tempore may be removed by the city manager with or without cause, after consultation with the city attorney. Any hearing examiner removed is responsible for transitioning all pending matters to the successor hearing examiner in an appropriate and timely manner.

E. Vacancies will be filled in the same manner as initial appointments. (Ord. 2019-004 § 1 (Exh. A))


2.10.030 Appointment of pro tempore hearing examiners.

The city manager may appoint one or more pro tempore hearing examiners upon confirmation from a majority of the city council to act before the appointment of or in the absence of the regular hearing examiner. Such appointment must be from qualified applicants meeting all criteria set forth in SMC 2.10.020 – Appointment and removal. Pro tempore hearing examiners, when acting in such capacity, have all powers and duties of the hearing examiner as prescribed in this code or elsewhere. (Ord. 2019-004 § 1 (Exh. A))


2.10.040 Support services.

Support services will be provided to the hearing examiner as the need arises by contract or by the city clerk or designee, the department of community development, or other city staff. (Ord. 2019-004 § 1 (Exh. A))


2.10.050 Rules of procedure.

The hearing examiner will adhere to the rules of procedure set forth in this chapter and as may be supplemented by the hearing examiner with written approval of the city.

A. Ex Parte Communications. No person, including elected or appointed city officials, may attempt to influence a hearing examiner in any pending matter unless such influence is made during a public hearing called for that purpose. No person, including elected or appointed city officials or city staff, may interfere with a hearing examiner in the performance of his or her duties in any way. If ex parte communication occurs, the public official or any member of the public must disclose the communication, make it part of the public record and provide an opportunity for review and comment on its content before completing the public hearing process and making a decision. This section does not preclude ex parte communication regarding procedural matters if such communication is made part of the record. Nothing in this section is intended to prevent the city attorney from rendering legal service to the hearing examiner upon the hearing examiner’s request.

B. Pre-Hearing Conferences. The hearing examiner may hold pre-hearing conferences to clarify issues or structure the proceeding, if all affected parties receive reasonable notice and attend or waive their right to attend. At the hearing, or by pre-hearing order, the hearing examiner will communicate for the record the time, purpose, and result of the pre-hearing conference.

C. Continuing Hearings. The hearing examiner may continue the hearing until a certain date to allow all comments to be heard or to gather more information. No further notice of that hearing need be given. Any party of record may request that a hearing be continued and the hearing examiner will grant or deny the request.

D. Evidence. For land use decisions, the applicant has the burden of proof to show compliance with applicable Washington State and city of Sequim laws and regulations. The hearing generally does not need to be conducted according to strict legal rules of evidence and procedure; however, any relevant and probative evidence will be admitted. The rules of privilege are effective to the extent recognized by law. The hearing examiner will decide the admissibility of evidence. All parties will be allowed the opportunity to make a record of evidence admitted or excluded during the hearing; this record includes offers of proof. Documentary evidence may be received in the form of copies. Upon request, parties will be given an opportunity to compare the copy with the original.

E. Judicial Notice. The hearing examiner may take judicial notice of judicially cognizable facts and may also take notice of general, technical, or scientific facts within the hearing examiner’s specialized knowledge. The hearing examiner will not take notice of disputed adjudicative facts that are determinative of the outcome of a particular proceeding.

F. Hearing Record. Hearings will be electronically recorded and such recordings are a part of the official hearing record if the requester pays reasonable costs of copying recordings or preparing transcripts, all components of which will be available to the public. No minutes of the hearing will be kept. If a document is referred to at a public hearing and the hearing examiner requests a copy of the document, that document may enter the record. The hearing record includes:

1. The application or petition.

2. The staff report.

3. A statement of notices published.

4. Evidence received, including oral testimony and exhibits.

5. Transcribed electronic recordings.

6. The decision together with findings and conclusions.

7. The SEPA threshold determination and other environmental documents, if applicable. (Ord. 2019-004 § 1 (Exh. A))


2.10.060 Hearing examiner – Conflict of interest and freedom from improper influence.

A. The hearing examiner may not conduct or participate in any hearing or decision in which the hearing examiner has a direct or indirect financial interest. If the hearing examiner disqualifies himself or herself or is otherwise unable to serve, the hearing will be conducted by the pro tempore hearing examiner. The regular hearing examiner is responsible for transferring any case to a pro tempore hearing examiner in a timely and appropriate manner.

B. Participants have the right, insofar as possible, to have the hearing examiner free from personal interest or pre-hearing contacts on regulatory matters considered by the hearing examiner. It is recognized that there is an equivalent public right to free access to public officials on any matter. If such personal interest or pre-hearing contact impairs the hearing examiner’s ability to act on the matter, the hearing examiner must recuse himself or herself from such matter, unless all parties agree in writing to have the matter heard by the hearing examiner. Such writing will be made a part of the record of the relevant proceeding. Nothing in this section is intended to authorize ex parte communications or otherwise diminish the ex parte communication prohibition described in SMC 2.10.050(A). (Ord. 2019-004 § 1 (Exh. A))


2.10.070 Powers and duties – Designated.

The hearing examiner may provide rules for the format for hearings and proceedings, issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses, administer oaths and affirmations, interrogatories and depositions, examination and cross-examination of witnesses, and any other matters deemed necessary by the hearing examiner for the fair and efficient conduct of proceedings and hearings. Such rules must be consistent with this chapter and SMC 20.01.200, Procedures for public hearings.

The hearing examiner has the following powers and duties:

A. Appeals. To hear and decide appeals from orders, recommendations, permits, decisions, or determinations made by a city official in the administration or enforcement of the zoning provisions or other land use regulatory ordinances adopted by the city as set forth in Chapter 20.01 SMC. Appeals must be in writing and conform to the requirements identified in SMC 20.01.240.

B. Variances. To authorize variances from city zoning provisions or other land use regulatory ordinances in specific cases where, due to special conditions, enforcement of such ordinance(s) would result in unnecessary hardship. In those instances where review of a variance application has been consolidated with other development applications, the variance will be considered with the highest procedure required, consistent with the requirements of SMC Title 20. A variance from such ordinance(s) will not be granted by the hearing examiner unless the hearing examiner finds that all of the review criteria established in Chapter 18.72 SMC are met.

In granting any variance, the hearing examiner may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with the city’s zoning ordinance or other land use regulatory ordinances. Failure to abide by any conditions and safeguards made part of the terms under which the variance is granted is a violation of this section. All hearing examiner decisions granting or denying a variance must comply with RCW 35A.63.110.

The hearing examiner may only grant zoning variances for uses that are generally permitted or conditionally permitted in the applicable zoning district.

C. Hear and decide appeals related to code enforcement activities as set forth in Chapter 1.13 SMC – Code Enforcement. Appeal submittals must conform to the relevant code enforcement process or, if no process is identified in the relevant code, to SMC 1.13.150. (Ord. 2019-004 § 1 (Exh. A))


2.10.080 Decision.

A. All hearing examiner decisions must be supported by findings of fact and conclusions of law. Such findings and conclusions must address all specific issues raised by the staff, the applicant, or any party of record. Such findings and conclusions may also set forth the manner by which the decision would carry out and conform to the city’s comprehensive plan, land use or other enforcement regulations, and other official policies, objectives, and ordinances. In lieu of original findings and conclusions regarding uncontested matters, the hearing examiner may adopt findings and conclusions recommended by the staff, the applicant, or any party of record. The decision must also contain a statement that the decision is final, as applicable, and set forth the time frames for reconsideration and appeal.

B. The hearing examiner may approve, deny, or approve with such conditions, modifications, and restrictions as the hearing examiner finds necessary to make the application compatible with its environment, the comprehensive plan, other official policies, objectives, and land use regulatory enactments.

C. At any time before the filing of the final decision, the hearing examiner may reopen the proceeding to receive evidence that was unavailable at the time of the hearing. Such reopening may be initiated by a party of record requesting permission to present such evidence. The hearing examiner may grant the request only upon a showing of significant relevance and good cause for delay in its submission. All parties of record will be given notice of the consideration of such evidence and granted an opportunity to review such evidence and file rebuttals.

D. Within 10 business days after the hearing has been concluded and the record closed, unless a longer period is agreed to in writing by the applicant or appellant, the hearing examiner will render a written decision.

E. Upon issuance of the hearing examiner’s decision, a copy of the decision will be sent to the director, the applicant or appellant, and other parties of record in accordance with RCW 36.70C.040(4).

F. The city manager, on behalf of the city, is authorized to appeal or seek review of a hearing examiner’s decision in Clallam County Superior Court pursuant to Chapter 36.70C RCW or any other applicable legal authority. (Ord. 2019-004 § 1 (Exh. A))


2.10.090 Final decision.

The hearing examiner’s decision is final unless otherwise specified in each ordinance or code section that grants jurisdiction to the examiner.

A. Appeals – Land Use Decisions. Appeals of the hearing examiner’s decision regarding land use permit applications must be made by a party with standing to the Clallam County Superior Court within 21 calendar days of the date of the decision. The appeal period begins once the hearing examiner has issued the written decision.

B. Appeals – Non-Land Use Decisions. Refer to the applicable code; if no appeal period is identified, refer to SMC 1.13.220 – Judicial appeals. Any applicable appeal period begins once the hearing examiner has issued a written decision. (Ord. 2019-004 § 1 (Exh. A))


2.10.100 Reconsideration.

Prior to six days after the date of the hearing examiner’s decision, a party of record may request reconsideration. The request must be in writing and directed to the city clerk or designee, who will forward the request to the hearing examiner within three business days. The request must specifically set forth errors of procedure, errors of law or fact, errors in judgment, or the discovery of new evidence which was not reasonably available at the open record public hearing. Requests for reconsideration stay further issuance of city permits and the applicable appeal period. Within 10 calendar days of receiving the request, the hearing examiner will do one of the following:

A. Correct or amend the decision without an additional public hearing; or

B. Set the matter for additional public hearing, in which case notice will be republished and provided to all parties of record; or

C. Confirm the original decision.

The hearing examiner’s decision is subject to only one reconsideration, even if the hearing examiner reverses or modifies the original decision. (Ord. 2019-004 § 1 (Exh. A))


2.10.110 Failure to appear – Default judgment.

Failure of applicant or appellant to appear for a scheduled hearing after proper notice has been provided will result in a default judgment in favor of the city, affirming the city’s action or decision that was the subject of the appeal. The hearing examiner may, at the hearing examiner’s discretion, nullify the default judgment and reschedule the hearing if applicant or appellant, within 24 hours of failing to appear, provides the hearing examiner with good cause for failing to appear. At the city’s request, the costs of the missed hearing may be assessed by the hearing examiner against the applicant or appellant. (Ord. 2019-004 § 1 (Exh. A))


2.10.120 Payment of cost for transcription of verbatim transcript.

Whenever the city must prepare a verbatim written transcript of any city proceedings in response to a writ of review or other action filed in any state or federal court, the cost of preparing the transcript is paid by the party filing the action. Within 10 calendar days of the service of such writ of review or other action on the city, the city clerk will notify the party filing the action that the city must prepare a verbatim written transcript of the proceedings involved. In such notice, the city clerk will state the date and subject matter of the public meeting(s) and/or hearing(s) involved and the estimated cost of the preparation of the transcript, including copying costs. Within 10 calendar days of the receipt of such notification, the party filing such action must pay the estimated cost to the city clerk and the city clerk will cause the transcript to be prepared.

If the city’s actual cost incurred in preparing the transcript exceeds the amount deposited with the city clerk, the party filing the action must reimburse the city for such additional amount within 10 calendar days of notification of the amount due. If the city’s actual cost incurred is less than the estimated cost, the city clerk will reimburse the party filing the action in accordance with the credit due.

If the relevant transcripts have previously been prepared, then there is no additional charge to the party filing the action, except for copying costs. The city will file the previously prepared transcripts with the court at no additional expense to the party filing the action, except for copying costs. (Ord. 2019-004 § 1 (Exh. A))


2.10.130 Hearing examiner’s report.

A. The hearing examiner will prepare an annual written report for the city council summarizing activities, actions, and observations.

B. The hearing examiner will meet with the city council as requested, to review the examiner’s observations and discuss potential ordinance, policy, or procedure changes. (Ord. 2019-004 § 1 (Exh. A))


Chapter 2.12 CITY CLERK

Sections:

2.12.010    Purpose.

2.12.020    Appointment of city clerk.

2.12.030    Qualifications and duties of city clerk.

2.12.040    Clerk to receive claims.


2.12.010 Purpose.

It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the appointment of the office of city clerk pursuant to the authority granted in RCW 35A.13.080 and 35A.13.090. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-013; Ord. 2001-018 § 1)


2.12.020 Appointment of city clerk.

From and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the office of the city clerk shall be deemed an appointive office. This chapter authorizes appointment to the office of city clerk by the city manager, pursuant to RCW 35A.13.080(2). (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-013; Ord. 2001-018 § 2)


2.12.030 Qualifications and duties of city clerk.

Appointments to the position of city clerk shall be made from candidates who have sufficient knowledge to perform the duties required for the position and as may be required by state law or ordinance. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-013; Ord. 2001-018 § 3)


2.12.040 Clerk to receive claims.

The city clerk is appointed, pursuant to RCW 4.96.020, to receive any claim for damages made under Chapter 4.96 RCW during normal business hours at the Sequim City Hall. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-013)


Chapter 2.14 OTHER OFFICERS – FINANCE OFFICER

Sections:

2.14.010    Purpose.

2.14.020    Appointment of city officers.


2.14.010 Purpose.

It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for appointment by the city manager to the offices deemed necessary by the city council, pursuant to the authority granted in RCW 35A.13.080(2), 35A.13.090, and 35A.13.100. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-028; Ord. 511 § 1, 1987)


2.14.020 Appointment of city officers.

The offices and officers of the city of Sequim, in addition to others provided for in this code, shall be those created by the city council by motion, resolution, or ordinance, including the budget ordinance. The duties of the clerk, finance officer and chief of police required by statute shall be performed by the officers appointed to perform the duties of clerk, finance officer or chief of police, respectively, or to other officers to whom such duties have been assigned by the city manager with the approval of the city council. Any duties assigned by statute to the office of treasurer shall be performed by the finance officer. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-028; Ord. 511 § 2, 1987)


Chapter 2.16 OFFICERS’ BONDS

Sections:

2.16.010    Purpose.

2.16.020    Bonds designated.

2.16.030    City to pay premiums.


2.16.010 Purpose.

It is the purpose of the ordinance codified in this chapter to establish performance bonds for officials of the city in accordance with the requirements of state law (RCW 35A.13.160). (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-027; Ord. 492 § 1, 1986)


2.16.020 Bonds designated.

A. It is ordered that the city clerk, the city treasurer, the deputy city clerks, the chief of police and the city manager of the city shall execute to the city performance bonds in the following respective amounts:

1. City clerk: $100,000;

2. Deputy city clerk: $25,000;

3. City finance officer: $100,000;

4. Chief of police: $25,000;

5. City manager: $25,000.

B. Each such bond shall be conditioned in such penal sums for the faithful performance of the officers’ respective duties and each such bond shall include therein like provision for the faithful performance of all offices and duties of which each such officer is by law made ex officio incumbent.

C. In the event of the combination of any of the offices pursuant to law, a single bond may be provided in the amount of the larger of the bonding requirements set forth under this chapter.

D. A policy of insurance covering honest and faithful performance and insuring against the same perils as a bond may be utilized in lieu of any such bond. All such bonds or insurance policies in lieu of bonds shall be approved by the city attorney as to form. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-027; Ord. 492 § 2, 1986)


2.16.030 City to pay premiums.

The city shall pay all premiums for bonds or in lieu of insurance for the city officers. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-027; Ord. 492 § 3, 1986)


Chapter 2.18 CITY OFFICES

Sections:

2.18.010    Hours of operation.


2.18.010 Hours of operation.

City offices will be open for the transaction of business with the public Monday through Friday, excluding holidays, from 7:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. The police department offices will be open Monday through Friday, excluding holidays, from 7:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.

The offices may occasionally be closed during these hours for special circumstances. In the case of such circumstances, a notice of such closure will be posted on the door of the Civic Center and/or on the city’s website at least one week prior to the closure. (Ord. 2017-013 § 1; Ord. 2015-004 § 1 (Exh. I); Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-015; Ord. 2007-011)


Chapter 2.20 SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC UTILITIES

(Repealed by Ord. 99-003)


Chapter 2.24 POLICE DEPARTMENT

Sections:

2.24.010    Department created – Duties.

2.24.020    Chief of police – Appointment.

2.24.030    Repealed.

2.24.040    Appointment of additional police personnel.


2.24.010 Department created – Duties.

The department of police for the city is created, which department shall be under the direction and control of the chief of police, subject to the direction of the city manager. The chief of police or the chief’s sworn officers shall initiate by citation, after consideration of RCW 9.94A.401 and 9.94A.411, violations of city ordinances which come to the chief’s knowledge. The chief of police and the chief’s sworn officers may pursue and arrest violators of city ordinances beyond the city limits and they shall have all powers granted police by the laws of the state. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-032; Ord. 232 § 1, 1970)


2.24.020 Chief of police – Appointment.

The city manager shall appoint a chief of police who shall hold office at the pleasure of the city manager and shall not be subject to confirmation by the city council. The position of chief of police is exempt from civil service (RCW 41.12.050). (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-032; Ord. 232 § 2, 1970)


2.24.030 Deputy chief of police – Appointment.

Repealed by Ord. 2001-014. (Ord. 232 § 3, 1970)


2.24.040 Appointment of additional police personnel.

The city council may establish additional positions in the budget for law enforcement purposed. The hiring of sworn officers shall comply with civil service requirements including exemptions allowed under RCW 41.12.050. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-032)


Chapter 2.28 VOLUNTEER FIREMEN’S RELIEF AND PENSION ACT

(Repealed by Ord. 99-003)


Chapter 2.34 DESIGN REVIEW BOARD

Sections:

2.34.010    Creation of design review board.

2.34.020    Terms, qualifications and appointment of members.

2.34.030    Purposes.

2.34.040    Additional powers and duties.

2.34.050    Limitations.

2.34.060    Organization.

2.34.070    Staff assistance.

2.34.080    Annual report.


2.34.010 Creation of design review board.

A design review board (also referred to as DRB) is hereby created. The design review board shall consist of five members. The design review board shall interpret, review and implement design review as provided by the city’s adopted design standards in Chapter 18.24 SMC. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2008-007 § 1)


2.34.020 Terms, qualifications and appointment of members.

A. Members of the design review board shall serve terms of two years. The terms shall be staggered. Terms expire on July 1st, but members of the design review board shall continue to serve until their successors are appointed and qualified. The city council shall appoint a new DRB member to fill vacancies that might arise and such appointments shall be to the end of the vacating member’s term.

B. Design review board members shall have qualifications, skills or a demonstrated interest in urban design or historic preservation and must be able to demonstrate the ability to read and interpret site plans, elevation drawings, landscape plans, architectural details and other design details and specifications as may be depicted on plans. Members shall be selected by the council who conform to the following qualifications and create a balance of talent and diversity:

1. A licensed architect or professional building designer with demonstrated experience in urban or historic building design;

2. A city resident with demonstrated interest and knowledge of urban design;

3. A business owner with such business physically located within the city of Sequim;

4. A member with a professional background relating to urban design (e.g., a professional artist (with color expertise), a civil or environmental engineer, planner, building contractor or professional designer) as determined by the city council;

5. A member with demonstrated interest in and knowledge of landscaping, horticulture, arboriculture or forestry;

6. A student member with an expressed interest in architecture.

The DRB action that would otherwise be valid shall not be rendered invalid by the temporary vacancy of one or two of the required categorical positions, as long as there is a quorum.

C. Application for Design Review Board Appointment. Individuals wishing to serve, or to be reappointed to serve, on the design review board shall submit a letter of interest to the city clerk. The letter of interest shall state which category of subsection B of this section the individual wishes to serve under, and shall cite personal experience or credentials in that category. The city council shall consider which individual has the most direct experience in that category and give weight in their decision to experience over general interest. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2008-007 § 1)


2.34.030 Purposes.

The purposes of the design review board are:

A. To implement procedures related to the city’s design standards as described in Chapter 18.24 SMC and as amended;

B. To protect and enhance Sequim’s small-town characteristics by assuring that decisions on design reflect the intent of the city’s design standards and the design intent of the city’s comprehensive plan;

C. To make suggestions on design alternatives which meet the needs of the property or business owner and which are consistent with and meet the intent of the city’s design policies;

D. To make recommendations to the planning commission and city council on policies and ordinances that may affect the city’s design and visual character;

E. To identify and actively encourage the conservation of the city of Sequim’s historic resources by initiating and maintaining a register of historic places and reviewing proposed changes to register properties;

F. To raise community awareness of the city of Sequim’s agricultural history and historic resources;

G. To serve as the city’s primary resource in matters of historic preservation;

H. To serve as the city’s local design review board as defined in WAC 254-20-030(8) and Chapter 18.24 SMC;

I. To make recommendations for design standard revisions. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2008-007 § 1)


2.34.040 Additional powers and duties.

In addition to the powers set forth in Chapter 18.24 SMC, the design review board shall:

A. Recommend to the planning commission and city council adoption of standards to be used by the city or design review board in reviewing outdoor proposals within city limits or its areas of contractual jurisdiction;

B. Recommend to the planning commission and city council the purchase of interests in property for purposes of preserving the city’s visual characteristics or implementing the provisions of the city’s design standards or the design intent of the city’s comprehensive plan;

C. Advise the planning commission and city council on possible incentives to preserve historic structures within the city’s historic district;

D. Recommend to the planning commission and city council changes to the Sequim Municipal Code and public works standards which reinforce the purpose of the city’s design standards and the design intent of the city’s comprehensive plan. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2008-007 § 1)


2.34.050 Limitations.

The design review board may recommend approval, conditional approval or disapproval of proposed building and site designs or alternate path to designs pursuant to the standards in Chapter 18.24 SMC, Design Standards. However, the DRB shall have no authority to make decisions on proposed building and site plans, or to waive, increase or decrease any other code requirements in SMC Titles 17 and 18. Site plans shall be reviewed as provided in SMC Titles 15, 17 and 18. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2008-007 § 1)


2.34.060 Organization.

The city’s design review board shall be organized as follows:

A. Chair. The design review board shall elect one of its members to serve as chair for a term of one year at its first meeting in March of each year. The chair may be elected to serve for one consecutive additional term, but not for more than two successive terms.

B. Quorum. No business shall be conducted without a quorum at the meeting.

1. Application Review Meetings Pursuant to Chapter 18.24 SMC. A majority of the design review board members, but not less than three, attending a meeting shall constitute a quorum.

C. Voting. All actions of the design review board shall be represented by a vote of the membership. A simple majority of the members present at the meeting in which action is taken shall approve any action taken. The chair may vote at the meetings.

D. Absence of Members. Attendance at design review board meetings is expected of all members. If a member misses three consecutive scheduled meetings without being excused by the chair, or is absent from 25 percent of the meetings in one calendar year, a note shall be made of the absences by the staff responsible for keeping minutes and sent to the city council for their consideration. A copy of that note shall be sent to the chair and to the members. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2008-007 § 1)


2.34.070 Staff assistance.

The city’s department of community development shall provide the design review board with such assistance as is reasonably necessary to enable it to perform its functions and duties. Staff assistance shall include, but not be limited to, the making of recommendations in staff reports to the design review board on specific projects, research, general planning and instruction. (Ord. 2011-017 § 1; Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2008-007 § 1)


2.34.080 Annual report.

The DRB shall annually report to the department of community development, planning commission and the city council on its progress, effectiveness and success or deficiencies with the process or standards. (Ord. 2011-017 § 1; Ord. 2009-011 § 1 (Exh. A))


Chapter 2.36 PLANNING COMMISSION AND DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT1

Sections:

2.36.010    Creation – Terms of office – Vacancies.

2.36.020    Powers and duties.

2.36.021    Hearing examiner.

2.36.030    Planning commission to report to council.

2.36.040    Secretary of the planning commission.

2.36.050    Annual report to council.

2.36.080    Department of community development and planning department, director.


2.36.010 Creation – Terms of office – Vacancies.

A. Pursuant to the authority conferred by Chapter 35A.63 RCW, there is created a city planning commission, consisting of seven members who shall be recommended by the mayor and the city council planning commission liaison member, and confirmed by the city council. 

B. The term of office of the seven members shall be four years. The terms of the current members in position five and position six shall end the second Monday of January, 2007; the term of the member in position seven shall end on the second Monday of January, 2010; the terms of the members in positions three, four and one shall end the second Monday of January, 2005; the term of the member in position two shall end the second Monday of January 2008. Members of the planning commission may be appointed from among the residents of the city of Sequim. Not more than three members of the planning commission may be appointed from outside of the city of Sequim; provided, that they reside within the Sequim school district boundaries in Clallam County.

C. Vacancies occurring otherwise than through the expiration of terms shall be filled for the unexpired term as set forth in subsection A of this section. Members may be removed, after public hearing, by the appointing official, with the approval of his or her council or board, for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office. If any person or persons on a planning agency concludes that he or she has a conflict of interest or an appearance of fairness problem with respect to a matter pending before the agency so that he or she cannot discharge his or her duties on such an agency, he or she shall disqualify himself or herself from participating in the deliberations and the decision making process with respect to the matter. (Ord. 2011-008 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-030; Ord. 2004-001; Ord. 2001-010; Ord. 95-029 § 2; Ord. 311 § 1, 1974)


2.36.020 Powers and duties.

The planning commission shall have all of the powers and perform each and all of the duties specified by Chapter 35A.63 RCW, as amended, and as set forth or amended by ordinance. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-030; Ord. 311 § 2, 1974)


2.36.021 Hearing examiner.

Any duties allowed to be performed by a hearing examiner pursuant to RCW 35A.63.170 may be assigned to such hearing examiner by the council. The position of hearing examiner may be established by the council by contract or other means. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-030)


2.36.030 Planning commission to report to council.

The city council may refer to the planning commission for its recommendation and report any ordinances, resolutions or other proposals relating to any of the matters and subjects referred to in Chapter 35A.63 RCW, as amended, and the commission shall promptly report to the council thereon, making such recommendations and giving such counsel as it may deem proper in the premises. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-030; Ord. 311 § 3, 1974)


2.36.040 Secretary of the planning commission.

The planning commission may designate one of its members to act as secretary without salary or, if requested by the commission, the city manager shall designate a member of the paid staff of the city to serve as such secretary. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-030; Ord. 311 § 4, 1974)


2.36.050 Annual report to council.

The planning department, hereafter known as the department of community development, through its director, shall, either separately or in its annual budget documents, report the cost and expenses of the department. (Ord. 2011-017 § 4 (Exh. A); Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-030; Ord. 311 § 5, 1974)


2.36.080 Department of community development and planning department, director.

The department of community development and its director shall perform all functions and duties of the planning department or its director, respectively as well as those functions and duties specifically designated to be performed by the department of community development or its director, respectively. (Ord. 2011-017 § 4 (Exh. A))1

Code reviser’s note: Ordinance 2011-017 provides as follows:

“Section 1. Whenever the term “Planning Department” is used in the Sequim Municipal Code or any ordinance or resolution, it shall in the future be referred to as the “Department of Community Development.”

Section 2. Whenever the term “Planning Director” or “Director” or “Planner” is used in the Sequim Municipal Code or any ordinance or resolution, it shall mean the “Director of the Department of Community Development,” unless the context clearly indicates a person other than the Planning Director is intended.

Section 3. The Director of Community Development shall have all powers of the Planning Director and the Department of Community Development, hereby created, shall have all powers and functions of the Planning Department.”

These name changes will be incorporated into the code as code sections are updated in the future. 


Chapter 2.38 PROTOCOL OFFICER

(Repealed by Ord. 99-003)


Chapter 2.40 CIVIL SERVICE FOR CITY POLICE

Sections:

2.40.010    Civil service commission created.

2.40.020    Appointment – Terms of office.

2.40.030    Organization of the commission.

2.40.040    Police appointments subject to authority of the commission.

2.40.050    Part-time police employees exempt.

2.40.060    Minimum standards for selection.

2.40.070    Compensation – Other requirements.


2.40.010 Civil service commission created.

Pursuant to the authority conferred by Chapter 41.12 RCW, there is created a city civil service commission to exercise the powers and perform the duties established by state law in connection with the selection, appointment and employment of the police of the city. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-016; Ord. 281 § 1, 1973)


2.40.020 Appointment – Terms of office.

There is created for the administration of the civil service for the city police department, a civil service commission composed of three members who shall be appointed by the city manager of the city. The term of office of such civil service commission shall be six years, except that the first three members of the commission shall be appointed for different terms as follows: one to serve for a period of two years, one to serve for a period of four years and one to serve for a period of six years. In the event any civil service commissioner resigns, becomes disqualified or is removed for cause, another commissioner shall be appointed to take his place for the unexpired portion of the term. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-016; Ord. 281 § 2, 1973)


2.40.030 Organization of the commission.

The commission shall organize itself, hold meetings, adopt rules and regulations, perform the duties and exercise the powers of the commission in accordance with state law. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-016; Ord. 281 § 3, 1973)


2.40.040 Police appointments subject to authority of the commission.

All applicants for employment, advancement and/or the filling of a vacancy for a sworn officer position with the police department of the city shall be subject to and shall comply with the civil service regulations adopted by the commission. In the employment, advancement, and the filling of vacancies in the police department the commission shall certify to the appointing power the names of the five persons highest on the eligible list for the available opening. The commission shall require appointees selected for full-time employment to satisfactorily serve one full year on a probationary status and to execute a contract of employment with the city as approved by the city council. The commission shall provide for the immediate termination, with notice to the commission, of any officer serving in a probationary status upon the direction of the chief of police with the consent of the city manager. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-016; Ord. 281 § 4, 1973)


2.40.050 Part-time police employees exempt.

The ordinance codified in this chapter shall not apply to part-time employees of the police department or to the chief and other employees who are exempt officers (RCW 41.12.050). (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-016; Ord. 281 § 5, 1973)


2.40.060 Minimum standards for selection.

The commission shall, as a minimum, adopt the standards listed in this section pertaining to the mental, physical and moral fitness which govern the recruitment and selection of law enforcement personnel:

A. Applicants must be a citizen of the United States;

B. Applicants must possess a valid Washington State driver’s license and be lawfully able to possess and carry a short firearm;

C. Applicants must have graduated from a recognized high school or possess a certificate of equivalency;

D. Applicants shall be of a minimum age of 21 years and be physically qualified;

E. All applicants shall be fingerprinted, and a thorough search shall be made of fingerprints to local, state and federal fingerprint files to disclose any criminal record;

F. Applicants shall not have been convicted by any state or by the federal government of any crime, the punishment for which could have been imprisonment in a federal or state prison or penitentiary, and shall not have been convicted of any offenses involving moral turpitude, narcotics or drugs;

G. Applicants shall possess good moral character as determined by a thorough background investigation;

H. Applicants shall be required to complete and submit a comprehensive application form;

I. An oral interview shall be given to determine if the applicant has any background or inability to communicate which would make him an ineffective law enforcement officer;

J. A thorough physical examination by a licensed physician or surgeon shall be made to ensure that the applicant is free from any physical, emotional or mental condition which might adversely affect the performance of the applicant’s duties as a law enforcement officer;

K. Within six months of the effective date of employment, the recruit (new hire or lateral transfer) shall be required to complete satisfactorily a basic training program prescribed by the Criminal Justice Training Commission (CJTC) except when evidence is presented of prior completion of equivalent training or experience and the requirement is waived by the CJTC. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-016; Ord. 2001-014 § 2; Ord. 281 § 6, 1973)


2.40.070 Compensation – Other requirements.

The members of the civil service commission shall serve without compensation, and shall each be a citizen of the United States and a resident of the city. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-016; Ord. 281 § 7, 1973)


Chapter 2.44 SOCIAL SECURITY FOR CITY EMPLOYEES

Sections:

2.44.010    City participation in Social Security System.

2.44.020    Plan to be submitted to state authorities.

2.44.030    Officers authorized to make contributions.

2.44.040    Continuity.


2.44.010 City participation in Social Security System.

The city council has ordained that this municipality become a participant in the Social Security System and that the benefits of old age and survivors’ insurance be extended to its employees and officers. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 159, 1952)


2.44.020 Plan to be submitted to state authorities.

The city council has further ordained that the city manager and the city clerk are authorized to execute and deliver to the Washington Department of Employment Security for its approval the plan or plans required under the provisions of Section 5 of the enabling act and of the Social Security Act to extend coverage to the employees and officers of this municipality and do all other things necessary to that end. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 159, 1952)


2.44.030 Officers authorized to make contributions.

The proper fiscal officers are authorized to make all required payments into the contribution fund established by the enabling act and to establish such system of payroll deductions from the salaries of employees and officers as may be necessary to their coverage under the old age and survivors’ insurance system. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 159, 1952)


2.44.040 Continuity.

The proper officials of the municipality are to do all things necessary to the continued implementation of the system. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 159, 1952)


Chapter 2.48 COMPENSATION FOR OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES

Sections:

2.48.010    Salary of council.

2.48.020    Salary of mayor and deputy mayor.


2.48.010 Salary of council.

A. Pursuant to RCW 35A.13.040, compensation for each city council member shall be the sum of $250.00 per month.

B. No such increase shall apply to a council member during the elective or appointive term of office during which the salary increase was adopted. (Ord. 2014-010 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-019; Ord. 94-024 § 2)


2.48.020 Salary of mayor and deputy mayor.

A. The city council member elected by council to serve as mayor shall be compensated at the monthly rate of $410.00.

B. The city council member elected to serve as deputy mayor shall be compensated at the monthly rate of $330.00. (Ord. 2014-014 § 1; Ord. 2014-010 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 94-024 § 2)


Chapter 2.50 PUBLIC RECORDS DISCLOSURE

Sections: 

2.50.010    Purpose.

2.50.020    Definitions.

2.50.025    Adoption of City of Sequim’s Public Records Act Compliance Policy and General Guide for Disclosure of City Records – Authorization for city manager approval of updates.

2.50.027    City employee responsibilities.

2.50.030    Requests for public records.

2.50.040    Decision on Public Records Act request – Procedure for review of decision.

2.50.050    Current index requirement – Finding of nonjustification.

2.50.060    Public records officer – Appointment and duties.

2.50.070    Costs of providing copies of public records.

2.50.080    Resources devoted to public records disclosure.

2.50.090    Severability.


2.50.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the administration of the city of Sequim’s policies regarding disclosure and production of public records and to ensure compliance with Chapter 42.56 RCW (the Public Records Act, “PRA”) and other applicable laws, regulations, or rules, as adopted or as hereafter amended. The purpose of the PRA is to provide the public full access to information concerning the conduct of government, mindful of individuals’ privacy rights and the desirability of the efficient administration of government. The city has essential functions in addition to providing public records, and the PRA recognizes that providing public records must not create “excessive interference” with the “essential functions” of the agency. However, any policies or procedures adopted by the city will be interpreted in favor of prompt and thorough responses to requests for disclosure. In carrying out its responsibilities under the PRA and other disclosure statutes and rules, the city will be guided by the provisions of those statutes and rules describing their purposes and interpretation. (Ord. 2017-022 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-033; Ord. 2002-025 § 1)


2.50.020 Definitions.

The definitions set forth in Chapter 42.56 RCW (or its successor) are adopted by reference. The definitions set forth in the City of Sequim’s Public Records Act Compliance Policy and General Guide for Disclosure of City Records (Guide), as adopted or as amended, are also adopted by reference. (Ord. 2017-022 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-033; Ord. 2002-025 § 2)


2.50.025 Adoption of City of Sequim’s Public Records Act Compliance Policy and General Guide for Disclosure of City Records – Authorization for city manager approval of updates.

The city council recognizes that the law governing disclosure of records is subject to frequent and at times abrupt revision and those agencies must be ready to adopt new procedures on an expedited basis in order to remain compliant, efficient, and effective.

Therefore, the city council hereby adopts the “City of Sequim’s Public Records Act Compliance Policy and General Guide for Disclosure of City Records” (“Guide”) as the city’s official public records disclosure policy. The city council further authorizes the city manager to approve updates to the Guide so long as a particular revision does not require formal city council adoption as a matter of law. Any revision that requires formal city council adoption will be timely brought before that body and incorporated into the Guide upon approval.

The public records officer (PRO), with the assistance of the city attorney and city manager, will ensure that the Guide remains in compliance with the Public Records Act and all other relevant laws and that no out-of-date versions are relied upon by staff or posted for the public.

The PRO will ensure that the Guide is easily accessible online and that a physical copy is available at each lobby counter at the Civic Center. The PRO will ensure that all city staff receive periodic training or “refreshers” to remain cognizant of the importance of diligent responses to all types of records requests, as well as the role of the PRO as portal and the existence of the Guide. (Ord. 2017-022 § 1 (Exh. A))


2.50.027 City employee responsibilities.

A. All city employees are responsible for assisting in identifying responsive records and facilitating thorough collection of records.

B. The city will provide training to its employees on their obligations under the Public Records Act, including the responsibility of all employees to retain records according to the relevant retention schedule.

C. For most city employees, producing records in response to records requests is a responsibility assigned in addition to their primary assigned duties and functions.

D. For those city employees for whom responding to records requests is not among their primary assigned duties, the need to devote more than eight hours in a month to records production may result in delay of the response to a records request. (Ord. 2017-022 § 1 (Exh. A))


2.50.030 Requests for public records. 

A. All requests to inspect or copy public records will be handled pursuant to the city of Sequim’s Guide, as adopted or as amended.

B. Unless exempt from disclosure, city records will be available for inspection and copying in accordance with this chapter and the city Guide.

C. The exemptions from disclosure set forth in Chapter 42.56 RCW are adopted by reference. Any exemptions from disclosure set forth in any other controlling law or in case law in effect at the time of a request are considered amendments adopted by this reference. Requests to inspect or copy records that may contain exempt material will be handled pursuant to the city Guide. (Ord. 2017-022 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-033; Ord. 2002-025 § 3)


2.50.040 Decision on Public Records Act request – Procedure for review of decision.

The procedure for internal administrative review of a public records officer’s decision to exempt from disclosure any record, in whole or in part, is set forth in the Guide. A requester may seek judicial review of an adverse decision pursuant to RCW 42.56.550. (Ord. 2017-022 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-033; Ord. 2002-025 § 4)


2.50.050 Current index requirement – Finding of nonjustification.

The city council finds that maintenance of a current index of identifying information for the records described in Chapter 42.56 RCW would unduly burden and interfere with city operations. The city has never received a request for inspection and copying of a current index. City officials and employees have full workloads and city residents have expressed a desire for low-cost government, with minimum staff levels. Therefore, based upon anticipated use and cost to the city, creation and maintenance of a current index for city departments is not justified. (Ord. 2017-022 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-033; Ord. 2002-025 § 5)


2.50.060 Public records officer – Appointment and duties.

A. The city clerk is appointed to serve as the city’s public records officer and has the duties described in this chapter and in the Guide.

The public records officer will:

1. Serve as a point of contact (“portal”) for members of the public requesting access to and disclosure of city records;

2. Designate other staff as needed to assist with requests for access to and disclosure of records;

3. Oversee compliance with the Public Records Act and any related laws, rules and regulations;

4. Fulfill records requests with the assistance of designees and any other necessary persons, including information technology staff and individuals or companies with whom the city has contracted;

5. Implement policies and procedures adopted by the city council as necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter consistent with applicable laws and rules; and

6. Have final decision-making authority over access, disclosure, and production of records, except where a petition for internal administrative review has been filed, in which case the city attorney may affirm or reverse the PRO’s decision.

B. The public records officer will publish his or her name and contact information in a way reasonably calculated to provide notice to the public as to how to make a request for records, including posting on the city’s website. The public records officer will ensure that the most recent Guide is posted on the city’s website.

C. The public records officer, in coordination with the city attorney, will remain abreast of the law, regulations, rules and case law related to records disclosure, and whenever necessary will prepare and submit for adoption a revised version of the Public Records Act Compliance Policy and General Guide for Disclosure of City Records.

D. During the first quarter of each year, the city clerk will submit a report to the city council on the city’s performance in responding to public records requests during the preceding year. The report will include, at a minimum:

1. Open records requests (queue) at beginning of period;

2. Number of records requests received in the period by category;

3. Number of records requests closed in the period by category; and

4. Open records requests (queue) at end of period. (Ord. 2017-022 § 1 (Exh. A))


2.50.070 Costs of providing copies of public records.

A. The city of Sequim has determined that performing a study to calculate the actual costs of providing records is unduly burdensome. The city adopts the default fee schedule for providing public records as permitted by RCW 42.56.120 or as hereafter amended and has followed the associated public hearing requirements.

B. It is within the discretion of the public records officer to waive copying fees when (1) all of the records responsive to an entire request are paper copies only and are 15 or fewer pages; or (2) all of the records responsive to an entire request are electronic and can be provided in a single email with attachments of a size totaling no more than the equivalent of 100 printed pages. If that email for any reason is not deliverable, records will be provided through another means of delivery, and the requester will be charged in accordance with this rule. (Ord. 2017-022 § 1 (Exh. A))


2.50.080 Resources devoted to public records disclosure.

A. The resources currently allocated to public disclosure response are established as the initial level of effort necessary to ensure that public disclosure response is not creating excessive interference with essential city government functions.

B. Starting with the 2019 budget process, the city council will annually determine and establish the level of effort to be devoted to public records disclosure and the amount of resources to be allocated. During the budget process, the city council will devote at least a portion of a public work session or council meeting specifically to public records response resource allocation before adopting the final budget.

C. The city council may reevaluate its determination as part of the mid-year budget adjustment and modify the resource allocation.

D. The city does not intend every employee to expend eight hours per month responding to records requests. For purposes of this chapter, city employees referenced in SMC 2.50.027(D) do not constitute an allocation of resources available for other public records responses. (Ord. 2017-022 § 1 (Exh. A))


2.50.090 Severability.

To the extent any section or subsection of this chapter is ruled unlawful or illegal by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining portions of this chapter remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 2017-022 § 1 (Exh. A))


Chapter 2.52 LEGAL REPRESENTATION FOR CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES

Sections: 

2.52.010    Definitions.

2.52.020    Legal representation.

2.52.030    Exclusions.

2.52.040    Determination of exclusion.

2.52.050    Representation and payment of claims – Conditions.

2.52.060    Settlements.

2.52.070    Legal representation of marital community.

2.52.080    Effect of compliance with conditions.

2.52.090    Failure to comply with conditions.

2.52.100    Reimbursement of incurred expenses.

2.52.110    Conflict with provisions of insurance policies.

2.52.120    Pending claims.

2.52.130    Intent.


2.52.010 Definitions.

Unless the context indicates otherwise, the words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:

A. “Employee” means any person who is or has been employed by the city in either a full-time or part-time capacity and for compensation or as a volunteer.

B. “Official” means any person who is serving or has served as an elected city official and any person who is serving or has served as an appointed member of any board, commission or committee created by any elected city official. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-024; Ord. 94-013 § 1)


2.52.020 Legal representation.

Pursuant to RCW 4.96.041, as a condition of service or employment with the city, the city shall provide to an official or employee, subject to the conditions and requirements of this chapter, and notwithstanding the fact that such official or employee may have concluded service or employment with the city, such legal representation as may be reasonably necessary to defend a claim or lawsuit filed against such officer or employee resulting from any conduct, act, or omission of such official or employee performed or omitted on behalf of the city, in good faith, in their capacity as a city official or employee, which act or omission is within the scope of their service or employment with the city. Such legal representation shall be provided by the city attorney or an attorney selected by the city attorney in the case of a conflict of interest. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-024; Ord. 94-013 § 2)


2.52.030 Exclusions.

The obligations assumed under this chapter by the city shall not apply to:

A. Any dishonest, bad faith, fraudulent, criminal, or malicious act of an official or employee;

B. Any act of an official or employee which is not performed on behalf of the city;

C. Any act which is outside the scope of an official’s or employee’s service or employment within the city; or

D. Any lawsuit brought by or on behalf of the city.

The provisions of this chapter shall have no force or effect with respect to any accident, occurrence or circumstance for which the city or the official or employee is insured against the loss or damages under the terms of any valid city-purchased insurance policy. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-024; Ord. 94-013 § 3)


2.52.040 Determination of exclusion.

The determination of whether an official or an employee is entitled to a defense by the city under the terms of this chapter shall be made by the city attorney. There shall be no appeal from such determination, except to the Superior Court by means of an action for declaratory judgment. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-024; Ord. 94-013 § 4)


2.52.050 Representation and payment of claims – Conditions.

The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable; provided, that the following conditions are met:

A. In the event of any incident or cause of conduct potentially giving rise to a claim for damage or the commencement of a suit, the official or employee involved shall as soon as practicable give the city risk manager and city clerk written notice thereof, identifying the official or employee involved, information with respect to the date, time and place of the incident or conduct giving rise to the claim or lawsuit, as well as the names and addresses of all persons allegedly injured or otherwise damaged thereby, and the names and addresses of all witnesses;

B. Upon receipt thereof, the official or employee shall forthwith deliver any claim, demand, notice, or summons or other process relating to any such incident or conduct to the city risk manager and the city clerk. Said official or employee shall cooperate with any attorney designated by the city, and upon request, assist in making any settlements of any suits and enforcing any claim for any right of subrogation against any persons or organization that may be liable to the city or its officers or employees because of any damage or claim of loss arising from the incident or course of conduct;

C. Such officials or employees shall attend interviews, depositions, hearings and trials and shall assist in securing and giving evidence and obtaining attendance of witnesses and do all things necessary to defend against the claim or suit; and

D. Such officials or employees shall not accept nor voluntarily make any payment, assume any obligation, or incur any expense, other than for first aid to others at the time of an incident, or course of conduct giving rise to any such claim, loss or damage. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-024; Ord. 94-013 § 5)


2.52.060 Settlements.

The city may make settlements of any claim or suit as it deems expedient. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-024; Ord. 94-013 § 6)


2.52.070 Legal representation of marital community.

If an official or employee is entitled to a defense pursuant to this chapter, and the lawsuit in which he/she is named as a party also names his/her spouse or marital community, the defense obligation pursuant to this chapter shall also extend to the named spouse and/or marital community. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-024; Ord. 94-013 § 7)


2.52.080 Effect of compliance with conditions.

If legal representation of any official or employee is undertaken under this chapter, all of the conditions of representation are met, and a judgment is entered against the official or employee, or a settlement made, the city shall pay such judgment or settlement; provided, that the city may, at its discretion, appeal as necessary such judgment. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-024; Ord. 94-013 § 8)


2.52.090 Failure to comply with conditions.

In the event that any official or employee fails, neglects or refuses to comply with any conditions of SMC 2.52.050, or elects to provide his/her own representation with respect to any such claim or litigation, then all of the provisions of this chapter shall be inapplicable, and have no force or effect with respect to any such claim or litigation. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-024; Ord. 94-013 § 9)


2.52.100 Reimbursement of incurred expenses.

If the city attorney determines that an official or employee does not come within the provisions of this chapter, and a court of competent jurisdiction later determines that such claim does come within the provisions of this chapter, then the city shall pay any judgment rendered against the official or employee and costs or expenses, including reasonable attorney’s fees, incurred in defending against the claim. The city shall pay any costs or expenses, including attorney’s fees, incurred in obtaining the determination that such claim is covered by the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-024; Ord. 2001-014 § 2; Ord. 94-013 § 10)


2.52.110 Conflict with provisions of insurance policies.

Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to modify or amend any provision of any policy of insurance where any city official or employee thereof is named insured. In the event of any conflict between this chapter and the provisions of any such policy of insurance, the policy provisions shall be controlling; provided, however, that nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to limit or restrict any employee’s or official’s right to full coverage pursuant to this chapter, it being the intent of this chapter to provide complete coverage outside and beyond insurance policies which may be in effect, while not compromising the terms and conditions of such policies by any conflicting provision contained in this chapter. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-024; Ord. 94-013 § 11)


2.52.120 Pending claims.

The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any pending claim or lawsuit against an official or employee, or any such claim or lawsuit hereafter filed, irrespective of the date of the events or circumstances which are the basis of such claim or lawsuit. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-024; Ord. 94-013 § 12)


2.52.130 Intent.

It is the intent of this chapter to implement RCW 4.96.041. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-024)


Chapter 2.60 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT

Sections:

2.60.010    Purpose.

2.60.020    Emergency management policy.

2.60.030    Definitions.

2.60.040    Emergency management plan.

2.60.050    Adoption of the emergency management plan.

2.60.060    Emergency management organization.

2.60.070    Continuity of government.

2.60.080    Emergency management committee.

2.60.090    Functions and duties of the departments and employees.

2.60.100    Effect of chapter on other rules and regulations.

2.60.110    Interpretation of chapter.

2.60.120    Repealed.

2.60.121    No liability in designated shelters – State assumption of liability.

2.60.130    Emergency management appropriation.

2.60.140    Violation – Penalty.


2.60.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to promote the health, safety and welfare of the general public during an emergency or disaster. This chapter provides for the preparation and carrying out of plans for mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery of persons and property within the city of Sequim in the event of an emergency or disaster, and to provide for coordination of emergency functions and services of the city of Sequim, and with those of other affected public agencies and private persons, corporations, organizations, businesses or tribes. Expenditures made in connection with such emergency management activities, including mutual aid activities, will be deemed conclusively for the direct protection and general benefit of the inhabitants and property within the city of Sequim. (Ord. 2017-017 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-021; Ord. 96-018)


2.60.020 Emergency management policy.

A. It is the policy of the city of Sequim to make the best possible preparation and use of city manpower, resources, and facilities for dealing with any emergency disaster that may occur, and to cooperate to the extent possible with adjacent jurisdictions in order to make maximum use of local emergency response and recovery resources. The approved emergency management plan defines how the policy of emergency and disaster preparedness, response and recovery will be carried out in the city of Sequim.

B. All personnel of the city of Sequim are directed to support the emergency and disaster preparedness, response and recovery activities of the emergency management organization as defined in the approved emergency management plan.

C. Because the demands of the emergency may prevent the city from meeting all of the immediate needs of the community, each citizen is encouraged to prepare for at least two to three weeks without outside help. (Ord. 2017-017 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-021; Ord. 96-018)


2.60.030 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases and words will have the meanings given in this section:

A. “Continuity of government” means the maintenance or reconstitution of the civil government’s ability to carry out the executive, legislative, and judicial processes and services under the threat or occurrence of any emergency conditions that could disrupt such processes and services.

B. “County” means Clallam County.

C. “Director” means the person responsible for the administration and operation of the emergency management program for the city of Sequim. The director will be the Sequim police chief. If the police chief is unavailable, the person occupying the city position of public works director will be the acting director.

D. “Disaster,” as used in this chapter, means an emergency as defined herein which seriously affects the safety, health, or welfare of a substantial number of the citizens of this city; precludes the operation or use of essential public services and facilities; and which reaches such magnitude, dimension or degree of destructiveness as to warrant the city council, by proclamation of disaster, to formally seek county, state and/or federal supplementation of local efforts or resources utilized in alleviating the danger, damage, suffering or hardship faced.

E. “Emergency management” means the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible, to mitigate, prepare for, respond to and recover from emergencies and disasters, and to aid victims suffering from injury or damage resulting from disasters caused by all hazards, whether natural or manmade.

F. “Emergency,” as used in this chapter, means an event or set of circumstances, having been caused by the forces of nature, or other forces beyond the control of humans, by reason of civil disorder, riot, or disturbance, or by other factors not foreseen and not known to exist when the city budget was adopted, demands immediate action to preserve public health, protect life, protect public property, or to provide relief to any stricken neighborhood overtaken by such occurrences.

G. “Emergency management agency” means the Sequim police department.

H. “Emergency management organization” means any and all of the personnel, facilities, services and resources of the city of Sequim necessary to address the emergency pursuant to this chapter.

I. In any policies to implement this chapter the city manager may perform any function delegated to the office of the mayor.

J. Other Definitions. All definitions of terms contained within RCW 38.52.010 as adopted or hereinafter amended are adopted by this reference. (Ord. 2017-017 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-021; Ord. 96-018)


2.60.040 Emergency management plan.

The emergency management plan, prepared by the director and promulgated by the city council, is the official emergency management plan of the city of Sequim, and defines how the city of Sequim will carry out a program of emergency management. The director will file a copy of said plan in the office of the city clerk and distribute copies of said plan to appropriate city departments and other cooperating agencies and organizations. The city council authorizes and directs the director to prepare and distribute the emergency management plan. (Ord. 2017-017 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-021; Ord. 96-018)


2.60.050 Adoption of the emergency management plan.

The city of Sequim adopted an emergency management plan dated March 19, 2003, incorporated by reference as though fully set forth herein, three copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk/treasurer and which is available for public inspection. The emergency management plan will also be available on the city website. The proposed plan must be adopted as the final plan as soon as the State Director issues a certification of consistency pursuant to RCW 38.52.070. Any amendments to the adopted and state certified plan when approved by the city council and approved and certified by the state will constitute the emergency management plan. (Ord. 2017-017 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-021; Ord. 96-018)


2.60.060 Emergency management organization.

The emergency management organization for the city of Sequim is hereby created and will consist of:

A. The city manager, who must appoint a director to be the administrative head and have direct responsibility for organization, administration, and operation of the emergency management organization for the city of Sequim and direct responsibility for the emergency operations of departments of the city of Sequim;

B. The director, who must develop and maintain the emergency management plan and program for the city of Sequim and will have such duties as may be assigned by the city manager or as identified in the approved emergency management plan;

C. Compensated members of the emergency management organization;

D. Volunteer members of the emergency management organization;

E. Such advisory committees as may be appointed by the mayor or city manager;

F. Others as deemed appropriate by the city of Sequim;

G. At such time as an emergency is declared by the city council, any or all of the personnel, services, facilities or resources of the city of Sequim necessary to address the effect of the emergency or disaster. (Ord. 2017-017 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-021; Ord. 96-018)


2.60.070 Continuity of government.

In the event of an emergency or disaster as defined herein affecting the city of Sequim, the following policy is hereby established to provide for continuity of city government:

A. City Council. In the event the emergency or disaster results in one or more council members being unavailable after a reasonable attempt at notice to convene by the mayor, city manager, or director of emergency management, those council members available for duty will constitute the city council, and will have full power to act by majority vote of those present for the purpose of meeting the temporary, immediate and emergency needs, including the activation of the emergency operations center, brought on by the emergency or disaster.

B. City Manager. In the event that the city manager is unavailable by reason of an emergency or disaster, the assistant city manager will fill the role of city manager. In the event that the assistant city manager is unavailable by reason of an emergency or disaster, the city council will by majority vote of those present select an emergency interim city manager to exercise and discharge the duties of that office.

C. Director of Emergency Management. In the event that the director of emergency management is unavailable by reason of emergency or disaster, the public works director will serve as director of emergency management.

D. Department Heads. Each city department must, by adoption of internal procedures, identify their successors in the event that the department head is unavailable for duty by reason of an emergency or disaster.

E. Meetings at Other Than Usual Places. In the event it becomes imprudent, inexpedient, or impossible to conduct the affairs of the city of Sequim at the regular or usual place or places, the city council may meet in any temporary place within or without the territorial limits of the city on the call of the mayor or any two council members. After the relocation the affairs of the city may be lawfully conducted at the emergency temporary location or locations for the duration of the emergency or disaster. (Ord. 2017-017 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-021; Ord. 96-018)


2.60.080 Emergency management committee.

A. There is created the emergency management committee which will consist of the director of emergency management and such city department heads and/or their designees, and other cooperating agencies and organizations having appropriate expertise and knowledge, as deemed appropriate by the city manager.

B. The purpose of the emergency management committee is to provide overall guidance in the preparation, implementation, evaluation and currency of the emergency management plan and program, and to ensure interagency and interjurisdictional cooperation for the maximum use of local and mutual aid resources.

C. The city of Sequim may recognize the Peninsula Regional Emergency Planning Council for the purpose of ensuring coordination with adjacent jurisdictions, and designate the appropriate representatives. (Ord. 2017-017 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-021; Ord. 96-018)


2.60.090 Functions and duties of the departments and employees.

The city council hereby assigns to the various departments and the officers and employees thereof the functions, duties, and powers set forth in the approved emergency management plan. (Ord. 2017-017 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-021; Ord. 96-018)


2.60.100 Effect of chapter on other rules and regulations.

At all times when the order and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this chapter are in effect, they will supersede all existing ordinances, orders and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. (Ord. 2017-017 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-021; Ord. 96-018)


2.60.110 Interpretation of chapter.

This chapter must be construed so as not to conflict with any state or federal statute or with any military rule or regulation. (Ord. 2017-017 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-021; Ord. 96-018)


2.60.120 Nonliability of city and complying agents.

Repealed by Ord. 2001-014. (Ord. 96-018)


2.60.121 No liability in designated shelters – State assumption of liability.

To the fullest extent of RCW 38.52.180 as now enacted or hereafter amended, no liability attaches to the city or any complying agent due to injuries sustained by persons seeking refuge in designated emergency shelters, unless such action was due to willful negligence. Further, Washington State assumes liability for all damage, injuries, or death in accordance with RCW 38.52.180 as now enacted or hereafter amended. (Ord. 2017-017 § 1 (Exh. A))


2.60.130 Emergency management appropriation.

Appropriations will be made in the city budget to cover the expense of emergency management training, writing and maintaining the emergency management plan, and administration of the emergency management plan. Such moneys are to be approved for expenditures in the same manner as expenditures as now authorized by requisition against the budget. (Ord. 2017-017 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-021; Ord. 96-018)


2.60.140 Violation – Penalty.

It is unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder or delay any members of the emergency management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or to do any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or to do any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this chapter. It is likewise unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or any other means of identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the city unless authority to do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials. Convictions for violation of the provisions of this chapter are punishable by a fine of not more than $100.00, or imprisonment for not more than one year, or by both fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 2017-017 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-021; Ord. 96-018)


Chapter 2.62 PARKS, ARBOR AND RECREATION BOARD

Sections:

2.62.010    Membership.

2.62.020    Duties.

2.62.030    Procedures.

2.62.040    Removal.


2.62.010 Membership.

A. There is established a city of Sequim parks, arbor and recreation board consisting of seven members to be appointed by the city council upon recommendation of an interview committee. The term of office of the seven members shall be three years, except that the initial appointments shall be staggered from one to three years so that no more than three members shall have their terms expire in any one year. Each of the members of the board will serve without compensation. Initial determination of term of appointment shall be determined by lot. Members of the board shall reside within the Clallam County boundaries of Sequim School District 323, with preference given to residents of the city of Sequim. At all times, at least four members of the board shall be residents of the city of Sequim.

B. Nonvoting advisors may be approved by the city council to assist in the deliberations of the parks, arbor and recreation board. (Ord. 2016-016 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2013-010 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-024; Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2005-005; Ord. 2001-014 § 2; Ord. 96-013; Ord. 96-009)


2.62.020 Duties.

A. The board is entrusted with the responsibilities of advising and making recommendations to the city council for the acquisition, control, improvement, beautification and planning of all public squares and parks of the city and all city recreation facilities. The board shall periodically review whether the lands being used for park purposes are adequate and shall recommend to the city council what additional lands and grounds should be acquired and used for park and recreation purposes. The board may explore and recommend public/private partnerships where appropriate and feasible. The board shall also recommend design of parks and structures therein to the city council and shall make recommendations on an updated comprehensive plan element for parks and recreation facilities for the city.

B. The board shall recommend to the city council appropriate measures to ensure that the city has a well integrated and complete program for the use of its parks and recreation playgrounds and to accomplish this end, the board shall from time to time meet with appropriate city employees and with representatives and officials of other groups, public and private, who are interested in the use and development of city parks and recreational facilities for the public benefit.

C. It shall be the responsibility of the board to study, investigate, counsel and develop and/or update annually, and administer a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets and in other public areas. The board, when requested by the city council, shall consider, investigate, make finding, report and recommend upon any special matter of question coming within the scope of its work. (Ord. 2016-016 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2013-010 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 96-013; Ord. 96-009)


2.62.030 Procedures.

Meetings of the board shall comply with Chapter 42.30 RCW, the Open Public Meetings Act. The board shall elect its own chairperson. The board shall hold at least one meeting per month, unless cancelled by the board chairperson, and shall adopt rules for the transaction of business, keep a record of its meeting by a board member, who shall be appointed secretary, and shall submit such record to the city clerk. A majority of the members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business and any action taken by a majority of those present shall be deemed action of the board. (Ord. 2016-016 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2013-010 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2001-014 § 2; Ord. 96-013; Ord. 96-009)


2.62.040 Removal.

The mayor may remove any member of the board for any reason other than disagreement with an official recommendation of the board or its members; provided, that such removal has been confirmed by a majority of the city council. Vacancies occurring otherwise than by expiration of the term of office shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as regular appointments are made. (Ord. 2016-016 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2013-010 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 96-013; Ord. 96-009)


Chapter 2.64 CITY ARTS ADVISORY COMMISSION

Sections:

2.64.010    Establishment of commission – Number of members.

2.64.020    Membership.

2.64.030    Officers of commission – Meetings – Quorum.

2.64.040    Authority and duties.

2.64.050    Budget.


2.64.010 Establishment of commission – Number of members.

The city arts advisory commission (the “commission”) is hereby established, which will be composed of not less than five and not more than seven members who are appointed by the city council. Commission members will be appointed upon the basis of demonstrated interest in, and knowledge and support of, the arts. Members serve without salary or other compensation. Members must be residents within the Clallam County boundaries of the Sequim School District. At least two members must be residents of the city of Sequim. (Ord. 2019-007 § 2; Ord. 2014-008 § 1)


2.64.020 Membership.

A. Term of Membership. The term of membership for the voting members of the city arts advisory commission shall be four years; provided, however, that in order that the fewest terms expire in any one year, all terms shall expire on December 31st of the year set forth below for each respective position number as follows:

	Position Number 1 shall expire December 31, 2017

	Position Number 2 shall expire December 31, 2017

	Position Number 3 shall expire December 31, 2018

	Position Number 4 shall expire December 31, 2018

	Position Number 5 shall expire December 31, 2018

	Position Number 6 shall expire December 31, 2019

	Position Number 7 shall expire December 31, 2019

The staff and city council liaison, if any, shall be nonvoting members.



B. Vacancies. Any appointment to a position vacated other than by the expiration of the term of the appointment shall be to fill only the unexpired portion of said term. (Ord. 2014-008 § 1)


2.64.030 Officers of commission – Meetings – Quorum.

Members of the commission shall meet regularly at least once per quarter at a date, time and place to be established by the commission. The commission shall give notice of such meeting in compliance with the Open Public Meetings Act of the state of Washington, as it now exists and as it may be amended from time to time. In order to ensure that a proper record is kept, minutes shall be prepared of all meetings of the commission. All documents and items that are before the commission shall be recorded and retained by the city. The commission shall make a report to the city council at least annually.

The commission shall organize by electing from the members of the commission a chair, a vice-chair, a secretary, and such other officers as may be determined by the commission. It shall be the duty of the chair to preside at all meetings. The vice-chair shall perform this duty in the absence of the chair. A majority of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. (Ord. 2014-008 § 1)


2.64.040 Authority and duties.

The commission shall serve in an advisory capacity to the city on matters including, but not limited to, those purposes set forth below. 

A. To provide recommendations to the staff, mayor and city council in connection with cultural and artistic endeavors and projects in which the city becomes involved and to act as a representative of the community in such matters.

B. To encourage donations, grants to the city and other support to further expand the arts and cultural services and programs available to citizens of Sequim and members of the Sequim community.

C. To assist existing organizations in the field of art, and to develop cooperation with schools and regional and national art organizations.

D. To encourage further development and public awareness of, and interest in, the fine and performing arts.

E. To recommend to the city opportunities/plans to conduct, sponsor, or co-sponsor public programs to further the development and public awareness of, and interest in, the fine and performing arts and then carry out any council-approved plans as appropriate.

F. To review and make recommendations on all works of art acquired by the city, whether through purchase, donation or loan.

G. To assist the city in the preparation of planning documents including art and art-related policies, guidelines, master plans and strategic planning documents related to public art and the public awareness of the visual and performing arts within the city.

H. To operate under policies and procedures as approved by the city council.

I. To propose changes to policies and procedures, assist in the preparation of planning documents including guidelines, master plans, and strategic planning documents which shall be submitted to the city council for approval.

J. To take such other actions as the city council may direct from time to time. (Ord. 2014-008 § 1)


2.64.050 Budget.

Arts commission programs and operating expenses shall be funded by any budgeted city general fund, grants, foundations, donations and/or admission charges. The staff liaison to the commission shall be responsible for submitting the annual operating budget to the city manager. (Ord. 2014-008 § 1)


Chapter 2.66 STREETSCAPE COMMITTEE

(Repealed by Ord. 2001-004)


Chapter 2.68 LODGING TAX ADVISORY COMMITTEE

Sections:

2.68.010    Establishment of lodging tax advisory committee.

2.68.020    Membership.

2.68.030    Duties.

2.68.040    Quorum.

2.68.050    Procedure.

2.68.060    Voting.

2.68.070    Expenses.

2.68.080    Removal.


2.68.010 Establishment of lodging tax advisory committee.

A lodging tax advisory committee is hereby declared to be established and created by the city council. The purpose of the lodging tax advisory committee (LTAC) is to perform the functions of a lodging tax advisory committee under RCW 67.28.1817 and also to be an ongoing advisory committee to the Sequim city council, with duties as described in this chapter or as directed by the city council, following procedures as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2010-018 § 1; Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2006-015 § 1)


2.68.020 Membership.

The LTAC shall be comprised of at least five voting members, each appointed by the Sequim city council. The Sequim city council may appoint nonvoting members to the LTAC. Members of the LTAC are not required to be residents of the city of Sequim.

A. Voting members shall be as follows:

1. One member shall be a Sequim city council member, who shall serve as chair.

2. At least two members shall be representatives of businesses required to collect tax under this chapter.

3. At least two members shall be persons involved in activities authorized to be funded by revenue received under this chapter.

4. There shall be equal representation of businesses required to collect tax under this chapter and persons involved in activities authorized to be funded by revenue received under this chapter.

B. The term of membership shall be through June 30th of the year following appointment; provided, that a member’s term shall not expire until the appointment of a new member is effective. By statute, eligibility for appointment under subsection (A)(2) or (3) of this section is mutually exclusive. The city council shall review the membership of the advisory committee annually and make changes as appropriate. Each year, organizations representing businesses required to collect the lodging tax, organizations involved in activities authorized to be funded by lodging tax revenue, and local agencies involved in tourism promotion may submit recommendations for membership on the LTAC. (Ord. 2010-018 § 2; Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2006-015 § 2)


2.68.030 Duties.

The LTAC coordinator shall submit a proposal to the LTAC for review and comment for budgeting purposes or if an increase is proposed in the rate of the tax imposed under this chapter, the repeal of an exemption from a tax imposed under this chapter, or a change in the use of revenue received under this chapter. The LTAC shall submit comments on such a proposal to the city council in a timely manner through generally applicable public comment procedures. Comments from the LTAC shall include an analysis of the extent to which the proposal will accommodate activities for tourists or increase tourism, and the extent to which the proposal will affect the long-term stability of the lodging tax fund created under this chapter.

The LTAC should submit its comments on the proposal no more than 44 days after its receipt of the proposal. However, failure of the LTAC to submit comments shall not prevent the city from acting on the proposal once 45 days have elapsed since the proposal was submitted to the LTAC.

In addition to the foregoing, the LTAC will submit a report to the city manager as to whether the proposed budget for lodging tax revenue and lodging fund expenditures is consistent with long-term stability of the lodging tax fund.

Minutes shall be maintained of each meeting. These minutes shall be submitted to the city on at least a quarterly basis for acknowledgement by the city council. (Ord. 2010-018 § 3; Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2006-015 § 3)


2.68.040 Quorum.

A quorum of the LTAC shall be a majority of persons currently serving as voting members of the LTAC. A quorum must be present in order for a vote to be taken on a recommendation to go to the city council. (Ord. 2010-018 § 4; Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2006-015 § 4)


2.68.050 Procedure.

A. All business shall be guided pursuant to the Open Public Meetings Act.

B. The chair shall propose an agenda for meetings, shall preside at all meetings, and shall vote on matters being voted on by LTAC. The chair shall be responsible for assuring that LTAC reports are presented to the city on time and shall select a member to record minutes and decisions of LTAC that establish policies or recommendations.

C. LTAC may select a vice chair or a temporary chair to act in the absence of the chair.

D. LTAC may adopt a written policy of LTAC practices, not consistent with this chapter or other direction of the city council. (Ord. 2010-018 § 5; Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2006-015 § 5)


2.68.060 Voting.

Each voting member is entitled to one vote. All matters establishing policies, recommendations or decisions shall be decided by a majority vote of voting members present. (Ord. 2010-018 § 6; Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2006-015 § 6)


2.68.070 Expenses.

The members of the LTAC shall receive no compensation and are not eligible for reimbursement of expenses incidental to service on the LTAC. LTAC may request specific support necessary to carry out its responsibilities by a request made, in advance, to the city manager. (Ord. 2010-018 § 7; Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2006-015 § 7)


2.68.080 Removal.

A member of LTAC may be removed during their term by the city council only for sufficient cause. “Sufficient cause” means:

A. Absence for two consecutive meetings without prior excuse from the chair; or

B. Violation of the public trust or malfeasance. (Ord. 2010-018 § 8; Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2006-015 § 8)


Chapter 2.70 TRANSPORTATION BENEFIT DISTRICT

Sections:

2.70.010    Establishing transportation benefit district.

2.70.020    Governing board.

2.70.025    City authority.

2.70.030    Transportation improvement funded.

2.70.040    Establishment of revenue sources.

2.70.050    No existing rights impaired.

2.70.060    Rules, regulations, pending business, and contracts.

2.70.070    Reports, books, and records.

2.70.080    Funds, credits, appropriations, federal grants, or other assets.

2.70.090    Assumption of indebtedness.

2.70.100    Liberal construction.


2.70.010 Establishing transportation benefit district.

There is created, to carry out all functions allowed by statute, a transportation benefit district within the geographical boundaries of the corporate limits of the city existing on date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. The name of the transportation benefit district shall be the “transportation benefit district of the city of Sequim, Washington.” (Ord. 2017-021 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 2017-016 § 2; Ord. 2016-008 § 2; Ord. 2015-009 § 2; Ord. 2014-015 § 2; Ord. 2013-013 § 2; Ord. 2011-023 § 2; Ord. 2010-017 § 2; Ord. 2010-004 § 2; Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2008-012 § 2; Ord. 2008-008 § 2)


2.70.020 Governing board.

As authorized pursuant to RCW 36.74.030(2), the governing body of the Sequim transportation benefit district established pursuant to RCW 36.73.020 is hereby abolished and the city of Sequim city council (“city council”) hereby assumes and is vested with all the rights, powers, functions and obligations previously vested, exercised and/or performed by the governing body of the Sequim transportation benefit district. (Ord. 2017-021 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 2017-016 § 2; Ord. 2016-008 § 2; Ord. 2015-009 § 2; Ord. 2014-015 § 2; Ord. 2013-013 § 2; Ord. 2011-023 § 2; Ord. 2010-017 § 2; Ord. 2010-004 § 2; Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2008-012 § 2; Ord. 2008-008 § 2)


2.70.025 City authority.

The city has the authority to exercise the rights, powers, functions and obligations set forth in this chapter and Chapter 36.73 RCW, as currently enacted and subsequently amended. (Ord. 2017-021 § 2 (Exh. A))


2.70.030 Transportation improvement funded.

One hundred percent of the funds generated by the transportation benefit district shall be used towards the payment of the estimated funding shortfall needed for the improvements identified in the city’s Transportation Improvement Program as adopted by the city and other transportation projects as deemed necessary. (Ord. 2018-007 § 1; Ord. 2017-021 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 2017-016 § 2; Ord. 2016-008 § 2; Ord. 2015-009 § 2; Ord. 2014-015 § 2; Ord. 2013-013 § 2; Ord. 2011-023 § 2; Ord. 2010-017 § 2; Ord. 2010-004 § 2; Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2008-012 § 2; Ord. 2008-008 § 2)


2.70.040 Establishment of revenue sources.

A. Through majority vote of the registered voters residing within the district, an up to two-tenths of one percent increase in the sales and use tax on taxable goods will be requested (e.g., from 8.4 percent to 8.6 percent). The sales and use tax shall be collected by the businesses located within the transportation benefit district and remitted to the State of Washington Department of Revenue for remittance back to the district as set forth in RCW 82.14.0455.

B. Through petition of a majority of the property owners that reside within the district or by majority vote of the registered voters that reside within the district, whichever applies, the formation of a local improvement district or special assessment or other approved and authorized assessments may be enacted, as provided under RCW 36.73.070 and 36.73.080, for the purpose of providing capital improvements in the applicable area.

C. The transportation benefit district is not intended to subsidize development; therefore, imposition of a fee may be charged on building construction or land development, such as a per trip charge, as authorized under RCW 36.73.120 and subject to the provisions of RCW 36.73.065 and Chapters 39.92, 43.21C, and 82.02 RCW.

D. The transportation benefit district is also authorized to perform all functions of a transportation benefit district allowed by law. (Ord. 2017-021 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 2017-016 § 2; Ord. 2016-008 § 2; Ord. 2015-009 § 2; Ord. 2014-015 § 2; Ord. 2013-013 § 2; Ord. 2011-023 § 2; Ord. 2010-017 § 2; Ord. 2010-004 § 2; Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2008-012 § 2; Ord. 2008-008 § 2)


2.70.050 No existing rights impaired.

Pursuant to RCW 36.74.040, nothing in this chapter will be construed as impairing or altering any existing rights acquired by the Sequim transportation benefit district under Chapter 36.73 RCW, this chapter, or any other provision of law applicable to transportation benefit districts. Nor does this assumption impair or alter any actions, activities, or proceedings validated thereunder; any civil or criminal proceedings instituted thereunder; any rule, regulation, or order promulgated thereunder; any administrative action taken thereunder; nor the validity of any act performed by the Sequim transportation benefit district or division thereof or any officer thereof prior to the assumption of such rights, powers, functions, and obligations by the city as authorized by law. (Ord. 2017-021 § 2 (Exh. A))


2.70.060 Rules, regulations, pending business, and contracts.

Pursuant to RCW 36.74.050(1), all rules and regulations and all pending business before the board of the Sequim transportation benefit district is continued and acted upon by the city council. In addition, pursuant to RCW 36.74.050(2), all existing contracts and obligations of the Sequim transportation benefit district remain in full force and effect and will be performed by the city. The assumption does not affect the validity of any official act performed by any official or employee prior to the assumption authorized in the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 2017-021 § 2 (Exh. A))


2.70.070 Reports, books, and records.

Pursuant to RCW 36.74.060(1), all reports, documents, surveys, books, records, files, papers, or other writings relating to the administration of the powers, duties, and functions available to the Sequim transportation benefit district will be made available to the city. (Ord. 2017-021 § 2 (Exh. A))


2.70.080 Funds, credits, appropriations, federal grants, or other assets.

Pursuant to RCW 36.74.060(2), all funds, credits, or other assets held in connection with rights, powers, duties, and functions of the Sequim transportation benefit district assumed hereunder are assigned to the city. Further, pursuant to RCW 36.74.060(3), any appropriations or federal grant made to the Sequim transportation benefit district (if any) for the purpose of carrying out the rights, powers, functions, and obligations authorized to be assumed by the city must, on the effective date of the assumption, be credited to the city for the purpose of carrying out such assumed rights, powers, functions, and obligations. (Ord. 2017-021 § 2 (Exh. A))


2.70.090 Assumption of indebtedness.

Pursuant to RCW 36.74.070, the city assumes and agrees to provide for the payment of all of the indebtedness of the Sequim transportation benefit district, including the payment and retirement of outstanding general obligation and revenue bonds (if any) issued by the Sequim transportation benefit district. (Ord. 2017-021 § 2 (Exh. A))


2.70.100 Liberal construction.

As authorized pursuant to Chapter 36.73 RCW, this chapter will be liberally construed to permit the accomplishment of its purposes. (Ord. 2017-021 § 2 (Exh. A))


Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE

Chapters:

3.04    Sales or Use Tax

3.08    Excise Tax on Leases of Public Property

3.10    Repealed

3.12    Claims against the City

3.14    Purchasing

3.16    Checks and Electronic Payment

3.20    Investment of Inactive Funds

3.24    Current Expense and Indebtedness Funds

3.28    Garbage Fund

3.30    Contingency Fund

3.31    Repealed

3.32    Local Improvement Guaranty Fund

3.34    Sales and Use Tax for Affordable Housing

3.36    Capital Projects Fund

3.40    Repealed

3.42    Police Asset Seizure Fund No. 121

3.44    Police Department Donation Fund

3.46    Payroll Fund – Claims Fund

3.48    Water and Sewer Funds

3.50    Combined Water and Sewer Utility

3.52    Combined Utility Billings

3.54    Rainy Day Fund

3.56    Real Estate Excise Tax Fund

3.62    Real Estate Excise Tax

3.66    Carrie Blake Park Trust Fund

3.68    Rates and Fees

3.70    Advance Travel Fund

3.72    Lodging Tax

3.74    Donations, Devises or Bequests

3.76    Bonds and Obligations Registration System


Chapter 3.04 SALES OR USE TAX

Sections:

3.04.010    Imposition of sales tax – Authority.

3.04.020    Rate of tax.

3.04.030    Administration and collection of tax.

3.04.040    Consent to inspection of records.

3.04.050    Authorizing execution of contract for administration.

3.04.060    Penalties.


3.04.010 Imposition of sales tax – Authority.

There is imposed a sales or use tax, as the case may be, as authorized by RCW 82.14.030(2), upon every taxable event, as defined in RCW 82.14.020, occurring within the city. The tax shall be imposed upon and collected from those persons from whom the state sales or use tax is collected, pursuant to Chapters 82.08 and 82.12 RCW. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-034; Ord. 468 § 1, 1985)


3.04.020 Rate of tax.

The rate of the tax imposed by SMC 3.04.010 shall be one-half of one percent of the selling price or value of the article used, as the case may be; provided, however, that during such period as there is in effect a sales tax or use tax imposed by Clallam County under Section 17(2), Chapter 49, Laws of 1982, First Extraordinary Session, at a rate equal to or greater than the rate imposed by this section, the county shall receive 15 percent of the tax imposed by this section; and provided further, that during such period as there is in effect a sales tax or use tax imposed by Clallam County under Section 17(2), Chapter 49, Laws of 1982, First Extraordinary Session, at a rate which is less than the rate imposed by this section, the county shall receive from the tax imposed by this section, that amount of revenues equal to 15 percent of the rate of the tax imposed by the county under Section 17(2), Chapter 49, Laws of 1982, First Extraordinary Session. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-034; Ord. 468 § 2, 1985)


3.04.030 Administration and collection of tax.

The administration and collection of the tax imposed by this chapter shall be in accordance with the provisions of RCW 82.14.050. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-034; Ord. 468 § 3, 1985)


3.04.040 Consent to inspection of records.

The city consents to the inspection of such records as are necessary to qualify the city for inspection of records of the Department of Revenue, pursuant to RCW 82.32.330. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-034; Ord. 468 § 4, 1985)


3.04.050 Authorizing execution of contract for administration.

The city manager and finance officer are authorized to enter into a contract with the Department of Revenue for the administration of this tax. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-034; Ord. 468 § 5, 1985)


3.04.060 Penalties.

Any seller who fails or refuses to collect the tax as required with the intent to violate the provisions of this chapter or to gain some advantage or benefit, either direct or indirect, and any buyer who refuses to pay any tax due under this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined no more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-034; Ord. 468 § 6, 1985)


Chapter 3.08 EXCISE TAX ON LEASES OF PUBLIC PROPERTY

Sections:

3.08.010    Tax imposed.

3.08.020    Rate of tax.

3.08.030    Administration and collection.

3.08.040    Exemptions.

3.08.050    Consent to inspection of records.

3.08.060    Authority to contract with state.

3.08.070    Severability.

3.08.090    Violation.


3.08.010 Tax imposed.

There is levied and shall be collected a leasehold excise tax July 1, 1976, upon the act or privilege of occupying or using publicly owned real or personal property within the city through a “leasehold interest” as defined by Section 2, Chapter 61, Laws of 1975-76, Second Extraordinary Session (hereafter in this chapter referred to as the “state act”). The tax shall be paid, collected and remitted to the Department of Revenue of the state at the time and in the manner prescribed by Section 5 of the state act. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-022; Ord. 335 § 1, 1976)


3.08.020 Rate of tax.

The rate of the tax imposed by SMC 3.08.010 shall be four percent of the taxable rent (as defined by Section 2 of the state act); provided, that the following credits shall be allowed in determining the tax payable:

A. With respect to a leasehold interest arising out of any lease or agreement, the terms of which were binding on the lessee prior to July 1, 1970, where such lease or agreement has not been renegotiated (as defined by Section 2 of the state act) since that date, and excluding from such credit (i) any leasehold interest arising out of any lease of property covered by the provisions of RCW 28B.20.394 and (ii) any lease or agreement including options to renew which extends beyond January 1, 1985, as follows:

1. With respect to taxes due in calendar year 1976, a credit equal to 80 percent of the tax produced by the above rate;

2. With respect to taxes due in calendar year 1977, a credit equal to 60 percent of the tax produced by the above rate;

3. With respect to taxes due in calendar year 1978, a credit equal to 40 percent of the tax produced by the above rate;

4. With respect to taxes due in calendar year 1979, a credit equal to 40 percent of the tax produced by the above rate;

5. With respect to a product lease (as defined by Section 2 of the state act), a credit equal to 33 percent of the tax produced by the above rate. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-022; Ord. 335 § 2, 1976)


3.08.030 Administration and collection.

The administration and collection of the tax imposed by the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be in accordance with the provisions of the state act. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-022; Ord. 335 § 3, 1976)


3.08.040 Exemptions.

Leasehold interests exempted by Section 13 of the state act as it now exists or may hereafter be amended shall be exempt from the tax imposed pursuant to SMC 3.08.010. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-022; Ord. 335 § 4, 1976)


3.08.050 Consent to inspection of records.

The city consents to the inspection of records as are necessary to qualify the city for inspection of records of the Department of Revenue pursuant to RCW 82.32.330. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-022; Ord. 335 § 5, 1976)


3.08.060 Authority to contract with state.

The city manager is authorized to execute a contract with the Department of Revenue of the state for the administration and collection of the tax imposed by SMC 3.08.010; provided, that the city attorney shall first approve the form and content of the contract. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-022; Ord. 335 § 6, 1976)


3.08.070 Severability.

If any provision of this chapter or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter or the application of the provision to any other persons or circumstance is not affected. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-022; Ord. 335 § 7, 1976)


3.08.090 Violation.

Failure to pay the tax authorized by this chapter shall be a misdemeanor. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-022; Ord. 335 § 8, 1976)


Chapter 3.10 INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM FOR TAX ORDINANCES

(Repealed by vote of the people, 11/3/98)


Chapter 3.12 CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY

Sections:

3.12.010    Auditing officer.

3.12.020    Authentication/certification of claims.

3.12.030    Bond required.

3.12.040    Policies adopted.

3.12.050    Finance committee.


3.12.010 Auditing officer.

The position of auditing officer is established to review and facilitate the payment of claims against the city. The finance director, or his/her designee, is named as the auditing officer for the city of Sequim. This chapter does not apply to any alleged tort claims. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-017; Ord. 2002-005 § 1)


3.12.020 Authentication/certification of claims.

Upon a satisfactory review that a claim against the city is valid, the auditing officer shall certify that the claim is a just, due and unpaid obligation against the city on a form and in the manner prescribed by the State Auditor. No claim shall be paid without such authentication and certification. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-017; Ord. 2002-005 § 2)


3.12.030 Bond required. 

A. The auditing officer and the officer designated to sign the checks or warrants shall each be required to furnish an official bond for the faithful discharge of his/her duties in an amount of at least $50,000.

B. A policy of insurance covering honest and faithful performance and insuring against the same perils as a bond may be utilized in lieu of any such bond. All such bonds or insurance policies in lieu of bonds shall be approved by the city attorney as to form. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-017; Ord. 2002-005 § 3)


3.12.040 Policies adopted. 

The legislative body has adopted contracting, hiring, purchasing, and disbursing policies that implement effective internal control. These policies are adopted under separate ordinance (Ordinance No. 2002-006, codified at Chapter 3.14 SMC). (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-017; Ord. 2002-005 § 4)


3.12.050 Finance committee. 

A. There is hereby created a finance committee consisting of three members of the city council, which members shall be appointed annually by the mayor of the city of Sequim.

B. At least two of the finance committee members shall review the documentation supporting claims paid and recommend approval before the city council at its next regularly scheduled public meeting within one month of issuance.

C. The finance committee shall require that if, upon review, it disapproves a claim, the auditing officer and the officer designated to sign the checks or warrants shall jointly cause the disapproved claims to be recognized as receivables of the city and to pursue collection diligently until the amounts disapproved are collected or until the city council is satisfied and approves the claim. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-017; Ord. 2002-005 § 5)


Chapter 3.14 PURCHASING

Sections:

3.14.010    Repealed.

3.14.020    Administration.

3.14.030    Repealed.

3.14.040    Repealed.

3.14.050    Repealed.

3.14.060    Repealed.

3.14.070    Repealed.

3.14.080    Repealed.

3.14.090    Prohibited practices.

3.14.100    Disposition of public property.


3.14.010 Definitions.

Repealed by Ord. 2008-005. (Ord. 2002-006 § 1)


3.14.020 Administration.

Under direction of the city manager, the purchasing policies shall be administered in accordance with applicable state statutes, this chapter, and by other applicable laws. The city manager or his/her designee(s) shall have the responsibility and accountability to purchase and dispose of city property in accordance with state law and as established by resolution.

A. Prescribe and maintain such administrative policies, procedures and forms as are reasonably necessary to the operation of said purchasing system.

B. Periodically prepare a comprehensive list of surplus, worn out or obsolete city-owned equipment. Items which cannot be used or reassigned to another department shall be recommended to the manager for disposal as set by resolution, unless the cost of said surplus property exceeds $5,000, in which case the manager shall hold an administrative hearing prior to disposal pursuant to RCW 39.33.020. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2008-005 § 1; Ord. 2002-006 § 2)


3.14.030 Local vendors.

Repealed by Ord. 2008-005. (Ord. 2002-006 § 3)


3.14.040 Competitive bidding. 

Repealed by Ord. 2008-005. (Ord. 2002-006 § 4)


3.14.050 Small works roster.

Repealed by Ord. 2008-005. (Ord. 2002-006 § 5)


3.14.060 Architectural and engineering services.

Repealed by Ord. 2008-005. (Ord. 2002-006 § 6)


3.14.070 Bidding. 

Repealed by Ord. 2008-005. (Ord. 2002-006 § 7)


3.14.080 Exemptions to competitive bidding requirements.

Repealed by Ord. 2008-005. (Ord. 2002-006 § 8)


3.14.090 Prohibited practices. 

A. Collusion among Bidders. Any agreement or collusion among bidders or prospective bidders to either buy or sell, in restraint of freedom of competition, be it agreement to bid a fixed price, or otherwise, shall render the bids of such bidders void. Such bidders may be subject to possible exclusion from future bidding with the city when determined by the city manager to be in the best interest of the city.

B. Disclosure of Formal Bid Contents. Any disclosure in advance of the opening bids, of any information contained in the sealed or formal bid, made or permitted by a city officer or employee may render each bid void either by the city or the parties submitting bids. Appropriate disciplinary action shall be taken against both the persons revealing the information and the persons using the information. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, all bids submitted by bidders taking advantage of any information revealed contrary to this section shall at once become null and void.

C. Gratuities. With the exception of normal business and social courtesies, or donations publicly given and accepted, the acceptance of any gift or gratuity in the form of cash, merchandise or any other thing of significant value by an official or employee of the city from any vendor or contractor, or prospective vendor or contractor, shall be prohibited.

D. Employee-Owned Businesses. City goods or services shall not be obtained from businesses in which city officials, employees or their immediate family members have a majority ownership interest.

E. Sale of Materials and Supplies. The city shall not use its purchasing power or lend its credit to acquire goods or services for any private party, nor shall the city sell its materials or supplies to city officials, employees, or the public except when said materials have been declared surplus and disposed of as provided herein. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2008-005 § 1; Ord. 2002-006 § 9)


3.14.100 Disposition of public property.

Disposition of public property shall be in accordance with state laws and as established by resolution. Existing code shall remain in effect until a resolution is adopted by council setting forth a new policy for disposing of public property and referencing this code section.

Disposal of public property shall be done in the following manner:

A. Declaration as Surplus Property. Upon recommendation of the department head, the city manager may declare property surplus upon one or more of the following criteria:

1. The city has or soon will have no practical, efficient, or appropriate use for the property, nor will it have such a use for the property in the near future.

2. The purpose served by the property can be accomplished by use of a better, less costly, or more efficient alternative.

3. The purpose served by the property or its use no longer exists as determined by a change of policy evidenced by an ordinance or resolution of the city council.

4. The property is damaged, worn out, otherwise inoperable and the cost of repairing the same is unwise or impractical.

B. Sale of Property.

1. If a department head or authorized city representative has city property under his or her control or supervision which is deemed surplus to use, said employee shall notify the city manager, who shall in turn notify interested department heads, supervisors or other city representatives and give them an opportunity to review their need for the same. If any of such persons desire to acquire and use the proposed surplus property, unless the manager disagrees, the property may be transferred to the requesting department head, or other authorized representative.

2. If no request for use of proposed surplus property is received, the city manager may then proceed to direct the disposal of the same by public auction, bid, or other method of sale on terms the manager deems to be in the best interest of the city.

3. Surplus personal property, which is not sellable because of obsolescence, wear and tear, or other reasons, may be dismantled, if necessary, and sold as scrap.

4. If the proposed surplus property is real property, notice of the proposal to declare the same surplus shall additionally be given to all city council members.

5. The decision to declare real property as surplus shall rest solely with the city council.

C. Trade of Real Property.

1. If the city manager determines that the real property declared surplus under this section could be sold for a greater consideration or benefit to the city if something other than cash were taken as consideration, then the manager may invite prospective purchasers to tender consideration, either cash or in-kind or a combination of both. Upon receipt of a bid tendering consideration in-kind, and if the manager considers such bid to be the best offer made, prior to accepting such a bid the manager shall make a report setting forth reasons for thinking the in-kind bid has the most value to the city. This report shall be made to the city council at a regular council meeting and the report shall remain open to public inspection.

2. Before accepting any bid containing in-kind consideration, an adequate appraisal must have been made by a qualified independent appraiser.

3. If the city council finds that the bid containing the in-kind consideration has more value or benefit to the city than any other bid submitted, the manager may accept the bid containing in-kind consideration.

D. Lease of Public Property. When specifically provided for in the city budget, the city manager may authorize the lease or sublease of any property, including real property, under such terms and conditions as the manager may deem desirable, fair and appropriate, either by use of negotiations or bidding in the best interest of the city. Leases of real property shall not be granted for a period of more than five years. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2008-005 § 1; Ord. 2002-006 § 10)


Chapter 3.16 CHECKS AND ELECTRONIC PAYMENT

Sections:

3.16.010    Authority.


3.16.010 Authority.

Ordinance 2003-001 passed on January 23, 2003, is hereby repealed in its entirety except that acts performed under Ordinance 2003-001 shall remain valid acts, and the city manager (or his or her written designee) and the finance officer designated in SMC 2.14.020, also known as administrative services director/treasurer, are hereby authorized to sign, endorse, make, execute, and deliver checks, notes, drafts and acceptances on behalf of the city and to execute electronic payment options for any and all of the following accounts maintained by the city for the conduct of its business at:

	U.S. Bank	Treasurer’s Checking Account

	 	Interest Account

	 	Claim Checks Account

	 	Investments Account

	 	Travel Advance Account 

	SNW Asset Management	Investments Account

Provided, that all such officers and designees shall comply with RCW 35A.13.160 and 35A.12.080 and SMC 2.16.020 related to oaths and bonds or fidelity insurance from the city’s risk pool, for such officers. (Ord. 2012-003)


Chapter 3.20 INVESTMENT OF INACTIVE FUNDS

Sections:

3.20.010    Purpose.

3.20.020    Committee to be appointed.

3.20.030    Investment of funds.

3.20.040    Council consent not required.

3.20.050    Report to council.

3.20.060    Conversion of funds.


3.20.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to enable the city to invest its inactive funds in certain prescribed investments through an investment committee. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-023; Ord. 217 § 1, 1968)


3.20.020 Committee to be appointed.

The mayor of the city, with consent of a majority of the city council, shall appoint a committee composed of two councilmen and a person designated by the city manager from the city finance department to make investments of any portions of the moneys in the city’s inactive funds or in any other funds in excess of current needs. The city manager may manage funds in accordance with state law and as directed by the finance committee, as approved by the city council. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-023; Ord. 217 § 2, 1968)


3.20.030 Investment of funds.

The moneys shall be invested in:

A. United States bonds (RCW 39.59.020);

B. United States certificates of indebtedness;

C. Bonds or warrants of the state;

D. General obligation or utility revenue bonds or warrants of the city or of any other city or town in the state;

E. The city’s own bonds or warrants of a local improvement or condemnation award district which is within the protection of the local improvement guaranty fund law; and

F. In other investments authorized by law, including, but not limited to, RCW 39.59.020, 39.59.030, 43.84.080 and 43.250.040. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-023; Ord. 217 § 3, 1968)


3.20.040 Council consent not required.

The investments authorized as indicated in SMC 3.20.030 may be made by the city manager or the city manager’s designee without the consent of the city council for each investment. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-023; Ord. 217 § 4, 1968)


3.20.050 Report to council.

The investment committee shall make a report of all investments to the city council upon request of the council and shall keep the council informed of any substantial investment changes. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-023; Ord. 217 § 5, 1968)


3.20.060 Conversion of funds.

The city council or the investment committee authorized to invest city funds may at any time convert the securities specified in SMC 3.20.030 purchased with city funds, or any part thereof, into cash. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-023; Ord. 217 § 6, 1968)


Chapter 3.24 CURRENT EXPENSE AND INDEBTEDNESS FUNDS

Sections:

3.24.010    Funds created.

3.24.020    Indebtedness fund.

3.24.030    General or current expense fund.


3.24.010 Funds created.

There are created and established, pursuant to the laws of the state, two separate and distinct funds for the city, one fund to be designated as the current expense fund and the other to be designated as the indebtedness fund. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 39 § 1, 1916)


3.24.020 Indebtedness fund.

All money collected from the taxes levied for the payment of indebtedness shall on and after February 1, 1916, be credited and applied to the indebtedness fund. The indebtedness fund shall be used for the payment of all indebtedness of the city existing prior to February 1, 1916, and all outstanding warrants of the city drawn prior to February 1, 1916, shall be payable out of the indebtedness fund. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 39 § 2, 1916)


3.24.030 General or current expense fund.

All money collected from the taxes levied for the payment of current expenses shall after February 1, 1916, be credited and applied to the current expense fund, also called the general fund, and that all money collected from all licenses, poundage fees, police court fines or other receipts coming into the city treasurer’s office, except indebtedness fund taxes, shall be credited and applied to the current expense fund. All current expenses incurred by the city from and after February 1, 1916, shall be on warrants drawn only upon the current expense fund. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 39 § 3, 1916)


Chapter 3.28 GARBAGE FUND

Sections:

3.28.010    Fund established.

3.28.020    Reserved.


3.28.010 Fund established.

There is established a garbage fund for the city. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 337 § 1, 1976)


3.28.020 Maintenance of fund.

Reserved by Ord. 2005-029. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 337 § 2, 1976)


Chapter 3.30 CONTINGENCY FUND

Sections:

3.30.010    Contingency fund.


3.30.010 Contingency fund.

A. There is hereby created for the city a fund to be known as the “contingency fund.”

B. The contingency fund shall be supported by a budgetary appropriation from any tax or revenue source not restricted to any use by law, and may also be supported by a transfer from any other unexpended or decreased fund made available by ordinance; provided, that the total amount accumulated in such fund at any time shall not exceed the equivalent of $0.375 per $1,000 of assessed valuation of property within the city at the time. Any moneys in the contingency fund at the end of the fiscal year shall not lapse except upon reappropriation by the city council to another fund in the adoption of a subsequent city budget.

C. No money shall be withdrawn from the contingency fund except by transfer to an appropriate operating fund authorized by ordinance or resolution or by direction of the council reflected in council minutes clearly stating the facts constituting the reason for the withdrawal or the emergency as the case may be and specifying the fund to which the withdrawn money shall be transferred. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-020; Ord. 93-019 § 2)


Chapter 3.31 SEQUIM 2000 CREDIT CARD FUND

(Repealed by Ord. 2005-029)


Chapter 3.32 LOCAL IMPROVEMENT GUARANTY FUND

Sections:

3.32.010    Fund created.

3.32.020    Maintenance of fund.

3.32.030    Warrants.

3.32.040    Purchases in order of presentation.

3.32.050    Protection of fund.

3.32.060    Interest and earnings.


3.32.010 Fund created.

Pursuant to RCW 35A.37.010, there is created a fund of the city to be known and designated as the local improvement guaranty fund, for the purpose of guaranteeing, to the extent of the fund, in the manner provided by law and this chapter, the payment of local improvement bonds and warrants to pay the cost of improvements constructed in all local improvement districts of the city. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 263 § 1, 1972)


3.32.020 Maintenance of fund.

From time to time hereafter for the purpose of maintaining the local improvement guaranty fund, the city shall at the time of making its annual budget and tax levy provide for the levy of a sum sufficient, with other resources of the fund, to meet the financial requirements of the fund; provided, that the levy in any one year does not exceed five percent of the outstanding obligations guaranteed by the fund. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 263 § 2, 1972)


3.32.030 Warrants.

Warrants drawing interest at a rate of not to exceed six percent shall be issued against the local improvement guaranty fund to meet any liability accruing against it. The warrants so issued shall at no time exceed five percent of the outstanding obligations guaranteed by the fund. At the time of making its annual budget and tax levy, the city shall provide for the levying of a sum sufficient, with other resources of the fund, to pay warrants so issued during the preceding fiscal year. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 263 § 3, 1972)


3.32.040 Purchases in order of presentation.

Defaulted bonds, interest coupons and warrants against local improvement district funds of the city shall be purchased out of the guaranty fund. As between the several issues of bonds, coupons or warrants no preference shall exist, but they shall be purchased in the order of their presentation. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 263 § 4, 1972)


3.32.050 Protection of fund.

A. For the purpose of protecting the guaranty fund, so much of the guaranty fund as is necessary may be used to purchase certificates of delinquency for general taxes on property subject to local improvement assessments which underlie the bonds, coupons or warrants guaranteed by the fund or to purchase such property at county tax foreclosures or from the county after foreclosure.

B. The city, as trustee of the fund, may foreclose the lien of general taxes, certificates of delinquency and purchase the property at foreclosure sale. When so doing, the court costs, cost of publication, expense for clerical work and other expenses incidental thereto shall be charged to and paid from the local improvement guaranty fund.

C. After acquiring title to property by purchase at general tax foreclosure sale or from the county after foreclosure, the city may lease it or sell it at public or private sale at such price and on such terms as may be determined by the resolution of the council. All proceeds shall belong to and be paid into the local improvement guaranty fund. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 263 § 5, 1972)


3.32.060 Interest and earnings.

A. Interest and earnings from the local improvement guaranty fund shall be paid into the fund. If in any local improvement fund guaranteed by the local improvement guaranty fund there is a surplus remaining after the payment of all outstanding bonds and warrants payable therefrom, it shall be paid into the local improvement guaranty fund.

B. Whenever any sum is paid out of the local improvement guaranty fund on account of the principal or interest of a local improvement bond or warrant, the city, as trustee of the fund, shall be subrogated to all rights of the holder of the bonds or interest coupon or warrant so paid and the proceeds thereof or of the underlying assessment shall become a part of the guaranty fund. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 263 § 6, 1972)


Chapter 3.34 SALES AND USE TAX FOR AFFORDABLE HOUSING

Sections:

3.34.010    Imposition of sales and use tax for affordable housing.

3.34.020    Purpose of tax.

3.34.030    Administration and collection – Statutory compliance.

3.34.040    Affordable housing sales tax fund.


3.34.010 Imposition of sales and use tax for affordable housing.

A. There is imposed a sales and use tax as authorized by Washington State Legislature Chapter 338, Laws of 2019, which is codified in Chapter 82.14 RCW, upon every taxable event, as defined in Chapter 82.14 RCW, occurring within the city of Sequim. The tax is imposed upon and collected from those persons from whom the state sales tax or use tax is collected pursuant to Chapters 82.08 and 82.12 RCW.

B. The rate of the tax imposed by this section is 0.0073 percent of the selling price or value of the article used.

C. The tax imposed under this section will be deducted from the amount of tax otherwise required to be collected or paid to the Department of Revenue under Chapter 82.08 or 82.12 RCW. The Department of Revenue will perform the collection of such taxes on behalf of the city of Sequim at no cost to the city.

D. The Department of Revenue will calculate the maximum amount of tax distributions for the city of Sequim based on the taxable retail sales in the city in state fiscal year 2019, and the tax imposed under this section will cease to be distributed to the city of Sequim for the remainder of any state fiscal year in which the amount of tax exceeds the maximum amount of tax distributions for the city as properly calculated by the Department of Revenue. Distributions to the city of Sequim that have ceased during a state fiscal year will resume at the beginning of the next state fiscal year. (Ord. 2020-005 §§ 1, 2)


3.34.020 Purpose of tax.

A. The city may use the moneys collected by the tax imposed under SMC 3.34.010 or bonds issued only for the following purposes:

1. Acquiring, rehabilitating, or constructing affordable housing, which may include new units of affordable housing within an existing structure or facilities providing supportive housing services under RCW 71.24.385; and

2. Providing the operations and maintenance costs of new units of affordable or supportive housing;

3. Providing rental assistance to tenants; and

4. Such other purposes authorized by the laws of the state of Washington.

B. The housing and services provided under this section may only be provided to persons whose income is at or below 60 percent of the median income of the city.

C. In determining the use of funds under this section, the city must consider the income of the individuals and families to be served, the leveraging of the resources made available under SMC 3.34.010, and the housing needs within the city.

D. The finance director must report annually to the Washington State Department of Commerce, in accordance with the Department’s rules, on the collection and use of the revenue from the tax imposed under SMC 3.34.010.

E. The tax imposed by the city under SMC 3.34.010 will expire 20 years after the date on which the tax is first imposed. The administrative services director will notify the city council and the mayor of the expiration date of the tax each year beginning three years before the expiration date, and will also promptly notify the city council and the mayor of any changes to the expiration date. (Ord. 2020-005 §§ 1,  3)


3.34.030 Administration and collection – Statutory compliance.

The administration and collection of the tax imposed by this chapter will be in accordance with the provisions of Washington State Legislature Chapter 338, Laws of 2019, which is codified in Chapter 82.14 RCW. (Ord. 2020-005 §§ 1,  4)


3.34.040 Affordable housing sales tax fund.

A. There is hereby established a special revenue fund for the city of Sequim, to be known as the “affordable housing sales tax fund,” into which will be deposited all monies received from a portion of sales and use taxes otherwise required to be collected and paid to the Department of Revenue pursuant to legislation enacted by the 2019 Washington State Legislature.

B. This fund has been established to receive that portion of sales and use tax credited back to the city for use in the acquisition, construction or rehabilitation of affordable housing or facilities providing supportive housing, and for the operations and maintenance costs of new units of affordable or supportive housing, and if eligible, for providing rental assistance for tenants.

C. Any unexpended funds remaining in the affordable housing sales tax fund at the end of the budget period will not be transferred to the general fund or otherwise lapse, but funds will be carried forward from year to year until expended for the purpose set forth in subsection B of this section. (Ord. 2020-005 §§ 1,  5)


Chapter 3.36 CAPITAL PROJECTS FUND

Sections:

3.36.010    Fund established.


3.36.010 Fund established.

A. There is established a capital projects fund for the city, such fund to be used to accrue moneys for the construction and/or completion of capital projects.

B. The fund shall be kept as a separate fund of the city and shall be separately listed and disclosed upon the city budget. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 495 § 1, 1986)


Chapter 3.40 FIRE DEPARTMENT DONATION FUND

(Repealed by Ord. 99-003)


Chapter 3.42 POLICE ASSET SEIZURE FUND NO. 121

Sections:

3.42.010    Created.

3.42.020    Purpose.

3.42.030    Maintenance and use of proceeds.

3.42.040    Unexpended funds.


3.42.010 Created.

There is created and established a special revenue-type fund to be known as the “police asset seizure fund No. 121” into which the net proceeds of the following will be placed:

A. RCW 69.50.505 provides for the seizure and forfeiture of property connected with the manufacture, compounding, processing, delivery, importing, or exporting of illegal narcotics and drugs (controlled substances) by law enforcement agencies, including the Sequim police department.

B. RCW 46.61.5058 provides for the seizure and forfeiture of a vehicle connected with driving a motor vehicle while meeting or exceeding the Washington State recognized level of intoxication (DUI) and having had a prior conviction within seven years as defined in RCW 46.61.5055.

C. Chapter 9A.83 RCW et seq. provides for the seizure and forfeiture of proceeds and property connected with money laundering.

D. Moneys derived as a result of the Federal Comprehensive Crime Control Act. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-031 § 1; Ord. 99-004 § 1)


3.42.020 Purpose.

The city has previously established the police expendable trust fund No. 621 to hold pending, unresolved, seized or forfeited moneys as cited above until legally resolved. Therefore, it is the purpose of this chapter to create and maintain a separate special revenue type fund entitled “police asset seizure fund No. 121” to deposit the net portion of forfeited proceeds after payment to the Washington State Treasurer and settlement of all claims as required by the RCW and federal laws. This fund shall be kept as a separate fund of the city of Sequim and shall be separately listed and disclosed upon the Sequim city budget as fund No. 121. Moneys shall not be commingled with other city moneys. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-031 § 1; Ord. 99-004 § 1)


3.42.030 Maintenance and use of proceeds.

A. The net proceeds in this fund are to be used to assist the Sequim police department in funding drug enforcement as determined by the Sequim city manager and the chief of police. RCW 69.50.505 states, “Forfeited property and net proceeds not required to be paid to the state treasurer shall be retained by the seizing law enforcement agency exclusively for the expansion and improvement of controlled substances related law enforcement activity. Money retained under this section may not be used to supplant preexisting funding sources.” The city finance officer shall have authority to manage these funds in the city budget and to create such funds as may be necessary.

B. The city finance officer shall establish a savings/checking account with a local bank for the deposit of needed proceeds to this fund. This account is intended to maintain any necessary confidential information with any purchases or expenditures from this account.

C. Withdrawals from the account shall require written authorization of the chief of police and the city manager.

D. Checks written for the police asset seizure bank account will require the signature of the city manager or finance officer.

E. Confidential funds used for the purchase of evidence, contraband, information from informants or investigative expenses must meet at least the current minimum requirements for receipt documentation as required by the RCW and the Washington State Budgeting, Accounting, and Reporting manual (BARS) and requirements of RCW 69.50.505.

F. All bank statements for this fund will be given to the city finance officer on a regular basis.

G. The city finance officer is also authorized to invest the moneys from the police asset seizure fund as a separate secure investment. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-031 § 1; Ord. 99-004 § 1)


3.42.040 Unexpended funds.

Any unexpended funds remaining in the police asset seizure fund at the end of any budget year shall not be transferred to the general fund or otherwise lapse; rather, said unexpended funds shall be carried forward from year to year until expended for the purposes set forth in this chapter or as otherwise directed by ordinance of the city council. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-031 § 1; Ord. 99-004 § 1)


Chapter 3.44 POLICE DEPARTMENT DONATION FUND

Sections:

3.44.010    Donations to be deposited in fund.

3.44.020    Disposition of funds.


3.44.010 Donations to be deposited in fund.

Any officer collecting or receiving any money donated for the use of the city police department shall return such money to the city clerk, who shall immediately pay it into the treasury of the city, to be credited to a fund to be established as the Sequim police department donation fund. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 474 § 1, 1985)


3.44.020 Disposition of funds.

A. To the extent that any donation, devise or bequest requests a particular appropriation and/or use for the donation, devise or bequest made, the city shall endeavor to see that the funds donated are so applied.

B. In the absence of any such specific request, the city council may direct the expenditure or use of the funds for such police department purposes as shall be determined by the city council to be in the best interests of the city and the police department; provided, that the use of such money shall be designated and used to provide services and/or facilities within the powers granted by law to the city and to the police department. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 474 § 2, 1985)


Chapter 3.46 PAYROLL FUND – CLAIMS FUND

Sections:

3.46.010    Funds established.


3.46.010 Funds established.

There is established a separate fund for the city which shall be known as the payroll fund, and another separate fund which shall be known as the claims fund. The city manager, after consultation with the city attorney, and approval of the risk manager, and the risk pool or city insurer, shall have authority to settle small claims not exceeding $5,000 from the claims fund; provided, however, that such releases shall be in exchange for a full release and hold harmless agreement. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-029; Ord. 536 § 2, 1989)


Chapter 3.48 WATER AND SEWER FUNDS

Sections:

3.48.010    Creation of separate revenue funds within combined utility fund.

3.48.020    Creation of separate general facility (construction) funds within combined utility fund.

3.48.030    Water replacement reserve fund within combined utility fund.

3.48.040    Sewer replacement reserve fund within combined utility fund.

3.48.050    Mitigation funds.


3.48.010 Creation of separate revenue funds within combined utility fund.

Within the combined utility fund created in the office of the city treasurer under SMC 3.50.010, there are two special subfunds of the city to be known as the water revenue subfund and the sewer revenue subfund, into which shall be paid all the earnings, revenue and moneys derived from the operation and ownership of the water system and sewerage system, respectively, and out of which shall be paid the costs of maintenance and operation of the water system and sewerage system, respectively. (Ord. 2014-022 § 9; Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-035; Ord. 444 § 2, 1983)


3.48.020 Creation of separate general facility (construction) funds within combined utility fund.

Within the combined utility fund created in the office of the city treasurer under SMC 3.50.010, there are two special subfunds of the city to be known as the water general facility subfund and the sewer general facility subfund, into and out of which shall be paid moneys for the acquisition, construction and installation of additions and betterments to and extensions of the water system and sewerage system, respectively, and costs and expenses incidental thereto. (Ord. 2014-022 § 9; Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-035; Ord. 444 § 3, 1983)


3.48.030 Water replacement reserve fund within combined utility fund.

Within the combined utility fund created in the office of the city treasurer under SMC 3.50.010, there is established a separate subfund for the city which shall be known as the water replacement reserve subfund. The subfund shall establish a reserve for replacement of domestic water distribution facilities of the city and be expended as the replacement is needed. (Ord. 2014-022 § 9; Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-035; Ord. 518 § 2, 1987)


3.48.040 Sewer replacement reserve fund within combined utility fund.

Within the combined utility fund created in the office of the city treasurer under SMC 3.50.010, there is established a separate subfund for the city which shall be known as the sewage replacement reserve subfund. The subfund shall establish a reserve for replacement of sewage distribution facilities of the city and be expended as the replacement is needed. (Ord. 2014-022 § 9; Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-035; Ord. 519 § 2, 1987)


3.48.050 Mitigation funds.

There is authorized to be established, when needed, mitigation subfunds within the combined utility fund for both water system mitigation and sewer system mitigation. Such subfunds shall be considered dedicated funds to be expended only as provided by law, ordinance or contract for such mitigation subfunds. (Ord. 2014-022 § 9; Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-035)


Chapter 3.50 COMBINED WATER AND SEWER UTILITY

Sections:

3.50.010    Combined water and sewer utility.


3.50.010 Combined water and sewer utility.

A. Combined Water and Sewer Utility Established. The city maintains and operates a water system, Chapters 13.04 through 13.24 SMC, and a sewerage system, Chapters 13.28 through 13.64 SMC, pursuant to the provisions of RCW 35A.80.010 and 35A.21.150, and Chapters 35.67 and 35.92 RCW. In accordance with this authority and pursuant to RCW 35.67.331, 35.67.010, and 35.92.020, the city’s water system, sewerage system, and any future utility enterprise that may be created and combined into this combined utility system by ordinance, together with all additions, extensions, and betterments at any time made, are combined into a combined utility.

B. Creation of Combined Utility Fund. There is created in the office of the city treasurer a special fund of the city, into which shall be paid all the earnings, revenue, and moneys derived from the operation and ownership of the water system, sewerage system, and other future utility systems (if any) combined by future ordinance. Out of this special fund shall be paid the costs of maintenance and operation of those systems. The city treasurer shall maintain separate books and accounts for each utility system pursuant to RCW 43.09.210 and Chapter 3.48 SMC. The city treasurer shall segregate, credit, and deposit the earnings, revenue, and money derived from the operation of each utility system into separate funds or accounts for each utility system. Money in each such account shall be expended only for the utility system associated with that account. (Ord. 2014-022 § 2)


Chapter 3.52 COMBINED UTILITY BILLINGS

Sections:

3.52.010    Purpose.

3.52.020    Definitions.

3.52.030    Responsibility of owner.

3.52.040    Payment.

3.52.050    Delinquent bills – Notice.

3.52.060    Dishonored checks.

3.52.070    Disconnection of services.

3.52.080    Interest on delinquent bills.

3.52.090    Collection costs.

3.52.100    Charges to be lien on real property served.

3.52.110    Creation of accounts – Deposits.

3.52.120    Foreclosure of lien.

3.52.130    Retroactive effect of chapter.

3.52.140    Failure to give notice.

3.52.150    Remedies not exclusive.

3.52.160    Attorney’s fee.


3.52.010 Purpose.

It is the purpose of this chapter to establish and provide for a uniform billing and collection procedure for the city utility services. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-018; Ord. 487 § 1, 1986)


3.52.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:

A. “Account” is defined as a record of charges for services provided related to water, sewer and solid-waste utilities.

B. “Combined utility bill” means a bill for water, sewer and solid-waste services or any combination thereof rendered for a specific time period.

C. Delinquent (Past Due) Bill. A bill becomes delinquent 25 days after the date of mailing.

D. “Notice of delinquent account” means a notice to remit payment within 10 days or be subject to shut off.

E. “Shut off” means the discontinuation of water service. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-018; Ord. 487 § 2, 1986)


3.52.030 Responsibility of owner.

All utility charges will be charged against the property to which the services were furnished and against the owners of the property. Accounts shall be kept in the name of the owner of the property and not in the name of any tenant; and the owner only, or his legally authorized agent, shall be held responsible for payment of utility service charges; provided, that persons holding property under a written lease agreement, upon a written application to the city signed by the owner of the property and the tenant, and where it is more convenient to keep the account in the name of the tenant, may be billed accordingly. The owner shall not be released from the responsibility for payment and must pay in case the agent or tenant refuses or neglects to do so. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-018; Ord. 487 § 3, 1986)


3.52.040 Payment.

A. Within 25 days of the date of mailing, any combined utility bill not fully paid shall be deemed a delinquent bill.

B. Payment shall be made to the office of the city clerk of the city. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-018; Ord. 487 § 4, 1986)


3.52.050 Delinquent bills – Notice.

A. All utility bills of the city shall be delinquent if payment therefor is not received by the city on or before the twenty-fifth day after the current-charges date posted on the bill. Such current-charges date shall be stated on the bill with particularity.

B. Upon lapse of a bill into delinquency, the city clerk or his/her designee shall cause a notice of delinquent account to be deposited in the United States Mail, addressed to the consumer at the address of the property serviced or billing address on file.

C. Deposit in the United States Mail pursuant to subsection B of this section shall be deemed full and complete notice to the consumer of the nature and amount of any particular utility billing.

D. The notice of delinquent account shall state that unless all delinquencies are corrected within 10 days of the date of the notice of delinquent account, the city will disconnect or discontinue water service without further notice on or after a date certain to be stated in the notice of delinquent account. The notice of delinquent account shall further state that, if the consumer has questions concerning the amount of the account, he/she may appeal to the city clerk whose address and telephone number shall be stated on the notice of delinquent account.

E. An account which has become delinquent shall be charged a penalty fee set forth in the city council adopted fee resolution, as amended. For the purposes of this subsection, when an account receives a third penalty in a 12-month period, the administrative services director or his/her designee may request a deposit or an additional deposit in accordance with SMC 3.52.110.

F. Failure to receive mail or notices is not a valid reason for failure to pay bills when due.

G. Litigation. In lieu of the above or in addition to the above, the city may commence litigation to obtain a judgment for unpaid bills if necessary. The city shall make reasonable efforts to avoid litigation. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-018; Ord. 2003-006; Ord. 487 § 5, 1986)


3.52.060 Dishonored checks.

A fee as established by resolution will be assessed for each check returned by a bank or savings and loan association due to insufficient funds or closed account. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-018; Ord. 2005-029 § 2; Ord. 487 § 6, 1986)


3.52.070 Disconnection of services.

A. Should a delinquent account not be paid pursuant to SMC 3.52.050, the city clerk or his/her designee shall immediately cause the water services to be cut off from the premises, and such services shall not be reconnected until all arrears, delinquent charges, service charges and unpaid charges are paid, together with a reconnection fee and deposit pursuant to SMC 3.52.110.

B. Minimum charges for water, sewerage and garbage collections shall be in effect as long as the water meter remains in service, even though the water has been shut off. These charges will only be discontinued if the owner requests the water meter be disconnected and the premises are uninhabited.

C. There shall be a reconnect charge of $50.00 or as set forth in the city council adopted fee resolution, as amended, whichever is the greater, for the resumption of city utility services to properties which have been previously disconnected for nonpayment.

D. After a shut-off notice has been sent by the city, water shall be shut off unless full payment of the account of the premises served is made. Full payment shall include charges for interest and collection costs incurred by the city as set forth in SMC 3.52.090 and 3.52.100. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-018; Ord. 487 § 7, 1986)


3.52.080 Interest on delinquent bills.

The city shall charge interest on delinquent accounts at the rate of 12 percent per annum or the maximum allowed by law. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-018; Ord. 487 § 8, 1986)


3.52.090 Collection costs.

Costs incurred by the city in collecting or attempting to collect delinquent accounts shall be chargeable to the premises served and shall be added to the account billed. The charges may include the following:

A. Postage;

B. Attorney’s fees;

C. Secretarial time;

D. Long-distance telephone expenses;

E. Mileage;

F. Costs of service of notices and/or other process;

G. Filing fees and court costs as allowed pursuant to the Rules for Superior Courts of the state. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-018; Ord. 487 § 9, 1986)


3.52.100 Charges to be lien on real property served.

A. To the extent provided by the laws of the state, the delinquent utility charges shall become a lien upon the real property to which the utility services have been provided. The lien shall include those amounts provided for under the laws of the state.

B. The city may, at the city’s sole discretion, file and record a notice of such lien with the office of the auditor of Clallam County.

C. The lien shall have priority over all other liens and interest in the real property to the extent provided by the laws of the state. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-018; Ord. 487 § 10, 1986)


3.52.110 Creation of accounts – Deposits.

A. 1. At the time an account is requested and before it is authorized, the finance officer or his/her designee shall require the person requesting services to make a deposit with the city if they are not the property owner, or are not on city water. If they are the owner of a property that the city provides with water, they may either make a deposit or present a copy of a verifiable prior utility credit rating deemed suitable to assure with certainty that the account with the city will not become delinquent. A deposit, if required, will normally be based on 60 days of average residential charges for the unit type for which services are requested.

2. Nothing in this section shall prevent the city requiring additional or new deposits when conditions such as chronic delinquencies warrant.

B. A deposit, once established, may be refunded in whole or in part to the person or credited to the account of that person upon receipt by the city of the person’s prior utility credit rating deemed suitable by the finance officer or his/her designee; provided, that the property is served by city water and the occupant is the owner of the property. In the absence of such documentation, the deposit may be retained by the city until an account is ordered off or otherwise discontinued. The city may then, at its option, apply such deposit to pay fully any remaining charges on the account. Under no circumstances shall any part of the deposit be used as payment for charges until an account has been finalized and all services have been discontinued. If circumstances such as timely payment history warrant, the finance officer or his/her designee may, by determining that the city is assured with certainty that an account will not become delinquent, release all or part of the deposit to the depositor at his/her request; provided, however, that no such refund will occur for at least 12 months from the time of initial deposit.

C. A deposit may be required on commercial accounts in a manner consistent with the procedure set forth in this section when the finance officer or his/her designee determines that such deposit is necessary based on utility credit rating and/or payment history. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-018; Ord. 497 § 1, 1986; Ord. 487 § 11, 1986)


3.52.120 Foreclosure of lien.

The city may bring an action to foreclose liens filed under this chapter in the superior court of Clallam County. The action may alternatively request a judgment for damages against the owner of the premises in the amount of arrearages and collection costs and interest as previously set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-018; Ord. 487 § 12, 1986)


3.52.130 Retroactive effect of chapter.

All accounts in the name of the renter, lessee or tenant of the property and not in the name of the owner at the time of passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall have until the first day of June, 1986, to comply with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-018; Ord. 487 § 13, 1986)


3.52.140 Failure to give notice.

Failure on the part of the city to provide notices to the delinquent accounts as set forth in this chapter on the dates set forth shall not constitute a waiver on the part of the city to subsequently provide such notices and effect the remedies provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-018; Ord. 487 § 14, 1986)


3.52.150 Remedies not exclusive.

The remedies provided in this chapter are not exclusive, and the city retains the right to such other remedies as it may have at law. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-018; Ord. 487 § 15, 1986)


3.52.160 Attorney’s fee.

In any action brought pursuant to this chapter, the prevailing party shall be entitled, in addition to costs allowed by the court rules, to a reasonable attorney’s fee to be established by the court. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-018; Ord. 487 § 16, 1986)


Chapter 3.54 RAINY DAY FUND

Sections:

3.54.010    Rainy day fund.


3.54.010 Rainy day fund.

A. The city council creates a city fund to be known as the “rainy day fund.”

B. The rainy day fund will be supported by a budgetary appropriation from any unrestricted tax or revenue source and may also be supported by a transfer from any other unexpended or decreased city fund. Money left in the rainy day fund at the end of the fiscal year remains in the fund unless the city council reappropriates the rainy day funds to another fund in a subsequent, adopted city budget.

C. Withdrawals from the rainy day fund may only be done by transfer to an appropriate operating, capital or debt fund authorized by ordinance or resolution or at the city council’s direction and reflected in council minutes. In giving such direction, council must clearly state the facts constituting the reason for the withdrawal or the emergency, as applicable, and specify the fund to which the withdrawn money will be transferred. (Ord. 2018-002 § 1)


Chapter 3.56 REAL ESTATE EXCISE TAX FUND

Sections:

3.56.010    Purpose.

3.56.020    Fund established.


3.56.010 Purpose.

The city deems it advisable to establish a separate fund in which to pay the real estate excise tax imposed by the city upon real estate transactions, for appropriate distribution for purposes in accordance with the terms of the state enabling legislation. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 606 § 1, 1991)


3.56.020 Fund established.

There is hereby established a separate fund for the city which shall be known as the real estate excise tax fund. City revenues from the imposition of the real estate excise tax shall be deposited therein and expenditures therefrom shall be for purposes as allowed by law. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 606 § 2, 1991)




Chapter 3.62 REAL ESTATE EXCISE TAX

Sections:

3.62.010    Purpose.

3.62.020    Imposition of real estate excise tax.

3.62.030    Taxable events.

3.62.040    Consistency with state tax.

3.62.050    Distribution of tax proceeds and limiting the use thereof.

3.62.060    Lien provisions.

3.62.070    Seller’s obligation.

3.62.080    Notation of payment.

3.62.090    Date payable.

3.62.100    Refunds.


3.62.010 Purpose.

A. Pursuant to Chapter 82.46 RCW, the State Legislature has empowered cities to adopt an excise tax on each sale of real property within the corporate limits to be collected by the county treasurer and used for municipal improvements; and

B. Most cities in the state have adopted the real estate excise tax; and

C. The city council finds that the city requires additional revenue sources in order to fund necessary municipal improvements and that the real estate excise tax is an appropriate tax for generating such necessary funds;

D. The city council ordains the sections set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 602, 1991)


3.62.020 Imposition of real estate excise tax.

There is hereby imposed an excise tax on each sale of real property within the corporate limits of the city at the rate of one-quarter of one percent of the selling price. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 602, 1991)


3.62.030 Taxable events.

The tax imposed in this chapter shall be collected from persons who are taxable by the state under Chapter 82.45 RCW and Chapter 458-61 WAC upon the occurrence of any taxable event as therein defined within the corporate limits of the city. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 602, 1991)


3.62.040 Consistency with state tax.

The tax imposed in this chapter shall comply with all applicable rules, regulations, laws and court decisions regarding real estate excise taxes as imposed by the state under Chapter 82.45 RCW and Chapter 458-61 WAC. The provisions of those chapters shall apply as though fully set forth in this section. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 602, 1991)


3.62.050 Distribution of tax proceeds and limiting the use thereof.

A. The county treasurer shall place one percent of the proceeds of the taxes imposed in this chapter in the county current expense fund to defray costs of collection.

B. The remaining proceeds from the taxes imposed in this chapter shall be distributed to the city monthly and shall be placed by the clerk-treasurer in a municipal capital improvements fund to be used for municipal improvements.

C. This section shall not limit the existing authority of the city to impose special assessments on property specially benefited thereby in the manner prescribed by law. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 602, 1991)


3.62.060 Lien provisions.

The tax imposed in this chapter and any interest or penalties thereon is a specific lien upon each piece of real property sold from the time of sale until the tax is paid, which lien may be enforced in the manner prescribed for the foreclosure of mortgages. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 602, 1991)


3.62.070 Seller’s obligation.

The tax imposed in this chapter is the obligation of the seller and may be enforced through an action of debt against the seller or in the manner prescribed for the foreclosure of mortgages. Resort to one course of enforcement is not an election to forgo the other. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 602, 1991)


3.62.080 Notation of payment.

The tax imposed in this chapter shall be paid to and collected by the treasurer of Clallam County. The county treasurer shall act as agent for the city. The county treasurer shall cause a stamp evidencing satisfaction of the lien to be affixed to the instrument of sale or conveyance prior to its recording or to the real estate tax affidavit in the case of used mobile home sales. A receipt issued by the county treasurer for the payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidence of the satisfaction of the lien imposed in SMC 3.62.060 and may be recorded in the manner prescribed for recording satisfactions of mortgages. No instrument of sale or conveyance evidencing a sale subject to the tax may be accepted by the county auditor for filing or recording until the tax is paid and the stamp affixed thereto; in case the tax is not due on the transfer, the instrument shall not be accepted until suitable notation of this fact is made on the instrument by the county treasurer. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 602, 1991)


3.62.090 Date payable.

The tax imposed hereunder shall become due and payable immediately at the time of sale and, if not so paid within 30 days thereafter, shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month from the time of sale until date of payment. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 602, 1991)


3.62.100 Refunds.

Any contest of the application of the real estate excise tax or any other petition for a refund shall comply with WAC 458-61-100 as now or hereafter amended. Any refund made shall be withheld from the next monthly distribution to the city. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 602, 1991)


Chapter 3.66 CARRIE BLAKE PARK TRUST FUND

Sections:

3.66.010    Purpose.

3.66.020    Fund 701 established.

3.66.030    Disposition of principal and income from fund.

3.66.040    Fund presented in annual budget report.


3.66.010 Purpose.

It is the purpose of this chapter to establish a nonexpendable trust fund into which the sum of $25,000 bequeathed to the city by Albert Haller may be placed, with the principal to remain undistributed and the net income therefrom to be used from time to time at the discretion of the city for the purposes of maintaining, caring for and improving Carrie Blake Park, a municipal park. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 640 § 1, 1992)


3.66.020 Fund 701 established.

It is hereby established in the city Fund 701, which shall be a nonexpendable trust fund. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 640 § 2, 1992)


3.66.030 Disposition of principal and income from fund.

The principal balance of the fund shall remain in accordance with the terms of the bequest of Albert Haller, and the net income from the fund may be expended only for purposes of maintaining, caring for and improving Carrie Blake Park, a municipal park. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 640 § 3, 1992)


3.66.040 Fund presented in annual budget report.

This fund, once established, shall be presented upon the city’s annual budget report and deposits of interest thereto and expenditures therefrom shall be shown in like manner as for other city funds. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 640 § 4, 1992)


Chapter 3.68 RATES AND FEES*

Sections:

3.68.010    Intention.

3.68.020    Future amendment.

3.68.030    Established.

Prior legislation: Ord. 2009-044.


3.68.010 Intention.

Rates and fees set forth in this chapter are intended to provide one code location for all city rates and fees. However, additional rates and fees may be located elsewhere in the Sequim Municipal Code and in various adopted codes such as the International Building Code and in other uniform codes. (Ord. 2019-015 § 2; Ord. 2018-008 § 2; Ord. 2017-015 § 2; Ord. 2017-007 § 2; Ord. 2016-012 § 2; Ord. 2015-005 § 2; Ord. 2013-015 § 2; Ord. 2012-014 § 2; Ord. 2011-018 § 2; Ord. 2010-024 § 3)


3.68.020 Future amendment.

Any of the fees or charges, which are allowed to be adopted by resolution, may be established or modified by a future fee resolution referencing the ordinance codified in this chapter and this chapter. (Ord. 2019-015 § 3; Ord. 2018-008 § 3; Ord. 2017-015 § 3; Ord. 2017-007 § 3; Ord. 2016-012 § 3; Ord. 2015-005 § 3; Ord. 2013-015 § 3; Ord. 2012-014 § 3; Ord. 2011-018 § 3; Ord. 2010-024 § 4)


3.68.030 Established.

A. Repealed by Ord. 2016-012.

B. Facility Rentals.

	 	City Resident	Nonresident	Nonprofit in City	Nonprofit out of City	Commercial

	(all fees except cleaning fee waived for gov’t agencies operating within Clallam County)

	GUY COLE EVENT CENTER	 	 	 	 	 

	Damage Deposit Hall	 	 	 	 	 

	No alcohol	$200	$200	$200	$200	$200

	Alcohol	$500	$500	$500	$500	$500

	Damage Deposit Kitchen 	 	 	 	 	 

	($500 max if renting both)	$300	$300	$200	$200	$300

	Monday through Thursday	 	 	Thursday NP rentals are bumpable by paying renter	 

	Hall Rental (per hour – 10-hour max)	$40	$48	$0	$0	$80

	Kitchen Rental (per hour – 10-hour max)	$40	$48	$0	$0	$80

	Friday through Sunday	 	 	 	 	 

	Hall Rental (per hour – 10-hour max)	$48	$58	$48	$58	$96

	Kitchen Rental (per hour – 10-hour max)	$48	$58	$48	$58	$96

	Recurring nonprofit rentals scheduled prior to 07-01-19	 	 	No charge through end of 2019	 

	 	 	CLEANING FEE SCHEDULE

	Cleaning Fee (two hours minimum)

All renters (including gov’t agencies operating within Clallam County and nonprofit organizations) will pay the cleaning fee appropriate to the nature of the event per the schedule.

Fee is payable at time of application to the City of Sequim.	 	2020 hourly rate = $35/hr

	 	# of Attendees	Includes Food or Alcohol	Hours Charged

	MAIN HALL	0 – 25	 	2 hrs

	 	yes	3 hrs

	26 – 75	 	3 hrs

	 	yes	4 hrs

	76 – 200	 	3 hrs

	 	yes	5 hrs

	Over 200	 	3 hrs

	 	yes	6 hrs

	KITCHEN	 	 	 

	Kitchen Use	No Cooking	2 hrs

	 	Cooking	3 hrs

	Other Facility Rentals

(all fees except cleaning fee waived for Clallam County gov’t agencies and nonprofits)	City Resident	Non-City Resident	Commercial

	Carrie Blake Park, 202 North Blake Avenue	 	 	 

	Softball field(s), east and west fields (per rental or day)	$25 unless per contract	$35 unless per contract	n/a

	Centennial Place	A temporary activity permit may be required

	Civic Center, 152 West Cedar Street – Fee waived for Clallam County governmental agencies	 	 	 

	Damage deposit	$150	$150	$150

	Burkett Community Meeting Room (per rental or day)	$25	$35	$50

	Council Chambers (per rental or day)	$50	$60	$100

	Cleaning fee (nonrefundable)	$25	$25	$25

	Outdoor plaza	A temporary activity permit may be required

	James Center for the Performing Arts (per hour, max 8-hour fee)	$90	$100	$200

	Damage deposit	$250	$250	$250

 

	Cleaning fee	$25	$25	$25

 

	Rescheduling fee (2nd reschedule or more)	$10	$10	$10

	Administration Building (226 N Sequim Ave)	Per contract	Per contract	n/a

 

C. Finance Department.

	Code Reference	Title	2020 Rate/Fee/Charge

	SMC Title 5	Business License	 	 

	 	Registration	$	56

	 	Renewal	$	56

	 	Handling fee – Department of Revenue (DOR)	 	Per DOR

	 	Door-to-door sales (peddler) license	$	56

	 	Seasonal (per week), not to exceed 7 weeks	$	10

	or as set by contract

	 	Amusement device	$	56

	SMC 5.28.115	For-hire vehicle driver permit (taxi driver)	$	56

	 	Miscellaneous Admin.	 	 

	 	Copies on CD or thumb drive	Actual cost of device

	 	Color plotter large planning map	$	15

		Comprehensive plan/zoning road maps	$	25

	 	Blueprints	 	 

	 	18" x 24"	$1 per sheet

	 	24" x 36"	$1.50 per sheet

	 	42" x 48"	$3 per sheet

	RCW 42.56.070(8)	Photocopies cost per page	$0.15 for all sizes

or actual cost if sent out

	RCW 42.56.120	Copying charges	$0.10 per page for records scanned into electronic format; $0.05 per each four electronic files uploaded to email, or other means of electronic delivery; $0.10 per gigabyte for the transmission of public records in an electronic format

	 	Scanning cost per page	$0.10 for letter size

	 	 	$0.25 for legal size or larger

	 	 	Or actual cost if sent out

	Chapter 42.56 RCW	Electronic files or attachments delivered electronically via email, cloud-based data storage service or electronic delivery	$0.05 for every four electronic files or attachments uploaded to an electronic delivery system

	 	Electronic production or files transfer or record and the use of any cloud-based data storage and processing service, digital storage media or devices; any container or envelope used to mail copies, postage or delivery charges	Actual cost

	 	Records transmitted in electronic format, or for use of agency equipment to send records electronically	$0.10/gigabyte

	SMC 3.52.060	Returned check (NSF)	$	43

	 	Certified mailings	$15 plus postage

	 	Cost reimbursement – Property damage/other	Actual cost (including wages and benefits) + 15% admin. fee

	SMC 20.05.010	Legal document preparation	Actual cost + 15% admin. fee

	 	Taxes	 	 

	SMC 3.08.010	Leasehold	4% of the taxable rent

	SMC 3.72.010	Lodging	4% of the sale or charge made for the furnishing of lodging

	SMC 3.62.020	Real estate excise REET 1	1/4 of 1% of the selling price

	SMC 3.62.020	Real estate excise REET 2	1/4 of 1% of the selling price

	Chapter 5.32 SMC, RCW 35.21.870, 35A.11.050, 35A.82.020	Utility Business and Occupation (B and O) Tax	 	 

	Chapter 5.32 SMC, RCW 35.21.870	Electric utility tax	6% of the total gross operating revenue

	Chapter 5.32 SMC	Garbage utility tax	8% of the total gross operating revenue

	Chapter 5.32 SMC	Gas utility tax (Ord. 2008-015 excludes propane)	6% of the total gross operating revenue

	Chapter 5.32 SMC, RCW 35.21.870	Telephone (and similar communication services) utility tax 	6% of the total gross operating revenue

	Chapter 5.32 SMC	Water utility tax 	8% of the total gross operating revenue

	Chapter 5.32 SMC	Sewer utility tax 	8% of the total gross operating revenue

	Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984	Cable franchise fee	5% of the total gross operating revenue

	 	Utility Deposits	 	 

	 	Residential	 	 

		Water	 	 

	 	Inside city limits	$170 or letter of credit

	 	Outside city limits	$255 or letter of credit

	 	Sewer for customers on city water	 	 

	 	Inside city limits	$145 or letter of credit

	 	Outside city limits	Depends on sewer rate or letter of credit

	 	Sewer only customers	Deposit required

	 	Inside city limits	$	145

	 	Outside city limits	Depends on sewer rate (see below)

	 	1.5 times the rate 	$	210

	 	1.6 times the rate	$	230

	 	2 times the rate	$	290

	 	Commercial	 	 

	 	Water	2 times estimated monthly usage or letter of credit showing no delinquencies in previous 12-month period

	 	Sewer	2 times estimated monthly usage or letter of credit showing no delinquencies in previous 12-month period

	 	Miscellaneous Utility Fees	 	 

	 	Debit card and credit card payments over the phone	$	3

	SMC 3.52.050	Delinquent utility account 	$5 plus 1% on outstanding balance

	 	Duplicate copy of utility invoice for owner/property manager	$7.50 per account annually

	SMC 3.52.070(C)	Reconnection fee for shut-off	$	84

D. Police Department (Some Fines for Crimes Are Not Governed by This Chapter).

	Code Reference	Title	2020 Rate/Fee/Charge

	SMC 8.28.050	Alarms Response	 	 

	 	First call offense	$	–

		Second call offense	$	–

	 	Third call offense	$	50

	 	Fourth and successive call offenses	$	100

	 	Bail, Permits and Certifications	 	 

	 	Bail	As set by municipal court

	 	Concealed weapons permit	As established by state statute

	 	Temporary non-vehicle use of streets permit	$5 per day not to exceed 14 days

	18 U.S.C., Title 926C	Retired non-SPD police concealed carry	$	25

	 	Fines	 	 

	SMC 10.12.100	Parking Infractions	 	 

	 	Improper parking	$	25

	 	Expired parking	$	25

	RCW 46.61.381	Parking in disabled/handicap space	$	450

	 	Violation of limited time or restricted zone	$	25

	 	Moving Vehicle Violations	 	 

	SMC 10.08.020	Speeding in alley	$	101

	SMC 10.21.060	Human-powered vehicle violation	$25 each violation

	Chapter 10.21 SMC	Wheeled device violation	$	25

	 	Miscellaneous Fees	 	 

	RCW 42.56.070(8)	Photocopies cost per page	$0.15 for all sizes

or actual cost if sent out

	 	Copy of CD or electronic data copies	$	5

	 	Off-duty hiring of Sequim police personnel	Set by current collective bargaining agreement (CBA) (includes wages and benefits) + 15% admin. fee

	 	Fingerprinting (per set)	$	15

E. Police Department – Code Compliance/Enforcement.

	Code Reference	Title	2020 Rate/Fee/Charge

	SMC 6.16.010	Animal License	 	 

	SMC 6.04.015	License (spayed/neutered)

Dog and cat

Cat licensing is voluntary	Per Clallam County fee schedule

	 	License (intact = not spayed/neutered)	Per Clallam County fee schedule

		License for micro-chipped (spayed/neutered)	Per Clallam County fee schedule

	 	License lifetime for micro-chipped (spayed/neutered)	Per Clallam County fee schedule

	 	Certified assist./companion animal – Lifetime license	Per Clallam County fee schedule

	 	Registration or renewal potentially dangerous dog – Spayed/neutered – Annual	$	150

	 	Registration or renewal potentially dangerous dog – Intact – Annual	$	450

	 	Registration or renewal dangerous dog – Spayed/neutered – Annual	$	250

	 	Registration and renewal of dangerous dog – Intact – Annual	$	550

	 	Impound fees and costs	Appropriate fees per Humane Society contract costs plus 25% admin. fee

	 	Replacement tag (animal licenses)	Per Clallam County fee schedule

F. Community Development.

	Code Reference	Title	2020 Rate/Fee/Charge

	SMC 20.05.010	Notice of application publication	Actual cost

	SMC 20.05.010	Notice of public hearing publication	Actual cost

	SMC 20.05.010	Public notice, publication fees and certified mailings	Actual cost

	SMC 5.40.100	Adult Entertainment License	 	 

	 	Nonrefundable processing fee	$	380

	 	Establishment permit	$	1,645

	 	Model/escort fee	$	1,100

	 	Manager license	$	1,100

	 	Entertainment license	$	550

	 	Entertainment acts	$	550

	SMC 20.05.010	Notices and Event Permits	 	 

	RCW 70.77.555	Fireworks sales permit (maximum allowed per RCW 70.77.555)	$	100

	SMC 8.20.100(D)	Fireworks refundable clean-up deposit (performance bond)	$	110

	SMC 18.68.020	Temporary activity permit	Group A – $25

	Group B – $110

	Group C – $215 (or as provided by contract)

	Group D – $215 plus $53 per hour of additional staff time over 4 hours (or as provided by contract)

	 	Special event permit (SEP) fees	$	250

	SMC 18.58.030(E)	Sign permit	$	280

	SMC 18.58.067	Temporary signs for events (on private property)	$	15

	 	Follow-through sign annual permit	$	35

	Chapter 20.01 SMC	Land Use Changes	 	 

	 	Application for annexation 	$	1,935

	 	Application for SEPA review, based upon project value	$0 – $250,000 = $600

	$250,000 – $500,000 = $825

	$500,000 – $1,000,000 = $1,540

	$1,000,000+ = $2,645

	SMC 18.20.015	Similar use determination	$	525

	SMC 20.05.010	Variance	$	1,210

	SMC 17.22.030 and 20.05.010	Boundary and lot line adjustment	$	600

	 	Final boundary line adjustment	$	240

	SMC 18.88.040(B)(9), 18.88.050(C)(16), 18.88.070(D)(17), and Chapter 20.05 SMC	Comprehensive plan amendment	$	1,645

	SMC 18.88.070(D)(17) and 20.05.010	Zoning code amendment,

Type 1, 2 and 3	$	1,645

	SMC 20.01.240(F)	Appeals	 	 

	SMC 16.04.170 and 20.01.240(F)	Administrative/SEPA appeal 	$	600

		Quasi-judicial appeal	$	910

	SMC 1.13.150	Administrative appeal – code enforcement	$	250

	 	Critical Areas	 	 

	 	Environmental review (e.g., transportation study, EIS, etc.)	Actual cost of city-retained consultant plus $56 per hour for staff time

	SMC 18.80.050 and Chapter 20.05 SMC	Critical areas 	$	495

	 	Essential public facility use permit	$	1,935

	 	Reasonable uses permit	$	550

	 	Slope encroachment	$	495

	 	Wetland buffer averaging	$	495

	 	Land Use Development	 	 

	 	Residential site plan review (for building permit)	$	112

	 	Commercial design/site plan review	$1,000 + $0.25/sq. ft.

	 	Home occupation permit	$	150 + $56/hour after 3 hours

	 	Mobile food service vendor permit with TAP or SEP	$	115

	 	Mobile food service vendor – stand alone	$	200

	SMC 20.01.110(I) and Chapter 20.05 SMC	Preapplication consultation (includes preliminary design review (not board) and preliminary plat)	$	385

	Chapter 18.24 SMC	Design standards and review meeting	$515 plus 10% building permit

	Chapters 18.60 and 20.05 SMC	Major conditional use 	$	1,375

	 	Minor conditional use	$	825

	Chapter 18.56 SMC and SMC 20.05.010	Special use permit	$	1,100

	SMC 20.05.010	Subdivision	 	 

		Major subdivision	$3,000 + $75/lot

	 	Major subdivision final plat	$	1,000

	 	Minor subdivision	$	825

	 	Minor subdivision final plat	$	330

	 	Plat Amendments	 	 

	 	Major plat amendment	$	1,375

	 	Major plat amendment final plat	$	665

	 	Minor plat amendment	$	935

	 	Minor plat amendment final plat	$	330

	 	Plat extension	$	240

	 	Binding site plan	$1,375 + $75/lot/unit + $0.25/sq. ft. (if nonresidential)

	 	Binding site plan final map	$	415

	Chapter 18.35 SMC	Planned residential development with preliminary plat	$	750

	 	Planned residential development without preliminary plat	$	3,000

	SMC 18.66.040	Administrative permit – Accessory dwelling unit (detached or expansion of existing structure)	$	500

	 	ADU within existing structure/nonexpansion of structure	$	300

	SMC 20.05.010	Unspecified land use and development fees	$	1,465

	 	Shoreline Development	 	 

	 	Shoreline substantial development permit (primary)	$1,000 + $75/unit

	 	Minor substantial development permit	$800 + $0.25/sq. ft.

	 	Shoreline conditional use permit	$800 + $0.25/sq. ft.

	 	Shoreline exemption	$	220

	 	Variance	$	800

	 	Engineering Fees	 	 

	 	Preapplication conference	$	250

	 	Hourly rate for engineering department	$70/hour

	 	Land Use Review – Engineering	 	 

	 	ADU (accessory dwelling unit) review – attached or detached	$150 + hourly after 2 hours

	 	Conditional use permit review	$250 + hourly after 3 hours

	 	Master plan review	$250 + hourly after 3 hours

	 	Master plan amendment review	$250 + hourly after 3 hours

		Drainage analysis review (required for commercial, subdivision and PRD application or as applicable)	$465/basin

	 	Commercial design and/or site plan review	$770 + hourly after 5 hours

	 	Essential public facility/special use permit review	$250 + hourly after 3 hours

	 	Boundary line adjustment review	$150 + hourly after 2 hours

	 	Subdivisions – Engineering	 	 

	 	Binding site plan review	$1,000 + $15/pad or unit

	 	Plat alteration review	$250 + hourly after 3 hours

	 	Short plat review	$250 + hourly after 3 hours

	 	Preliminary plat/planned residential development (PRD) review	$1,500 + $45/lot

	 	Final plat (PRD) review	$1,750 + $25/lot

	 	Policy Review – Engineering	 	 

	 	Comprehensive plan amendment review	$250 + hourly after 3 hours

	 	Shoreline Permits – Engineering	 	 

	 	Shoreline substantial development permit (SSDP) review	$250 + hourly after 3 hours

	 	Miscellaneous – Engineering	 	 

	 	Post decision review	$250 + hourly after 3 hours

	 	Right-of-way vacation review	$	920

	 	Latecomer agreement review (street, water, sewer, stormwater)	$1,545 for 1st utility + $925/additional utility

	 	Public property construction permit (PPCP) review	With pavement or sidewalk disturbance = $495

Without pavement or sidewalk disturbance = $160

	 	Site grading permit review (pre-site construction	$250 + hourly after 4 hours

	 	Site grading plan site inspection	Hourly and charged against escrow deposit

	 	Escrow Deposits – Engineering	 	 

	 	Erosion control and site inspections (site plan, PRD and plat development)	$5,000 minimum or $3,000/acre

	 	3rd party review	Determined with 1st review of site plan/plat submittal

	 	Inspection deposit for plats	$5,000 + $400/lot

	 	Latecomers’ Fees	 	 

	 	Base fee	$550 plus 1% of construction costs

	 	Parcel fee	$	115

	 	Segregation fee	$	385

	 	Miscellaneous Fees	 	 

	 	Research services fees	$56 per hour

	 	Permit software fee	$15 per standalone permit

G. Community Development – Building.

	Code Reference	Title	2020 Rate/Fee/Charge

	Chapter 15.04 SMC	Building Permit	 	 

	 	Permit software fee	$15 per standalone permit

	SMC 15.04.030	Building permit	Most current issue of the Building Safety Journal, published by the International Code Council

	Chapter 15.04 SMC	Accessory structure permit valuations	Carport/pole building $17.42/sq. ft.

Sheds $17.94/sq. ft.

Porches/decks $33.61/sq. ft.

		Plan check	65% residential; 80% commercial building permit

	 	Plan check (after initial approval)	$115 for first 2 hours plus $56/hour thereafter

	SMC 15.04.030	Single-family residential grading application fee	$	50

	 	Grading permit application fee – Non-single-family residential	<50 CY – $55

51 – 100 CY – $140

101 – 1,000 CY – $360

1,001 – 10,000 CY – $715

10,001 – 100,000 CY – $1,810

>100,000 CY – $2,755 + $75 per 10,000 CY

	 	Demolition permit fee 	$	50

	SMC 15.04.050	Mechanical permit base fee	As established by Uniform Mechanical Code

	SMC 15.04.050	Mechanical fixture fee	As established by Uniform Mechanical Code

	SMC 15.04.030	Over the counter – Reroof application fee	$	50

	SMC 15.04.070	Plumbing permit base fee	As established by Uniform Plumbing Code

	SMC 15.04.070	Plumbing and fixture permit	$7.70 per fixture

	 	Building permit reinspection after initial inspection (each)	$	112

	 	Final inspection

Certificate of occupancy for final inspection	$	115

 

	SMC 15.04.070	Manufactured home placement	$	255

H. Public Works Department.

	Code Reference	Title	2020 Rate/Fee/Charge

	 	Banners	 	 

	 	Community banner reservation	$180 per week

	 	Permits	 	 

	 	Public Improvement Permit	 	 

	 	Application deposit – Nonrefundable

(This deposit will be applied to the fee determined for the public improvement permit if permit is obtained within one year of design approval)	$	1,000

	Due with application

		Single parcel	2% of estimated construction costs due at application

Due at plan approval

	 	Subdivision	2% of estimated construction costs due at application

Due at plan approval

	 	Commercial	2% of estimated construction costs due at application

Due at plan approval

	 	Fats, Oil, and Grease (FOG) Program	 	 

	 	FOG – Failure to allow inspection	$	500

	 	FOG – Failure to install required equipment or process	$	500

	 	FOG – Failure to meet discharge standards	$	500

	 	FOG – Failure to maintain records	$	100

	 	Sewer Inspections	 	 

	 	Sewer inspection – Inside city limits	$	165

	 	Sewer inspection – Outside city limits	$	330

	Ord. 2010-007	Transportation Impact Fee	Effective June 1, 2020

	 	Transportation impact fees	Rate generated from formula set forth in transportation study. Fees are automatically adjusted by the Engineering News-Record Construction Price Index change, unless otherwise adjusted by council.

	Ord. 2010-008	Park Impact Fee	 	 

	 	Park impact fees	Rate generated from formula set forth in parks study. Fees are automatically adjusted by the Engineering News Record Construction Price-Index change, unless otherwise adjusted by council.

	 	Miscellaneous Services Fees	 	 

	 	Deferred impact fee administration	$	230

		Engineering and consulting (internal and outsourced)	Actual cost (direct and indirect)

I. Public Works Department – Streets.

	Code Reference	Title	2020 Rate/Fee/Charge

	 	Right-of-Way Usage/Work Within:	 

	 	Water line installation/repair	2% of estimated construction costs

	 	Reclaimed water line install/repair	2% of estimated construction costs

	 	Sewer line installation/repair	2% of estimated construction costs

	 	Stormwater system install/repair	2% of estimated construction costs

	 	Electrical utilities installation/repair	2% of estimated construction costs

	 	Telecommunications install/repair	2% of estimated construction costs

	 	Cable TV line installation/repair	2% of estimated construction costs

	 	Gas line installation/repair	2% of estimated construction costs

	 	Jack and bore	2% of estimated construction costs

	 	Open cut of street/road	2% of estimated construction costs

	 	Open cut of alley	2% of estimated construction costs

	 	Other right-of-way work	2% of estimated construction costs

	 	Other misc. R-O-W permits	2% of estimated construction costs

	 	Renewal fee for expired permit	$	83

	 	Site and R-O-W permit reinspections	$	56

	 	Street/right-of-way vacation	Actual costs (direct and indirect)

	 	Public Works – Streets Miscellaneous	 

	 	Follow-through sign installation	$	200

	 	Electric vehicle station user charge	1st 3 hours free

+ 3 hours @ $10/hour

J. Repealed by Ord. 2017-015.

K. Public Works Department – Utilities.

	Code Reference	2020 Rate/Fee/Charge

	SMC 13.72.010	Meter Install

	 	Meter Size	City-Installed Service

	 	 	Water

	 	Less than 2"	$250 plus meter kit, roadway and replacement costs in-city service

	 	Less than 2"	$500 plus meter kit, roadway and replacement costs out-of-city service

	 	Note: Greater than 2" 	Developer installed

	SMC 13.72.010	 	Inspection Fees

	 	 	Water

	 	Inspection fee for developer-installed meters	$77 for in-city-limit inspections

$154 for out-of-city-limit inspections

	 	 	Sewer

	 	Inspection fee for developer-installed side sewer service line	$77 for in-city-limit inspections

$154 for out-of-city-limit inspections

	SMC 13.72.020	General Facility Charges (GFC)

	 	Sewer

	 	Type of Connection	GFC (per Unit)

	 	 	Residential

	 	Residential living unit	$9,050 (1 equivalent residential unit (ERU)) includes condo units, mobile home park units and multifamily units 2 units or under

	 	Multifamily units (3 units or more)	0.7 ERU per unit

	 	Service outside the city limits = 2 times the city rate

	 	Temporary Residential Units

		Motel/hotel rooms, seasonal overnight travel trailer parks and RV parks	0.3 ERU per unit

	 	Rest homes, nursing homes, assisted care facilities	0.6 ERU per unit

	 	Commercial and Industrial Units and Other Units

	SMC 13.72.020	Based on the Following Meter Size as Outlined in the Code

	 	Meter size (inches)	ERU

	 	0.625	1.0

	 	0.75	1.5

	 	1.00	2.5

	 	1.50	5.0

	 	2.00	8.0

	 	Meters sized greater than 2 inches or any use requiring an industrial pretreatment plan requires an approved engineering analysis of equivalent ERUs.

	SMC 13.72.025	General Facility Charges (GFC)

	 	Water

	 	Type of Connection	GFC (per Unit)

	 	 	Residential

		Residential living unit	$7,350 (1 equivalent residential unit (ERU)) includes condo units, mobile home park units and multifamily units 2 units or under

	 	Multifamily units (3 units or more)	0.7 ERU per unit

	 	Service outside the city limits = 2 times the city rate

	 	Temporary Residential Units

	 	Motel/hotel rooms, seasonal overnight travel trailer parks and RV parks	0.3 ERU per unit

	 	Rest homes, nursing homes, assisted care facilities	0.6 ERU per unit

	 	Commercial and Industrial Units and Other Units

	 	Based on the Following Meter Size as Outlined in the Code

	 	Meter size (inches)	ERU

	 	0.625	1.0

	 	0.750	1.5

	 	1.000	2.5

	 	1.500	5.0

	 	2.000	8.0

	 	Meters sized greater than 2 inches or any use requiring an industrial pretreatment plan requires an approved engineering analysis of equivalent ERUs.

	 	Irrigation Water Rates

	 	Irrigation Base Rate for Each Meter Size

	 	5/8" and 3/4"	$27.31

	 	1"	$45.59

	 	1-1/2"	$90.92

	 	2"	$145.55

	 	3"	$272.98

	 	Irrigation Usage Charges

	 	Single-Family Residential, Duplex and Multifamily

	 	Up to 600 cubic ft.	$0.00950/cubic ft.

	 	Over 600 cubic ft. and up to 1,600 cubic ft.	$0.02777/cubic ft.

	 	Over 1,600 cubic ft.	$0.03509/cubic ft.

	 	Commercial and Public Authority

	 	Up to 600 cubic ft.	$0.00950/cubic ft.

	 	Over 600 cubic ft.	$0.02777/cubic ft.

	 	Hotel/Motel

	 	First 600 cubic ft.	$0.00950/cubic ft.

	 	Over 600 cubic ft.	$0.02777/cubic ft.

	SMC 13.112.060	Reclaimed Water (Reuse) Rates

	 	Reclaimed Water Base Rate for Each Meter Size (per Month)

	 	5/8" and 3/4"	$5.29

	 	1"	$7.11

	 	1-1/2"	$11.29

	 	2"	$16.64

	 	3"	$30.59

	 	Reclaimed Water Usage Charge for Each Service per Month

		0 – 5,000 cubic ft.	$0.00496/cubic ft.

	 	5,001 – 20,000 cubic ft.	$0.00372/cubic ft.

	 	20,001 – 50,000 cubic ft.	$0.00247/cubic ft.

	 	50,001 cubic ft. and above	$0.00122/cubic ft.

	 	Rates to customers outside the current city limits shall be 2 times higher than the specified class base rate and the usage fee charged per unit or 2 times the total bill as computed by the in-city rate

	SMC 13.80.030	Sewer Rates

	 	Usage Charges

	 	Sewer Rates for Single-Family Residential – Inside City Limits

	 	Winter water average up to 600 cubic ft.	$59.38

	 	Winter water average over 600 cubic ft.	$68.90

	 	One-Tier Sewer-Only Single-Family Residential – Inside City

	 	Base rate	$62.69

	 	Sewer Rates for Multifamily Residential, Including Adult Care Facilities (per Unit)

	 	Base rate	$56.41

	 	Sewer Rates for Commercial and Public Authority (75% of AWWA factor)

	 	Base rate per meter size	 

	 	3/4"	$62.88

	 	1"	$78.41

	 	1-1/2"	$156.35

	 	2"	$250.25

	 	3"	$469.52

	 	Usage rate over 600 cubic ft. 	$0.06208/cubic ft.

	 	Sewer Rates for Hotel/Motel (per Unit)

	 	Base rate	$44.53

	 	Over 600 cubic ft. 	$0.06208/cubic ft.

	 	Outside City Limits

		Two times the rate

	SMC 13.80.080	Reduced Sewer Rates

	 	Residential low income rate reduction program for individually metered water (only qualifying account holders). Up to 50% reduction of base charge for qualifying low income customers.

	SMC 13.84.030	Water Rates

	 	Water Rates for Single-Family Residential

	 	Base rate	$27.31

	 	Up to 600 cubic ft.	$0.00950/cubic ft.

	 	Over 600 cubic ft. and up to 1,600 cubic ft.	$0.02777/cubic ft.

	 	Over 1,600 cubic ft.	$0.03509/cubic ft.

	 	Water Rates for Multifamily Residential, Including Adult Care Facilities (per Unit)

	 	Base rate	$25.93

	 	Up to 600 cubic ft.	$0.00950/cubic ft.

	 	Over 600 cubic ft. and up to 1,600 cubic ft.	$0.02777/cubic ft.

	 	Over 1,600 cubic ft.	$0.03509/cubic ft.

	 	Water Rates for Commercial and Public Authority

	 	Base rate per meter	 

	 	5/8" and 3/4"	$27.31

	 	1"	$45.22

	 	1-1/2"	$90.92

	 	2"	$145.55

	 	3"	$272.98

	 	Up to 600 cubic ft.	$0.00950/cubic ft.

	 	Over 600 cubic ft.	$0.02777/cubic ft.

	 	Water Rates for Hotel/Motel (per Unit)

	 	Base rate	$20.47

	 	Up to 600 cubic ft.	$0.00950/cubic ft.

	 	Over 600 cubic ft.	$0.02777/cubic ft.

	 	Outside City Limits

	 	1-1/2 times base

	 	Example – Residential

	 	Base rate outside city limits	$40.97

	 	Up to 600 cubic ft.	$0.01425/cubic ft.

	 	Over 600 cubic ft.	$0.04166/cubic ft.

	SMC 13.84.080	Reduced Water Rates

	 	Residential low income rate reduction program (only qualifying account holders). Up to 50% reduction of base charge for qualifying low income customers.

L. Miscellaneous Utility Fees.

	Code Reference	Title	2020 Rate/Fee/Charge

	SMC 13.92.040	Water: service availability fee (standby charge for single-family residents inside city limits)	$27.31 (water)

	SMC 13.80.030	Sewer: service availability fee (standby charge for single-family residents inside city limits who are also connected to city water)	$27.31 (sewer)

	SMC 13.92.020, 13.92.030	Water on/off at customer request	Water Off – $45

Water On – No charge

	 	Non-emergency after hours call out	$140

(Ord. 2019-015 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2019-014 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2019-009 § 1 (Exh. B); Ord. 2019-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2019-006 § 1 (Exh. B); Ord. 2018-008 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2018-004 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord, 2018-003 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2017-015 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2017-014 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2017-007 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2017-001 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2016-012 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2015-008 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2015-005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2014-018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2013-015 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2013-005 § 1; Ord. 2012-014 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-017 § 1; Ord. 2011-009 § 1; Ord. 2010-024 § 2 (Exh. A))




Chapter 3.70 ADVANCE TRAVEL FUND

Sections:

3.70.010    Established.

3.70.020    Separate checking account.

3.70.030    Charge cards.


3.70.010 Established.

The city clerk/finance officer is hereby directed and ordered to establish, within a reasonable period of time, a revolving fund to be used solely for the purpose of making advance payments of travel, pursuant to RCW 42.24.130. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 96-017 § 1)


3.70.020 Separate checking account.

Pursuant to RCW 42.24.130, the city clerk/finance officer is hereby directed and ordered to open a checking account, within a reasonable period of time, on behalf of the city of Sequim for the purpose of paying travel advancements. Authorized signatures shall be the city manager, city clerk/finance officer, and deputy city clerk/finance officer. Moneys utilized to establish this fund shall be allocated from the current expense fund in the amount of $5,000. Any interest earned on this fund will be allocated to the current expense fund. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 96-017 § 2)


3.70.030 Charge cards.

Pursuant to RCW 42.24.115, charge cards may be issued and utilized by officers and employees of the city for the purpose of covering expenses incident to authorized travel. Such use of such cards shall comply with RCW 42.24.115 and city policy. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1)


Chapter 3.72 LODGING TAX

Sections:

3.72.010    Levied.

3.72.020    Definitions.

3.72.030    Additional to other taxes.

3.72.040    Fund established.

3.72.041    Lodging tax advisory committee.

3.72.050    Collection and administration.

3.72.060    Violation – Penalty.


3.72.010 Levied.

Pursuant to Chapter 67.28 RCW there is levied a special excise tax of four percent on the sale of or charge made for the furnishing of lodging that is subject to tax under Chapter 82.08 RCW. The tax imposed under Chapter 82.08 RCW applies to the sale of or charge made for the furnishing of lodging by a hotel, rooming house, tourist court, motel, or trailer camp, and the granting of similar license to use real property, as distinguished from the renting or leasing of real property. It shall be presumed that the occupancy of real property for a continuous period of one month or more constitutes a rental or lease of real property and not a mere license to use or enjoy the same. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-025; Ord. 97-017 § 1)


3.72.020 Definitions.

The definitions of “selling price,” “seller,” “buyer,” “consumer,” and all other definitions as are now contained in RCW 82.08.010, and subsequent amendments thereto, are adopted as the definitions for the tax levied in this chapter. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-025; Ord. 97-017 § 2)


3.72.030 Additional to other taxes.

The tax levied in this chapter shall be in addition to any license fee or any tax imposed or levied under any law or any other ordinance of the city; provided, the first two percent of the tax shall be deducted from the amount of tax the seller would otherwise be required to collect and pay to the Department of Revenue under Chapter 82.08 RCW. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-025; Ord. 97-017 § 3)


3.72.040 Fund established.

There is created a special fund in the treasury of the city and all taxes collected under this chapter shall be placed in this special fund to be used solely for the purpose of paying all or any part of the costs of tourist promotion, acquisition of tourism-related facilities, or operation of tourism-related facilities or to pay for any other uses as authorized in Chapter 67.28 RCW, as now or hereafter amended. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-025; Ord. 97-017 § 4)


3.72.041 Lodging tax advisory committee.

A lodging tax advisory committee, conforming with the requirements of RCW 67.28.1817, is created (Chapter 2.68 SMC) and shall serve the functions as provided in RCW 67.28.1817. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-025)


3.72.050 Collection and administration.

For the purpose of the tax levied in this chapter:

A. The Department of Revenue is designated as the agent of the city for the purposes of collection and administration of the tax.

B. The administrative provisions contained in RCW 82.08.050 through 82.08.070 and in Chapter 82.32 RCW shall apply to administration and collection of the tax by the Department of Revenue.

C. All rules and regulations adopted by the Department of Revenue for the administration of Chapter 82.08 RCW are adopted by reference.

D. The Department of Revenue is authorized to prescribe and utilize such forms and reporting procedures as the Department may deem necessary or appropriate. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-025; Ord. 97-017 § 5)


3.72.060 Violation – Penalty.

It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter. Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine in the sum not to exceed $500.00. Each day of violation will be considered a separate offense. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2009-025; Ord. 97-017 § 6)


Chapter 3.74 DONATIONS, DEVISES OR BEQUESTS

Sections:

3.74.010    Definition.

3.74.020    Acceptance of donations.

3.74.030    Adoption of donation policy.

3.74.040    Funds and accounting.


3.74.010 Definition.

As used in this chapter, the term “donation” refers to any money or property, real or personal, donated, devised or bequeathed, with or without restriction, to the city of Sequim. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2002-003 § 1)


3.74.020 Acceptance of donations. 

A. Monetary Donations. The city manager is authorized to accept monetary donations to the city, and to carry out the terms of the donation, devise, or bequest, if the purposes and conditions of the donation are within the powers granted by law to the city. If no terms or conditions are attached to the donation, devise or bequest, the city may expend or use the same for any municipal purpose.

B. Nonmonetary Donations. The city manager is authorized to determine the appropriateness, usefulness and value to the city of all nonmonetary donations and to recommend to city council the retention, improvement, return to donor, transfer, trade, sale, donation to other agency, or other disposition.

C. Nonacceptance of Donation. The city manager may decline to accept a donation if such donation is not consistent with the policies, plans, goals or ordinances of the city of Sequim or if acceptance of same is contrary to law. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2002-003 § 2)


3.74.030 Adoption of donation policy. 

The city of Sequim hereby adopts the following as its donation policy:

A. Purpose. To establish policy and procedures for the acceptance of monetary and non-monetary donations to the city.

B. Policy.

1. Consideration. To consider the acceptance of any monetary and nonmonetary donations, devises, or bequests from private citizens, business groups or other organizations. Considerations include the use of the donation, restrictions associated with the donation, costs associated with and effective use of the donation.

2. Procedures.

a. All proposals for gifts shall be directed to the city manager or his/her designee.

b. Offers should be made in writing. The donation agreement form shall be completed and distributed.

c. The city manager may decline to accept a donation if such donation is not consistent with the policies, plans, goals or ordinances of the city of Sequim or if acceptance of same is contrary to law.

d. Monetary donations for a specific purpose may be made. However, design standards and location must be as established by the director of public works.

e. Monetary donations shall be approved by the city manager.

f. Nonmonetary donations shall be reviewed by the city manager who shall then make recommendations to the city council.

g. The city retains the right to use these donated items as it deems appropriate or to relocate the item if redevelopment of the area warrants this action.

3. Ownership. Any donations to the city become the property of the city.

4. Memorial Plaques. Bronze memorial plaques may be purchased and placed on benches, fountains, and picnic tables. If the donor does not wish to purchase a bronze plaque, a brass plaque can be placed on a gifting wall located in Carrie Blake Park at no additional cost. Brass plaques will be used for other donated items and placed on a gifting wall located in Carrie Blake Park. Upon receipt and acceptance of the donation, the city will order the memorial plaque. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2002-003 § 3(Exh. A))


3.74.040 Funds and accounting.

The finance officer is authorized and directed to establish such funds and accounting procedures as may be necessary to carry out the terms and conditions of any donation, devise or bequest, in accordance with the laws of the state of Washington and requirements of the Office of the State Auditor. (Ord. 2009-036 § 1; Ord. 2002-003 § 4)


Chapter 3.76 BONDS AND OBLIGATIONS REGISTRATION SYSTEM

Sections:

3.76.010    Findings.

3.76.020    Definitions.

3.76.030    Adoption of registration system.

3.76.040    Statement of transfer restrictions.


3.76.010 Findings.

The city council makes the following findings and determinations:

A. Section 149(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, requires municipal bonds and obligations offered to the public, having a maturity of more than one year, to be in registered form as a condition of the exclusion from gross income for federal income tax purposes of the interest on those bonds and obligations.

B. RCW 39.46.030 authorizes cities to establish a system of registering the ownership of their bonds or obligations as to principal and interest, or principal only.

C. In the past, the city has provided for registration of each bond issue separately, but in light of the foregoing, the city council now finds that it is in the city’s best interest to establish a system of registering the ownership of all of the city’s bonds and obligations in the manner permitted by law. (Ord. 2009-004 § 1)


3.76.020 Definitions.

The following words shall have the following meanings when used in this chapter:

“Bond” or “bonds” has the meaning defined in RCW 39.46.020(1), as the same may be amended from time to time.

“City” means the city of Sequim, Washington.

“Fiscal agent” means the duly appointed fiscal agent of the state of Washington serving as such at any given time.

“Obligation” or “obligations” has the meaning defined in RCW 39.46.020(3), as the same from time to time may be amended.

“Registrar” means the person, persons or entity designated by the city to register ownership of bonds or obligations under this chapter or under an ordinance of the city authorizing the issuance of such bonds or obligations. (Ord. 2009-004 § 2)


3.76.030 Adoption of registration system.

The city adopts the following system of registering the ownership of its bonds and obligations:

A. Registration Requirement. All bonds and obligations offered to the public, having a maturity of more than one year, on which the interest is intended to be excluded from gross income for federal income tax purposes, shall be registered as to both principal and interest as provided in this chapter.

B. Method of Registration. The registration of all city bonds and obligations required to be registered shall be carried out either by (1) a book entry system of recording the ownership of the bond or obligation on the books of the registrar, whether or not a physical instrument is issued; or (2) recording the ownership of the bond or obligation and requiring as a condition of the transfer of ownership of any bond or obligation the surrender of the old bond or obligation and either the reissuance of the old bond or obligation or the issuance of a new bond or obligation to the new owner. No transfer of any bond or obligation subject to registration requirements shall be effective until the name of the new owner and the new owner’s mailing address, together with such other information deemed appropriate by the registrar, shall be recorded on the books of the registrar.

C. Denominations. Except as may be provided otherwise by the ordinance authorizing their issuance, registered bonds or obligations may be issued and reissued in any denomination up to the outstanding principal amount of the bonds or obligations of which they are a part. Such denominations may represent all or a part of a maturity or several maturities and on reissuance may be in smaller amounts than the individual denominations for which they are reissued.

D. Appointment of Registrar. Unless otherwise provided in the ordinance authorizing the issuance of registered bonds or obligations, the city finance officer shall be the registrar for all registered interest-bearing warrants, installment contracts, interest-bearing leases, and other registered bonds or obligations not usually subject to trading without a fixed maturity date or maturing one year or less after issuance and the fiscal agent shall be the registrar for all other city bonds and obligations without a fixed maturity date or maturing more than one year after issuance.

E. Duties of Registrar. The registrar shall serve as the city’s authenticating trustee, transfer agent, registrar, and paying agent for all registered bonds and obligations for which he, she, or it serves as registrar and shall comply fully with all applicable federal and state laws and regulations respecting the carrying out of those duties. The rights, duties, responsibilities and compensation of the registrar shall be prescribed in each ordinance authorizing the issuance of the bonds or obligations, which rights, duties, responsibilities, and compensation shall be embodied in a contract executed by the city and the registrar, except that (1) when the fiscal agent serves as registrar, the city adopts by reference the contract between the State Finance Committee of the state of Washington and the fiscal agent in lieu of executing a separate contract and prescribing by ordinance the rights, duties, obligations and compensation of the registrar; and (2) when the city finance officer serves as registrar, a separate contract shall not be required. In all cases when the registrar is not the fiscal agent and the bonds or obligations are assignable, the ordinance authorizing the issuance of the registered bonds or obligations shall specify the terms and conditions of: (a) making payments of principal and interest; (b) printing any physical instruments, including the use of identifying numbers or other designation; (c) specifying record and payment dates; (d) determining denominations; (e) establishing the manner of communicating with the owners of the bonds or obligations; (f) establishing the methods of receipting for the physical instruments for payment of principal, the destruction of such instruments and the certification of such destruction; (g) registering or releasing security interests, if any; and (h) such other matters pertaining to the registration of the bonds or obligations authorized by such ordinance as the city may deem to be necessary or appropriate. (Ord. 2009-004 § 3)


3.76.040 Statement of transfer restrictions.

Any physical instrument issued or executed by the city subject to registration under this chapter shall state that the principal of and interest on the bonds or obligations shall be paid only to the owner thereof registered as such on the books of the registrar as of the record date defined in the instrument and to no other person, and that such instrument, either principal or interest, may not be assigned except on the books of the registrar. (Ord. 2009-004 § 4)


Title 4 (Reserved)


Title 5 BUSINESS TAXES, LICENSES AND REGULATIONS

Chapters:

5.04    Business Licenses Generally

5.08    Ambulances

5.12    Amusement Devices

5.16    Repealed

5.20    Pawnshops, Secondhand Stores, and Scrap Metal Businesses

5.24    Peddlers and Solicitors

5.28    For-Hire Vehicles

5.32    Utilities

5.36    Repealed

5.40    Adult Entertainment


Chapter 5.04 BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY

Sections:

5.04.010    Purpose.

5.04.020    Definitions.

5.04.030    Business license required.

5.04.040    License – Expiration date.

5.04.050    License – Application – Contents – Issuance.

5.04.060    Separate licenses required – Nontransferable.

5.04.070    License – Fee provisions.

5.04.080    Persons exempt from payment – Business license.

5.04.090    License to be procured when – Delinquency charge.

5.04.100    Collection of licenses authorized by city.

5.04.110    Recordkeeping – City authority.

5.04.120    Responsibility of nonresidents.

5.04.130    Denial – Suspension – Revocation of license.

5.04.140    Appeal procedure.

5.04.150    Violations – Penalties.

5.04.160    Disclaimer of city liability.


5.04.010 Purpose.

The provisions of this chapter are an exercise of the city’s power to license for revenue and of the city’s police power. (Ord. 2018-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2015-014 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 429 § 1, 1981)


5.04.020 Definitions.

In construing the provisions of this chapter, except when otherwise declared or clearly apparent from the context, the following definitions apply:

A. “Business” includes all services and activities engaged in with the object of gain, benefit or advantage to the licensee or to another person or class, directly or indirectly, whether part-time or full-time, except those businesses subject to the city’s utilities tax. 

B. Engage/Engaging in Business.

1. The term “engaging in business activities” means commencing, conducting, or continuing in business, exercising corporate or franchise powers, and liquidating a business when the liquidators thereof hold themselves out to the public as conducting such business.

2. The city expressly intends that “engaging in business” includes any activity sufficient to establish nexus for purposes of applying the license fee under the law and the constitutions of the United States and the state of Washington. Nexus is presumed to continue as long as the taxpayer benefits from the activity that constituted the original nexus-generating contact or subsequent contacts.

C. “Person,” used interchangeably in this chapter, means any individual, receiver, assignee, trustee in bankruptcy, trust, estate, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, club, company, joint stock company, business trust, corporation, association, society or any group of individuals acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit, or otherwise.

D. “Premises” means all lands, structures and places, and the location at which the business activity occurs, and which location is owned, leased, rented or occupied by the person or persons engaging in the business activity, and/or their agents, managers or employees. “Premises” of a business includes any offices, warehouses, storage rooms or other facilities upon or at which any part of the activity of the business occurs. 

E. “Threshold exemption” is an exemption from the requirement to obtain a business license that is available to persons who do not maintain a place of business within the city and whose annual value of products, gross proceeds of sales or gross income from engaging in business within the city does not exceed $2,000. (Ord. 2018-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2015-014 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 429 § 2, 1981)


5.04.030 Business license required.

A. Unless determined by the city to be exempt under SMC 5.04.080, it is unlawful for any person to conduct, operate, engage in or practice any business in the city without having first obtained a business license to do business in the city of Sequim. If an activity is not listed, whether it constitutes engaging in business in the city will be determined by the city after considering all the facts, circumstances, and applicable law.

B. Without being all-inclusive, any one of the following activities conducted within the city by a person, or its employee, agent, representative, independent contractor, broker or another acting on its behalf, constitutes engaging in business and requires a person to register and obtain a business license. The activities listed in this section are illustrative only and are not intended to narrow the definition of “engaging in business” as defined in this chapter.

1. Rendering professional services such as those provided by accountants, architects, attorneys, auctioneers, consultants, engineers, professional athletes, barbers, baseball clubs and other sports organizations, chemists, psychologists, court reporters, dentists, doctors, detectives, laboratory operators, teachers, veterinarians.

2. All other businesses, including individually owned and operated part-time, home-owned, or domestic.

3. Mobile home parks, trailer courts and campgrounds.

4. Commercial rentals of premises exceeding 3,000 square feet. All premises rented from the person acting as lessor or landlord are deemed within the business activity of renting and the gross floor area of such rentals is totaled in determining applicability under this chapter.

5. Rentals of five or more residential dwelling units. All premises rented from the person acting as lessor or landlord are deemed within the business activity of renting and all dwelling units of such rentals are totaled in determining applicability under this chapter.

6. Businesses located outside the corporate limits of the city and making retail sales and sales and deliveries within the city on a continuing basis whose annual value of products, gross proceeds of sale or gross income from business conducted within the city exceeds the amount of the threshold exemption.

7. Businesses located outside the corporate limits of the city engaged in the sale of services within the corporate limits of the city on a continuing basis whose annual value of products, gross proceeds of sale or gross income from business conducted within the city exceeds the amount of the threshold exemption. 

C. Businesses operated at one location comprised of a combination of business activities under one ownership are required to have only one license. (Ord. 2018-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2015-014 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2005-029 § 2; Ord. 429 §§ 3 – 6, 1981. Formerly 5.04.030, 5.04.040, 5.04.050, 5.04.060)


5.04.040 License – Expiration date.

Unless otherwise provided by this chapter, all licenses expire on the date established by the Master License Service. Business license renewals must be accomplished each year through the Master License Service. (Ord. 2018-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2015-014 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 429 § 7, 1981. Formerly 5.04.070)


5.04.050 License – Application – Contents – Issuance.

A. Application for license is accomplished by filing an application and paying all applicable fees through the Washington State Master Licensing Service (MLS). 

B. Businesses must have an approved city of Sequim business license prior to starting business in the city unless they have been determined to be exempt from the requirement. See SMC 5.04.080. (Ord. 2018-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2015-014 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 429 § 8, 1981. Formerly 5.04.080)


5.04.060 Separate licenses required – Nontransferable.

City business licenses are personal and nontransferable. In cases where business is transacted at two or more separate places by one person within the city, a separate license is required for each place in which business is transacted with the public. (Ord. 2018-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2015-014 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 429 § 9, 1981. Formerly 5.04.090)


5.04.070 License – Fee provisions.

The license fee and the tax levied in this chapter are in addition to any license fee or tax imposed or levied under any law or any other city ordinance, except as otherwise expressly provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2018-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2015-014 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 429 § 11, 1981. Formerly 5.04.080)


5.04.080 Persons exempt from payment – Business license.

Any person paying a business and occupation tax or license fee under the terms of other city of Sequim ordinances or as listed below is exempt from the payment of any license or tax under this chapter.

A. Additionally, if a person, or its employee, agent, representative, independent contractor, broker or another acting on the person’s behalf, engages only in the following activities in or with the city but the following, it need not register and obtain a business license:

1. Meeting with suppliers of goods and services as a customer.

2. Meeting with government representatives in their official capacity, other than those performing contracting or purchasing functions.

3. Attending meetings, such as board meetings, retreats, seminars, and conferences, or other meetings wherein the person does not provide training in connection with tangible personal property sold by the person or on its behalf. This provision does not apply to any board of directors member or attendee engaging in business such as a member of a board of directors who attends a board meeting.

4. Renting tangible or intangible property as a customer when the property is not used in the city.

5. Attending, but not participating in, a “trade show” or “multiple vendor events.”

6. Conducting advertising through the mail.

7. Soliciting sales by phone from a location outside the city.

8. A seller located outside the city merely delivering goods into the city by means of common carrier is not required to register and obtain a business license if it engages in no other business activities in the city;

B. All businesses operated not-for-profit are exempt from paying a business license fee upon application and satisfactory proof to the city of said not-for-profit status but may be required to file a nonprofit business license application;

C. Any special events licensed under another ordinance of the city; 

D. Any instrumentality of the United States, the state of Washington, or political subdivision thereof;

E. Any farmer or gardener who sells, delivers or peddles any fruit, vegetables, berries, butter, eggs, fish, milk, poultry, meats, or any farm produce or edibles raised, caught, produced or manufactured by such person;

F. Tax-exempt nonprofit organizations recognized by the state of Washington and the United States government; 

G. Nonprofit organizations, clubs, or corporations maintained for organized sports, charity, public school-related activities, or municipal-related activities, including police or fire department reserve organizations;

H. Peddling or delivering newspapers;

I. Minors doing business or operating a business where no other person is employed by the minor, such as babysitting, lawn mowing, car washing, and similar activities;

J. Casual or isolated sales or services made by persons who are not engaged in the ongoing business of selling the type of property involved. “Casual or isolated” is defined as not more than four such sales made during any tax year. Examples include garage sales, yard sales, rummage sales, bake sales, and occasional parties for the sale or distribution of goods. 

K. Threshold Exemption. Any person or business:

1. Whose annual value of products, gross proceeds of sales, or gross income from business conducted within the city is equal to or less than $2,000; and

2. Who does not maintain a place of business within the city;

is exempt from the general business license requirements in this chapter. The exemption does not apply to regulatory license requirements or activities that require a specialized permit. (Ord. 2018-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2015-014 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 494 § 1, 1986; Ord. 429 § 12, 1981. Formerly 5.04.090)


5.04.090 License to be procured when – Delinquency charge.

In addition to the required annual license, the MLS program may assess and collect a delinquency charge as established by the Master Licensing Services and the Sequim city council. (Ord. 2018-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2015-014 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2005-029 § 2; Ord. 450 § 2, 1983; Ord. 429 § 13, 1981. Formerly 5.04.100)


5.04.100 Collection of licenses authorized by city.

The licenses required under this chapter and all penalties thereon constitute a debt to the city. Such penalties may be collected by court proceeding in the same manner as any other debt in like amount, in addition to all other existing remedies, and also includes the city’s right to judgment for its costs and reasonable attorney’s fees. (Ord. 2018-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2015-014 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 429 § 14, 1981. Formerly 5.04.110)


5.04.110 Recordkeeping – City authority.

The city clerk, or designee, will keep full and accurate records pursuant to retention guidelines. (Ord. 2018-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2015-014 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 429 § 15, 1981. Formerly 5.04.120)


5.04.120 Responsibility of nonresidents.

The agents or other representatives of nonresidents who are doing business in the city are personally responsible for the compliance with this chapter of their principals and the businesses they represent. (Ord. 2018-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2015-014 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 429 § 18, 1981. Formerly 5.04.130)


5.04.130 Denial – Suspension – Revocation of license.

A. A business license may be denied, suspended, or revoked if any one of the following apply:

1. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement in the application for license;

2. Any violation of this chapter;

3. The licensee/applicant, or licensee’s/applicant’s employees or agents, have been convicted of a crime or suffered civil judgment or consent decree that bears a direct relationship to the conduct of the business;

4. Conducting the business in an unlawful manner, or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the public health, safety, or general welfare;

5. The licensee/applicant has failed to comply with any of the provisions of this title, or other applicable state, federal or local law;

6. The licensee/applicant, or licensee’s/applicant’s employees or agents, have engaged in, allowed, or acquiesced in unlawful drug-related or other criminal activity on the business premises;

7. The licensee/applicant, or licensee’s/applicant’s employees or agents, have violated any law or ordinance relating to the regulation of the business licensed pursuant to this chapter, or any health or safety ordinance.

B. The city will provide written notice of the reasons for denial, suspension, or revocation of a license. The notice will be mailed, postage prepaid, to the last known address of applicant or licensee, as applicable. (Ord. 2018-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2015-014 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 429 § 20, 1981. Formerly 5.04.140)


5.04.140 Appeal procedure.

A. Appeals for a denial, suspension, or revocation of a license may be made to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within 20 calendar days from the date of the city’s decision. Appeals must contain all the following:

1. A brief statement setting forth each appellant(s)’ legal interest in the business involved in the denial, suspension, or revocation;

2. A brief statement, in concise language, of the specific order or action protested, together with any material facts claimed to support appellant(s)’ contentions;

3. A brief statement, in concise language, of the relief sought, and the reasons why it is claimed the protested action or decision should be reversed, modified, or otherwise set aside;

4. The signatures and official mailing addresses of all persons named as appellants;

5. Each appellant’s verification (by declaration under penalty of perjury) as to the truth of the matters stated in the appeal.

B. The city clerk will schedule a hearing before the city council to consider the appeal as soon as practicable. Only those matters or issues specifically raised by the appellant(s) in the written notice of appeal will be considered in the hearing. Public testimony will not be considered during the hearing; city staff and appellant(s), including appellant(s)’ agents, may offer relevant evidence and testimony regarding the decision. 

C. Notice of the hearing will be provided to the appellant(s) via certified mail at least 10 calendar days before the hearing date. 

D. The city council may delay its decision or continue the hearing until the next regular city council meeting as it deems necessary. 

E. Enforcement of any suspension or revocation of any business license will be stayed during the pendency of a properly and timely filed appeal.

F. Failure of any aggrieved party to file an appeal in accordance with the provisions of this chapter constitutes a waiver of the right to an appeal and adjudication of the decision.

G. The city council may delegate its authority to hear such denials, suspensions, or revocations to a hearing examiner. (Ord. 2018-011 § 1 (Exh. A))


5.04.150 Violations – Penalties.

A. It is a violation for any person to fail to comply with any provision of this chapter, any other business license regulation, or any terms and conditions of a city business license. Unless a specific penalty is expressly provided for a particular violation, violations of this chapter constitute (1) a civil infraction and/or civil penalty of $250.00 for each offense, or (2) a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000, or imprisonment in jail for any term not exceeding 90 days, or both.

B. In determining which penalty will be used to enforce violations of this chapter, if the offense is of a serious nature, it poses a risk to public safety, the violator has not made good faith efforts to achieve compliance, or there are limited other avenues for effective enforcement, the investigating officer may refer a violation for charging as a misdemeanor.

C. Any person who engages in or carries on any business subject to a tax under this chapter without having the business license so to do will be deemed guilty of a separate violation for each day during which the business is engaged in or carried on; and any person who fails or refuses to pay the license fee or tax or any part thereof on or before the due date will be deemed to be operating without license so to do. 

D. Additional Relief. The city may seek legal or equitable relief to enjoin any acts or practices or abate any condition that constitutes or will constitute a violation of the applicable provisions of this chapter when penalties provided here are inadequate to effect compliance. (Ord. 2018-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2015-014 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 429 § 17, 1981. Formerly 5.04.180)


5.04.160 Disclaimer of city liability.

Issuance of any license pursuant to this chapter does not create any duty by the city of Sequim to indemnify a licensee or any city duty to third parties for any wrongful acts against the public by any licensee or their agents, officers or employees, or to guarantee the quality of goods, services, or expertise of a licensee. Nothing in this chapter may be construed to shift responsibility from the licensee to the city of Sequim for proper training, conduct or equipment of self or agents, even if specific regulations require standards of training, conduct or inspection. (Ord. 2018-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2015-014 § 1 (Exh. A))




Chapter 5.08 AMBULANCES

Sections:

5.08.010    Definitions.

5.08.020    Permits and license required.

5.08.030    Ambulance crew.

5.08.040    First aid equipment.

5.08.050    Public liability insurance.

5.08.060    Application for license.

5.08.070    Required information.

5.08.080    Annual license fee.

5.08.090    Revocation.

5.08.100    Penalties.


5.08.010 Definitions.

As used in this chapter:

A. “Ambulance” means and includes any motor vehicle acting as a common carrier for hire for the transportation or conveyance of the sick or injured.

B. “Operating an ambulance” applies to the operation of any ambulance licensed to operate within the city. It shall not apply to any ambulance which passes through the city in the delivery of fares picked up at points beyond the limits of the city.

C. “Ambulance licensee” means and includes any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of carrying or transporting any sick or injured person, for hire, by the use of any automobile or vehicle designed or adapted for such purpose. (Ord. 267 § 1, 1972; Ord. 256 § 1, 1971)


5.08.020 Permits and license required.

No person, firm or corporation shall operate, or cause to be operated, any ambulance in the city without first securing from the city clerk a valid ambulance licensee’s permit, provided any hospital or nursing home may provide ambulance service for its patient’s only, without a permit. The number of persons, firms or corporations licensed shall be limited to not more than one person, firm or corporation for each 5,000 or fraction thereof of population within the limits of the city. To qualify for a license, the licensee must have at least two ambulances, one of which must always be available within the city to answer emergency calls. (Ord. 267 § 2, 1972; Ord. 256 § 2, 1971)


5.08.030 Ambulance crew.

No person, firm or corporation shall operate any ambulance in the city without the same being attended by a crew of two able-bodied persons, at least one of whom shall be over the age of 21 years and shall hold a valid state vehicle operator’s license and shall hold whatever first aid certificate that is required by state law. (Ord. 256 § 3, 1971)


5.08.040 First aid equipment.

Each ambulance shall at all times be equipped as follows:

A. First aid equipment consisting of leg and arm splints and standard 24 unit first aid kits as prescribed by the American Red Cross or the State of Washington Department of Labor and Industries;

B. Invalid couch-type bed on wheels;

C. Stretcher for a second patient on floor or hanger;

D. Bandages, tourniquets and splints;

E. Oxygen tank equipped with hose and face piece and reserve type of equipment for administering;

F. Fresh, clean linen and blankets sufficient for two patients;

G. Towels, male and female urinals, restraints, fire extinguisher, basin, fan and heater. (Ord. 256 § 4, 1971)


5.08.050 Public liability insurance.

No license shall be issued under this chapter for any ambulance until the same is covered with public liability insurance in the amount of not less than $100,000 per person and $200,000 per accident, and property damage insurance in the amount of $50,000 for each accident or occurrence. (Ord. 256 § 5, 1971)


5.08.060 Application for license.

Application for an ambulance license permit shall be made to the clerk with an annual license fee as established by resolution. (Ord. 2005-029 § 2; Ord. 256 § 6, 1971)


5.08.070 Required information.

The applicant shall provide the city clerk with the following:

A. Name and address of the person, firm or corporation desiring such ambulance permit or license;

B. The number and description of ambulances owned by and operated by the applicant and location of each;

C. A policy of insurance as required by this chapter, which policy shall contain an endorsement providing that 10 days’ notice to the city will be given by the insurance company in the event of any material change or cancellation. (Ord. 256 § 7, 1971)


5.08.080 Annual license fee.

The annual license fee shall be as established by resolution, which shall cover all ambulances covered by the company. The ambulance license shall expire on the last day of December next following the issuance thereof and may be renewed from year to year. (Ord. 2005-029 § 2; Ord. 256 § 8, 1971)


5.08.090 Revocation.

Any such license shall be subject to revocation upon conviction of the operator for failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 256 § 9, 1971)


5.08.100 Penalties.

It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 256 § 10, 1971)


Chapter 5.12 AMUSEMENT DEVICES

Sections:

5.12.010    Amusement device defined.

5.12.020    Automatic music machine defined.

5.12.030    Gambling devices prohibited.

5.12.040    License required – Amusement devices.

5.12.050    License required – Automatic music machines.

5.12.060    Distributor’s license not required.

5.12.070    Duties of chief of police.

5.12.080    Violation – Penalty.


5.12.010 Amusement device defined.

The term “amusement device” means any machine or device designed to be operated or used for playing a game of skill upon payment by insertion or otherwise of cash or other valuable consideration, excluding machines vending food articles or articles of merchandise. (Ord. 246 § 1, 1971)


5.12.020 Automatic music machine defined.

The term “automatic music machine” means and is deemed to include any music device which is automatically operated or played upon the insertion of a coin, token or slug. (Ord. 246 § 2, 1971)


5.12.030 Gambling devices prohibited.

No device which carries a federal gambling stamp shall be licensed or authorized under the provisions of this chapter or allowed to be operated within the city limits of the city. (Ord. 246 § 3, 1971)


5.12.040 License required – Amusement devices.

Each and every person, firm or corporation who shall operate or have in his or its control or possession within the city, an amusement device with the intent that the same shall be operated or used, shall apply for and secure a location license from the city clerk in such form as shall be prescribed by the city clerk, and shall pay an annual license fee, as established by resolution, per calendar year or any portion thereof, the license payable on or before January 1st of each year for the ensuing calendar year. (Ord. 2005-029 § 2; Ord. 426 § 1, 1981; Ord. 246 § 4, 1971)


5.12.050 License required – Automatic music machines.

Each and every person, firm or corporation who shall operate or have in his or its control or possession within the city, an automatic music machine with the intent that the same shall be operated or used, shall apply for and secure a location license from the city clerk and shall pay an annual license fee, as established by resolution, per calendar year or any portion thereof, the license payable on or before January 1st of each year for the ensuing calendar year. (Ord. 2005-029 § 2; Ord. 426 § 1, 1981; Ord. 246 § 5, 1971)


5.12.060 Distributor’s license not required.

The owner or operator of a business where coin-operated amusement devices or music machines are located shall not be required to obtain a distributor’s license in order to use such devices at that location. (Ord. 246 § 7, 1971)


5.12.070 Duties of chief of police.

It is the duty of the chief of police to inspect all amusement devices and automatic music machines located in the city and ascertain whether they are properly licensed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 246 § 9, 1971)


5.12.080 Violation – Penalty.

Any violation or failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall subject the offender to a fine in any sum not to exceed $300.00 or imprisonment in the city jail for not to exceed 90 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 246 § 10, 1971)


Chapter 5.16 DANCE HALLS

(Repealed by Ord. 2001-014)


Chapter 5.20 PAWNSHOPS, SECONDHAND STORES, AND SCRAP METAL BUSINESSES

Sections:

5.20.010    License required.

5.20.015    Scrap metal businesses.

5.20.020    Definitions.

5.20.025    Exemptions.

5.20.030    Automated kiosks.

5.20.040    Hosted home parties for precious metal sales.

5.20.050    Application for license issuance or renewal – Role of State Department of Revenue – Fees.

5.20.060    License fees.

5.20.070    Records required – Duty to record information regarding property other than precious metal property – Duty to record information regarding precious metal property.

5.20.080    Duty to report to law enforcement – Duties upon notification that property is reported stolen.

5.20.090    False reporting to pawnbroker or dealer.

5.20.100    Prohibited acts – Penalties for violation.

5.20.110    Retention of property – Retention of precious metal property – Inspection by law enforcement.

5.20.120    Minimum age requirement.

5.20.130    License denial, revocation, or suspension.

5.20.135    Compliance with state law required.

5.20.140    Violation.


5.20.010 License required.

It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in the business of pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, or secondhand precious metal dealer without obtaining the proper license pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 2018-013 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-006 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 369 § 1, 1978)


5.20.015 Scrap metal businesses.

For purposes of this section, RCW 19.290.010 through 19.290.090, 19.290.240, and 19.290.250, as enacted or amended, are adopted as though fully set forth here. Any person engaging in scrap metal business must comply with this section. Failure to comply may result in penalties as set forth in RCW 19.290.070 and 19.290.080. (Ord. 2018-013 § 1 (Exh. A))


5.20.020 Definitions.

Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter.

A

“Automated kiosk” means a self-serve interactive machine that purchases secondhand electronic devices.

G

“Garage sale” means patio sale, yard sale, or any similar sale of used or secondhand merchandise offered for sale to the general public. No one regularly engaging in the business of selling such items may conduct garage sales. Garage sales are only allowed in residential zones and must be hosted by a resident of the dwelling unit offering the items for sale. Residents of separate dwelling units may combine their sales at the premises of one dwelling unit for a combined sale.

L

“Loan period” means the period of time from the date the loan is made until the date the loan is paid off, the loan is in default, or the loan is refinanced and new loan documents are issued, including all grace or extension periods. [Source: RCW 19.60.010]

M

“Melted metals” means metals derived from metal junk or precious metals that have been reduced to a melted state from other than ore or ingots, which are produced from ore that has not previously been processed.

“Metal junk” means any metal that has previously been milled, shaped, stamped, or forged and that is no longer useful in its original form, except precious metals.

N

“Nonmetal junk” means any nonmetal, commonly discarded item that is worn out, or has outlasted its usefulness as intended in its original form, except “nonmetal junk” does not include an item made in a former period which has enhanced value because of its age.

P

“Pawnbroker” means every person engaged, in whole or in part, in the business of loaning money on the security of pledges of personal property, or deposits or conditional sales of personal property, or the purchase or sale of personal property, and who maintains a fixed place of business within the state.

“Precious metals” means gold, silver, and platinum.

S

“Secondhand dealer” means every person engaged in whole or in part in the business of purchasing, selling, trading, consignment selling, or otherwise transferring for value, secondhand property including metal junk, melted metals, and precious metals, whether or not the person maintains a fixed place of business within the state. “Secondhand dealer” also includes persons or entities conducting business at flea markets or swap meets more than three times per year. “Secondhand dealer” also includes persons or entities operating an automated kiosk. “Secondhand dealer” does not include a retail purchaser of goods from a secondhand dealer.

“Secondhand precious metal dealer” means any person or entity engaged in whole or in part in the commercial activity or business of purchasing, selling, trading, consignment selling, or otherwise transferring for value, more than three times per year, secondhand property that is a precious metal, whether or not the person or entity maintains a permanent or fixed place of business within the state, or engages in the business at flea markets or swap meets. The terms “precious metal” and “secondhand property,” for purposes of transactions by a secondhand precious metal dealer, do not include: (1) gold, silver, or platinum coins, or other precious metal coins, that are legal tender, or precious metal coins that have numismatic or precious metal value, (2) gold, silver, platinum, or other precious metal bullion, or (3) gold, silver, platinum, or other precious metal dust, flakes, or nuggets.

“Secondhand property” means any item of personal property offered for sale which is not new, including metals in any form, except postage stamps, coins that are legal tender, bullion in the form of fabricated hallmarked bars, used books, and clothing of a resale value of $75.00 or less, except furs.

T

“Transaction” means a pledge, or the purchase of, or consignment of, or the trade of any item of personal property by a pawnbroker or a secondhand dealer from a member of the general public. (Ord. 2018-013 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-006 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 369 § 2, 1978)


5.20.025 Exemptions.

This chapter does not apply to the following:

A. Retailers that sell secondhand merchandise that the retailer did not pay to receive from, or offer to sell on consignment on behalf of, any individual;

B. Retailers that offer trade-in value for used items similar or identical to the item being purchased;

C. Retailers that are registered with the Secretary of State as a charitable organization that sell secondhand items received through donation;

D. Persons or groups conducting up to four garage-type sales within a calendar year. (Ord. 2018-013 § 1 (Exh. A))


5.20.030 Automated kiosks.

A secondhand dealer may use an automated kiosk to purchase secondhand property in the city of Sequim, if the automated kiosk complies with all requirements under RCW 19.60.020(1) and 19.60.105 as enacted or amended. (Ord. 2018-013 § 1 (Exh. A))


5.20.040 Hosted home parties for precious metal sales.

Any person or entity who hosts a precious metal sale at a private residence in the city of Sequim must comply with RCW 19.60.095 as enacted or amended. Any secondhand precious metal dealer who attends a hosted home party in the city of Sequim must comply with RCW 19.60.095 as enacted or amended. (Ord. 2018-013 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-006 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 369 § 4, 1978)


5.20.050 Application for license issuance or renewal – Role of State Department of Revenue – Fees.

The city of Sequim participates in the Business Licensing Service operated through the Washington State Department of Revenue. See Chapter 5.04 SMC. All applications for issuance or renewal of any licenses required under this chapter must be made to and filed with the Business Licensing Service, which furnishes the forms, collects the applicable fees, establishes expiration dates, and provides renewal notices. The city finance department receives the applications for issuance or renewal from the Business Licensing Service and forwards a copy to the chief of police for purposes of monitoring the licensee’s compliance with this code and other local and state laws. (Ord. 2018-013 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-006 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 369 § 5, 1978)


5.20.060 License fees.

Any license fees required under this chapter are established by resolution at the city’s discretion and collected by the Business Licensing Service of the Washington State Department of Revenue at the time of application. (Ord. 2018-013 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-006 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2005-029 § 2; Ord. 369 § 6, 1978)


5.20.070 Records required – Duty to record information regarding property other than precious metal property – Duty to record information regarding precious metal property.

A. Property Other Than Precious Metal. Before making any transaction involving nonprecious metal included within the activities described in this chapter, every pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, or secondhand precious metal dealer, or agent of such pawnbroker or dealer, must verify the identity of the customer by some bona fide means of identification. This information must be maintained in a book or other permanent record at their place of business, be legibly written in the English language at the time of each transaction, and consist of a record containing at a minimum all of the following:

1. The signature of the person with whom the transaction is made;

2. The time and date of the transaction;

3. The name of the person or employee or the identification number of the person or employee conducting the transaction, as required by the applicable chief of police or the county’s chief law enforcement officer;

4. The name, date of birth, sex, height, weight, race, and address and telephone number of the person with whom the transaction is made;

5. A complete description of the property pledged, bought, or consigned, including the brand name, serial number, model number or name, any initials or engraving, size, pattern, and color or stone or stones, and, in the case of firearms, the caliber, barrel length, type of action, and whether it is a pistol, rifle, or shotgun;

6. The price paid or the amount loaned;

7. The type and identifying number of identification used by the person with whom the transaction was made, which must consist of a valid driver’s license or identification card issued by any state or two pieces of identification issued by a governmental agency, one of which must be descriptive of the person identified. At all times, one piece of current government-issued picture identification will be required; and

8. The nature of the transaction, a number identifying the transaction, the store identification as designated by the applicable law enforcement agency, or the name and address of the business and the name of the person or employee conducting the transaction, and the location of the property.

This record must be open to inspection by law enforcement at all times during ordinary business hours or at reasonable times if ordinary business hours are not kept. This record must be maintained wherever that business is conducted, or at the principal place of business if the transaction occurred via automated kiosk, for three years following the date of the transaction.

B. Precious Metal Property. Every secondhand precious metal dealer must meet all requirements set forth in subsection A of this section for any transaction involving precious metal property bought or received from an individual. In addition, the record must contain a complete description of the precious metal property pledged, bought, or consigned, including the brand name, serial number, model number or name, any initials or engraving, size, pattern, and color of stone or stones. All records must be legibly written in the English language at the time and place of each transaction. The records required under this section must be open to inspection by law enforcement at all times during ordinary business hours or at reasonable times if ordinary business hours are not kept. This record must be maintained wherever that business is conducted for three years following the date of the transaction.

C. Altered or Defaced Serial Numbers. Any item where the manufacturer’s make, model, or serial number, personal identification number, or identifying marks engraved or etched upon an item of personal property have been defaced, changed, removed, altered, or obliterated in any manner cannot be accepted for loan, purchase, or consignment. Any person recording such item must immediately notify the city of Sequim police department pursuant to SMC 5.20.080(B). (Ord. 2018-013 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-006 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 369 § 7, 1978)


5.20.080 Duty to report to law enforcement – Duties upon notification that property is reported stolen.

A. Every pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, and secondhand precious metal dealer must regularly provide the Sequim police chief or the chief’s designee a full, true and correct transcript of the record of all transaction details as set forth in RCW 19.60.020 and 19.60.025. Such transcript must be reported in the manner and at the intervals specified by the chief of police, which may include electronic transmission via a designated vendor acting as a clearinghouse for local or regional law enforcement.

B. Every pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, and secondhand precious metal dealer, who has good cause to believe that any property in their possession has been previously lost or stolen, must promptly report that fact to the applicable law enforcement officer, together with the name of the owner, if known, and the date when and the name of the person from whom it was received. (Ord. 2018-013 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-006 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 369 § 8, 1978)


5.20.090 False reporting to pawnbroker or dealer.

Any person who supplies any false information or false identification to any pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, secondhand precious metal dealer, or employee or agent thereof is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 2018-013 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-006 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 369 § 9, 1978)


5.20.100 Prohibited acts – Penalties for violation.

Any pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, secondhand precious metal dealer, or employee or agent thereof is prohibited from violating any provision of RCW 19.60.066 or 19.60.067, the penalties for which range from gross misdemeanor to Class C felony.

Pawnbrokers, secondhand dealers, and secondhand precious metal dealers are prohibited from purchasing personal property on the condition of selling it back at a stipulated time and price greater than the purchase price to avoid the interest and fee restrictions under Chapter 19.60 RCW. (Ord. 2018-013 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-006 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 369 § 10, 1978)


5.20.110 Retention of property – Retention of precious metal property – Inspection by law enforcement.

Pawnbrokers, secondhand dealers, and secondhand precious metal dealers must fully comply with all provisions of RCW 19.60.050, 19.60.055 and 19.60.057 with respect to retention of property bought or received in pledge or on consignment and must allow inspection of such property by law enforcement officers as set forth in those statutes. (Ord. 2018-013 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-006 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 369 § 11, 1978)


5.20.120 Minimum age requirement.

Pawnbrokers, secondhand dealers and secondhand precious metal dealers are prohibited from making transactions described under this chapter with any person under the age of 18 years. (Ord. 2018-013 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-006 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 369 § 12, 1978)


5.20.130 License denial, revocation, or suspension.

A. Except for scrap metal business licenses, the city council has the authority to deny, suspend, or revoke any license granted under this chapter upon application by the chief of police. Scrap metal licensing is handled through the Washington State Department of Licensing.

B. Any appeal of a decision to deny, suspend, or revoke a license must follow the procedures set forth in SMC 5.04.140.

C. Causes for denial, suspension, or revocation of a license include but are not limited to the following:

1. Failure to present true and correct information upon the license application.

2. Failure to comply with reporting duties.

3. Conviction of the licensee or employee for dealing in or possessing stolen goods.

4. Any reason identified in SMC 5.04.130.

5. Failure to comply with this chapter. (Ord. 2018-013 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-006 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2001-014 § 2; Ord. 369 § 13, 1978)


5.20.135 Compliance with state law required.

Pawnbrokers, secondhand dealers, and secondhand precious metal dealers must comply with Chapter 19.60 RCW as now existing or as hereafter amended. In any case where the Sequim Municipal Code is more restrictive than Chapter 19.60 RCW, the provisions of the Sequim Municipal Code apply. [Source RCW 19.60.075]

Compliance with state law specifically includes compliance with all statutory and regulatory provisions regarding retention of property, inspection of property by law enforcement, allowable interest rates and fees, process for sales of pledged property, and written documentation of transactions. (Ord. 2018-013 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-006 § 1 (Exh. A))


5.20.140 Violation.

Violation of this chapter is subject to the penalties and provisions as set forth in Chapter 1.13 SMC – Code Enforcement. (Ord. 2019-013 (Exh. B); Ord. 2011-006 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 369 § 14, 1978)


Chapter 5.24 PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS

Sections:

5.24.001    Purpose.

5.24.005    Religious, charitable, civic, political, or other similar organizations.

5.24.010    Definitions.

5.24.020    License – Fees.

5.24.025    License fees – Veterans’ exemption.

5.24.030    License – Expiration date.

5.24.040    License required.

5.24.045    License – Required – Exceptions.

5.24.050    Unlawful acts.

5.24.060    Financial responsibility.

5.24.070    License application and investigation.

5.24.080    License – Product or services sold.

5.24.090    Identification card.

5.24.100    License – Display.

5.24.110    Disclosure of product and purpose.

5.24.120    Receipt and notice to buyer.

5.24.130    Denial or revocation of license.

5.24.135    Appeals.

5.24.140    Penalty.

Editor’s note: The general provisions of the new license code are codified in Chapter 5.04 SMC.

Prior legislation: Ords. 6 and 2005-029.


5.24.001 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish reasonable restrictions on peddling/soliciting activities within the city limits to protect and promote public safety, privacy, and welfare. This chapter is intended to be reasonable as to time, place, and manner restrictions and is not intended to infringe upon any constitutionally protected right.

Further, to promote voluntary compliance with this chapter, the city shall install a sign at each major entrance to the city. Each sign shall state, “Peddling, Soliciting, Canvassing Ordinances Enforced. Sequim Municipal Code 5.24.” (Ord. 2008-011 § 1)


5.24.005 Religious, charitable, civic, political, or other similar organizations.

A. To ensure privacy, all religious, charitable, civic, political, or other similar organizations intending to canvass or solicit within the city shall comply with the provisions set out in SMC 5.24.050(C) and (D). No other provisions of this chapter shall apply, unless a religious, charitable, civic, political, or other similar organization intends to solicit for money, then see subsection B of this section.

B. Religious, charitable, or political, civic, or other similar organizations canvassing or soliciting for money shall notify the planning department or code compliance officer that the organization will be canvassing or soliciting within the city limits. Nonprofit organizations shall also provide the planning department or code compliance officer with a copy of the organization’s nonprofit certification and state charitable solicitation organization registration. No other requirements of this chapter, including fees, licensing, or other forms of individual information, shall be required. This section is adopted solely for assuring residents that a legitimate organization is canvassing or soliciting in the area and that residents’ privacy is adequately protected.

This chapter is not intended to regulate religious or political free speech. Charitable solicitations are also not addressed herein. Chapter 19.09 RCW governs registration and regulation of charitable solicitation. (Ord. 2008-011 § 1)


5.24.010 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter:

“Peddler/solicitor” within the meaning of this chapter is any person who, without prior invitation from the occupant, goes from house to house, or place to place, in the city, selling or taking orders for, or offering to sell or take orders for, scheduling appointments for, or otherwise soliciting for goods, wares, merchandise or services, for present or future delivery, except those selling to entities holding business licenses. (Ord. 2008-011 § 1; Ord. 2006-012 § 1)


5.24.020 License – Fees.

The annual fee for a peddler/solicitor license is established by the license fee resolution. The fee shall be paid at the time of application and is nonrefundable. (Ord. 2008-011 § 1; Ord. 2006-012 § 2)


5.24.025 License fees – Veterans’ exemption.

Veterans as defined in RCW 73.04.050 are exempt from payment of licensing fees. Any veteran asserting this exemption shall provide the planning department or code compliance officer proof of honorable discharge prior to the veteran receiving a peddler/solicitor license. (RCW 73.04.060). (Ord. 2008-011 § 1)


5.24.030 License – Expiration date.

Peddler/solicitor licenses expire annually on May 31st. (Ord. 2008-011 § 1; Ord. 2006-012 § 2)


5.24.040 License required.

It is unlawful for any person to engage in business as a peddler/solicitor in the city without first obtaining a city of Sequim peddler/solicitor license for each person selling on behalf of the business. Any peddler/solicitor as defined in this chapter shall apply for and receive a city peddler/solicitor license prior to engaging in such activity, unless the peddler/solicitor is exempt as indicated in SMC 5.24.045. (Ord. 2008-011 § 1)


5.24.045 License – Required – Exceptions.

No license shall be required for:

A. Any person selling, delivering, or peddling any agricultural, horticultural, or farm products which they may grow or raise (RCW 36.71.090); or

B. Any person who, as an agent, acts as a peddler/solicitor on behalf of a regulated utility; or

C. Any minors engaged in baby-sitting, lawn mowing, car washing, or other similar independent activities, unless the minor is acting on behalf of a person not a minor; or

D. Any person who merely solicits orders for goods, which orders are to be accepted and goods delivered at a future time from a place outside of Washington State.

1. Any person or organization claiming an exemption under this section shall complete a modified peddler/solicitor license application;

2. Any such person who asserts an exemption under this subsection shall complete a form at the planning department outlining the reasons for this exemption. This statement must include the name, physical and mailing addresses, phone number, and, if applicable, e-mail address for each of the following:

a. Interstate business name;

b. Customer service department;

c. Order cancellation department, if different from customer service; and

d. Regional or local supervisor;

3. The applicant shall also include information about the seller’s cancellation policy. (Ord. 2008-011 § 1; Ord. 2006-012 § 2. Formerly 5.24.040)


5.24.050 Unlawful acts.

It is unlawful for any peddler/solicitor to:

A. Make untrue, deceptive, or misleading statements about the product or services sold for the purpose of procuring a sale or offer for sale;

B. Make any untrue, deceptive, or misleading statement regarding the purposes of his/her contact with a potential customer;

C. Sell before 8:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m. of any day without the specific prior consent of the prospective buyer;

D. Attempt to gain admittance at any residence at which a sign bearing the words “no peddlers,” “no solicitors,” “no trespassing,” or words of similar import is posted, unless at the invitation or with the consent of the occupant thereof;

E. Remain at any location after the prospective buyer has asked the peddler/solicitor to leave. (Ord. 2008-011 § 1; Ord. 2006-012 § 2)


5.24.060 Financial responsibility.

Each applicant for a peddler/solicitor license who intends to peddle/solicit for contracting services shall submit to the planning department or code compliance officer a surety bond naming himself or herself and all of his or her agents as principals, and conditioned as provided by the general provisions of the new license code. (Ord. 2008-011 § 1; Ord. 2006-012 § 2)


5.24.070 License application and investigation.

Each individual seeking to secure a peddler/solicitor license shall apply in writing to the planning department or code compliance officer on forms provided by the city. A letter on company letterhead showing the applicant’s name as an authorized agent to sell on the company’s behalf is required at time of filing. The application for peddler/solicitor license shall include a “WATCH” criminal record check and may require applicant’s fingerprints and require two photographs to be submitted.

If the investigation shows that the facts set forth in the application are true, that such peddler/solicitor proposes to engage in a lawful and legitimate commercial or professional enterprise, then the application shall be approved and the planning department will issue the license. The length of the investigation shall not exceed five business days from the date all requested information has been supplied to the city by the applicant. (Ord. 2008-011 § 1; Ord. 2006-012 § 2)


5.24.080 License – Product or services sold.

The license shall be endorsed with a statement of the type of product or service sold by the licensee. The license is valid only for the product or service specified. (Ord. 2008-011 § 1; Ord. 2006-012 § 2)


5.24.090 Identification card.

Each peddler/solicitor shall be issued an identification card showing:

A. Business name;

B. Peddler/solicitor name;

C. Type of service or product;

D. Date of expiration;

E. Photo of peddler/solicitor;

F. City of Sequim logo;

G. City of Sequim authorized signature. (Ord. 2008-011 § 1; Ord. 2006-012 § 2)


5.24.100 License – Display.

All peddler/solicitors shall conspicuously display on their outer clothing their identification issued by the city when engaged in peddling/soliciting activities. (Ord. 2008-011 § 1; Ord. 2006-012 § 2)


5.24.110 Disclosure of product and purpose.

Each peddler/solicitor shall, immediately upon contacting the prospective buyer, disclose to the prospective buyer his/her name, company, and the product or service represented. If requested to do so, he/she shall leave the premises immediately. (Ord. 2008-011 § 1; Ord. 2006-012 § 2)


5.24.120 Receipt and notice to buyer.

Every peddler/solicitor must comply with all provisions included in 16 CFR Section 429.1 to avoid any unfair or deceptive practices; 16 CFR Section 429.1 includes, but is not limited to, the following:

A. Every sale, having a price of $25.00 or more, made or order taken by a peddler/solicitor shall be evidenced by a signed receipt, contract, or other signed memorandum of the transaction, which shall be given to the purchaser. Such receipt, contract, or memorandum shall state: (1) the date and terms of the transaction; (2) the amount of any payment made; and (3) the name and address of the peddler/solicitor. The receipt shall also include, in immediate proximity to the space reserved in the contract for the signature of the buyer or on the front page of the receipt if a contract is not used, and in boldface type of a minimum size of 10 points, the following notice:

NOTICE TO BUYER

You, the buyer, may cancel this transaction at ANY TIME PRIOR TO MIDNIGHT of the THIRD BUSINESS DAY after the date of this transaction. See the attached notice of cancellation form for an explanation of this right.

B. The peddler/solicitor must furnish to each buyer, at the time the buyer signs any sales contract or otherwise buys or agrees to buy goods or services from the peddler/solicitor, a completed form in duplicate, captioned “NOTICE OF CANCELLATION.” This notice of cancellation shall be attached to the contract, receipt, or memorandum and easily detachable, and shall contain in 10-point bold type the following information and statements in the same language, e.g., Spanish, as that used in such contract, receipt or memorandum:

NOTICE OF CANCELLATION

(Enter date of Transaction)

You may CANCEL this transaction, without any penalty or obligation, within THREE BUSINESS DAYS from the above date.

If you cancel, any property traded in, any payments made by you under the contract or sale, and any negotiable instrument executed by you will be returned within TEN BUSINESS DAYS following receipt by the seller of your cancellation notice, and any security interest arising out of the transaction will be cancelled.

If you cancel, you must make available to the seller at your residence, in substantially as good condition as when received, any goods delivered to you under this contract or sale; or you may, if you wish, comply with the instructions of the seller regarding the return shipment of the goods at the seller’s expense and risk.

If you do make the goods available to the seller and the seller does not pick them up within 20 days of the date of your Notice of Cancellation, you may retain or dispose of the goods without any further obligation. If you fail to make the goods available to the seller, or if you agree to return the goods to the seller and fail to do so, then you remain liable for performance of all obligations under the contract.

To cancel this transaction, mail or deliver a signed and dated copy of this Cancellation Notice or any other written notice, or send a telegram to (name of seller) AT (Address of seller’s place of business) NOT LATER THAN MIDNIGHT OF (Date).

I HEREBY CANCEL THIS TRANSACTION.

(date)

__________________

(Buyer’s Signature)

C. The sending of any notice of cancellation within the specified period shall operate to cancel the purchase made or contract entered into, and the seller shall thereupon, without request, refund to the buyer any deposit or payment made, and in accordance with the notice of cancellation may reclaim from the buyer at the place of delivery any goods received by the buyer under such purchase or contract. (Ord. 2008-011 § 1; Ord. 2006-012 § 2)


5.24.130 Denial or revocation of license.

A. An application for a peddler/solicitor license will be denied or revoked if:

1. The applicant has been convicted of a felony within the past 10 years of the date of application, and the felony is directly related to the position sought (RCW 9.96A.020, 9.96A.050); or

2. The applicant has been the subject of repeated complaints of aggressive sales tactics by the residents of the city of Sequim. “Repeated complaints” means complaints from three or more independently contacted individuals arising from three or more separate occasions.

B. If the city denies the applicant a peddler/solicitor license based upon either of the reasons outlined above, the city shall notify the applicant promptly via telephone, using the telephone number provided by the applicant in Section 1 of the peddler/solicitor license application. The city shall also notify the applicant of the reason(s) for denial of the peddler/solicitor license in writing, and the notification will be sent to the applicant at the applicant’s permanent address provided in Section 1 of the peddler/solicitor license application. The city shall also post any revocations of peddler/solicitor licenses on the city’s website.

C. The city shall also send a written notification of the city’s reason(s) for the applicant’s denial of a peddler/solicitor license to the business identified by the applicant in Section 3 of the peddler/solicitor application. The notification shall be sent to the principal place of business address identified in Section 3 of the peddler/solicitor license application. (Ord. 2008-011 § 1; Ord. 2006-012 § 2)


5.24.135 Appeals.

If an applicant has been denied a peddler/solicitor license and wishes to appeal this denial, the applicant may appeal to the city council and have the council review the application at the next city council meeting. If the applicant does not wish to have the application reviewed by the city council, the applicant may elect to have the application reviewed by a hearings officer within 30 days of receiving the denial notification. The decision made by either the city council or the hearings officer shall be final. (Ord. 2008-011 § 1)


5.24.140 Penalty.

Any person who sells or offers for sale or exposes for sale, at public or private sale, any goods, wares, or merchandise without a peddler/solicitor license or any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in SMC 1.12.010. (Ord. 2008-011 § 1)


Chapter 5.28 FOR-HIRE VEHICLES

Sections:

5.28.010    Definitions.

5.28.020    Business license – Registration – Required.

5.28.030    Registration – Application – Required information.

5.28.040    Registration – Application – Inspection of vehicles – Issuance.

5.28.050    Equipment.

5.28.060    Operation regulations.

5.28.070    For-hire vehicle operator’s license – Qualifications.

5.28.080    Initial for-hire vehicle operator’s license – Required.

5.28.090    For-hire vehicle operator’s license – Application – Information required.

5.28.100    For-hire vehicle operator’s license – Application – Police endorsement.

5.28.110    Initial for-hire vehicle operator’s license – Fee.

5.28.115    For-hire vehicle operator’s license – Term – Renewal – Fee.

5.28.120    For-hire vehicle operator’s license – Exhibition required.

5.28.130    For-hire vehicle operator’s license – Temporary.

5.28.140    For-hire vehicle operator’s license – Nontransferable.

5.28.150    Fare – Filing – Posting required.

5.28.160    Fare – Overcharge.

5.28.170    Fare – Refusal to pay.

5.28.180    Insurance requirement.

5.28.190    Penalties.

5.28.200    For-hire vehicle operator’s license denial or revocation.


5.28.010 Definitions.

The following definitions shall apply to the provisions of this chapter:

“For-hire vehicle” means any motor vehicle used for transportation of passengers for compensation and not operated over a fixed and defined route, including taxicabs. This chapter does not regulate limousine charter carriers regulated under Chapter 81.90 RCW, charter party carriers of passengers and excursion service carriers regulated under Chapter 81.70 RCW, or a private, nonprofit corporation providing transportation services for compensation solely to elderly or handicapped persons as regulated under Chapter 81.66 RCW. (Ord. 2016-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2001-009)


5.28.020 Business license – Registration – Required.

Except as provided in this section, no person shall operate or permit a for-hire vehicle owned or controlled by him/her to be operated as a for-hire vehicle within the corporate limits of the city without first having obtained a city business license pursuant to Chapter 5.04 SMC through the Washington State Department of Revenue. (Ord. 2016-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2001-009)


5.28.030 Registration – Application – Required information.

In addition to all other information required of an applicant for a business license, an applicant for a for-hire vehicle registration shall provide the following information:

A. Full information concerning the ownership, including vehicle registration, the number and classification of vehicles to be operated, and the name, fictitious or otherwise, under which the applicant intends to operate;

B. The distinguishing color scheme, dress or design, including any monogram or insignia intended to be used upon the vehicle; such shall not resemble any police vehicle;

C. The rates proposed to be charged. (Ord. 2016-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2001-009)


5.28.040 Registration – Application – Inspection of vehicles – Issuance.

Before commencing operation, each registrant shall file with the clerk a certificate of inspection showing all vehicles subject to this chapter have been inspected by an ASE certified mechanic. Proof of inspection must be conspicuously posted inside the vehicle. (Ord. 2016-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2001-009)


5.28.050 Equipment.

Every vehicle licensed under this chapter shall be equipped with an approved fire extinguisher and first aid kit and appropriate, lawful seatbelts or passenger restraint devices for all passengers including appropriate, lawful car seats and booster seats for children and infants. All vehicles operated as taxicabs shall have an illuminated taxi sign or roof light, which shall be illuminated at all times while the taxicab is in operation as such. Vehicles licensed under this chapter, but not operated as taxicabs, shall have distinguishing signs. (Ord. 2016-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2001-009)


5.28.060 Operation regulations.

The operation of a for-hire vehicle business shall be governed by the following regulations, in addition to all other regulations of statute or ordinance:

A. No for-hire stand or zone may be operated without the permission of the owner or occupant of all adjoining premises.

B. No registrant shall permit more than three for-hire vehicles to stand or wait at the same time in a stand or zone or permit for-hire vehicles to cruise the streets for passengers.

C. Upon request by any authorized peace officer, every person engaged in the business of transporting passengers for hire under the provisions of this chapter shall present all information in regard to the address of the house or place to or from which he has driven or caused to be driven any passenger, as well as descriptions, names and addresses of such passengers, if known to him. Every person engaged in the for-hire vehicle business in the city of Sequim shall maintain records of the number, location, and length of trips made each day and shall retain and preserve such information for at least two years and shall make such reports available to the city clerk or chief of police upon request. No person shall operate a for-hire vehicle without first having obtained a for-hire vehicle operator’s license to do so.

D. No person shall operate or be in actual physical control of a for-hire vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs.

E. Every person engaged in the business of operating for-hire vehicles in the city of Sequim shall maintain a business address and a mailing address where the owner can accept mail and a business telephone in working order that shall be answered during normal business hours, Monday through Friday, and during all hours of operation and shall at all times have for-hire vehicles which are registered pursuant to this chapter and are capable of providing service in the city of Sequim.

F. Drivers of for-hire vehicles employed to carry passengers to a definite point shall take the most direct route possible that will carry the passengers safely and expeditiously to the passengers’ destination. (Ord. 2016-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2001-009. Formerly 5.28.070)


5.28.070 For-hire vehicle operator’s license – Qualifications.

No person shall be permitted to obtain a for-hire vehicle operator’s license for the driving of for-hire vehicles unless the following minimum requirements are met:

A. Possession of a valid Washington State driver’s license;

B. Having been a licensed driver for at least three consecutive years prior to the date of application for a license;

C. The ability to speak, read and write the English language;

D. Not being addicted to the use of intoxicating liquor or drugs within two years preceding the date of the application for a license;

E. Not having been convicted of a felony, or of operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs, or of being in actual physical control of a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs, or of negligent or reckless driving, within five years preceding the date of the application for a license;

F. Not having been convicted of three or more moving violations during a one-year period during the five years preceding the date of the application for a license. (Ord. 2016-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2001-009. Formerly 5.28.080)


5.28.080 Initial for-hire vehicle operator’s license – Required.

A. All persons, except those holding a current for-hire vehicle operator’s license issued by the city of Sequim, are required to obtain an initial for-hire vehicle operator’s license.

B. For-hire vehicle operator licensees who cease, for reasons other than illness or injury, to be actively employed as a for-hire vehicle driver for a period more than 90 calendar days are required to reapply for a for-hire vehicle operator’s license. (Ord. 2016-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2001-009. Formerly 5.28.085)


5.28.090 For-hire vehicle operator’s license – Application – Information required.

In addition to all other information required by the city clerk, or designee, the following information shall be required: the full name, address, residence; age, height, weight, color of eyes and hair; place of birth; length of time he or she has resided in the state; whether a citizen of the United States; whether previously licensed as a driver or chauffeur, and if so, when and where; whether such license has ever been revoked and for what cause. Such application shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant, and filed with the chief of police as a permanent record. Every applicant for a for-hire vehicle operator’s license must submit to fingerprinting, photographing, and a criminal and driver’s records check by the police department. (Ord. 2016-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2001-009)


5.28.100 For-hire vehicle operator’s license – Application – Police endorsement.

The chief of police or designee shall make a recommendation to the clerk, or designee, within 10 working days of the filing of a complete application or the return of the criminal and driver’s records check, to issue or not to issue a for-hire vehicle operator’s license permitting the person to drive a for-hire vehicle. In arriving at his/her recommendation, the chief of police, or designee, is authorized to conduct an appropriate investigation to assist in the determination of whether or not the qualifications for the driving of for-hire vehicles are met and the issuance of the license would be consistent with the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 2016-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2001-009)


5.28.110 Initial for-hire vehicle operator’s license – Fee.

The fee for obtaining the initial for-hire vehicle operator’s license shall be as established by resolution. The fee is not subject to proration. (Ord. 2016-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2006-003 § 2; Ord. 2005-029 § 2; Ord. 2001-009)


5.28.115 For-hire vehicle operator’s license – Term – Renewal – Fee.

For-hire vehicle operator’s licenses shall be for a period of one year beginning January 1st of the year of application and expiring on December 31st. The licensee shall submit an abstract of driving record issued by the state of Washington Department of Licensing annually, on or before January 1st.

The fee for renewal of a for-hire vehicle operator’s license shall be the same as a newly issued license and is not subject to proration. (Ord. 2016-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2006-003 § 2; Ord. 2001-009)


5.28.120 For-hire vehicle operator’s license – Exhibition required.

Each licensed driver shall wear his or her for-hire vehicle operator’s license prominently displayed on an outer garment and upon the request of any police officer or passenger, exhibit his/her license and photograph for inspection. (Ord. 2016-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2001-009)


5.28.130 For-hire vehicle operator’s license – Temporary.

The clerk or designee may, on the recommendation of the chief of police or designee, issue a temporary for-hire vehicle operator’s license, pending the completion of the investigation required pursuant to this chapter, effective only until the application is finally acted upon by the chief of police, and in no event for a period longer than 90 days. (Ord. 2016-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2001-009)


5.28.140 For-hire vehicle operator’s license – Nontransferable.

No for-hire vehicle operator’s license shall be transferable. (Ord. 2016-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2001-009)


5.28.150 Fare – Filing – Posting required.

Every person conducting or carrying on the business of transporting passengers for hire registered pursuant to this chapter shall post in a conspicuous place in every vehicle, the schedule of fares. (Ord. 2016-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2001-009)


5.28.160 Fare – Overcharge.

Any driver of a for-hire vehicle who charges any passenger a fare higher than that provided in the schedule of fares filed with the city shall be subject to penalties imposed as set forth in SMC 5.28.190. (Ord. 2016-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2001-009)


5.28.170 Fare – Refusal to pay.

It is unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the regular fare for a for-hire vehicle, after having hired the same. (Ord. 2016-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2001-009)


5.28.180 Insurance requirement.

Each for-hire service shall maintain appropriate insurance coverage as required by the state of Washington. (Ord. 2016-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2001-009. Formerly 5.28.190)


5.28.190 Penalties.

All violations of this chapter, except for operating a for-hire business without registering, shall be punishable as a Class 2 civil infraction as set forth in Chapter 7.80 RCW. Operating a for-hire business without registering shall be punishable as a Class 1 civil infraction. Infractions may be issued to the driver and to the registered business owner, and each day business is conducted is deemed a separate violation. (Ord. 2016-011 § 1 (Exh. A))


5.28.200 For-hire vehicle operator’s license denial or revocation.

In addition to grounds supporting denial or revocation of for-hire vehicle operator’s licenses set forth in any other chapter of this code, a license may also be denied or revoked upon a finding that:

A. Any applicant or licensee has omitted to disclose any material fact or has provided any misleading statement in the application for license; or

B. Any for-hire vehicle operator’s license applicant or licensee has become disqualified under SMC 5.28.070, 5.28.090 or applicable state law to hold a driver’s license for the driving of taxicabs or for-hire vehicles; or

C. Any for-hire business or for-hire vehicle operator licensee who persistently violates operating standards. For purposes of this section, “persistently” means three or more separate violations within one calendar year; or

D. Any for-hire vehicle business license applicant or licensee fails to report the disqualification of a driver in his or her employ to the city clerk and chief of police, or their designees.

E. The procedure for denial or revocation for a for-hire vehicle operator’s license shall be the same as set forth in SMC 5.04.140. (Ord. 2016-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2001-009)


Chapter 5.32 UTILITIES

Sections:

5.32.010    Purpose.

5.32.015    Definitions.

5.32.020    License required.

5.32.030    Taxes levied.

5.32.040    Quarterly installments – Due when.

5.32.050    Deductions from gross operating revenues.

5.32.060    Records to be kept.

5.32.070    Failure to pay tax.

5.32.080    Overpayments – Credits – Refunds – Appeals.

5.32.090    Notice of annexation.

5.32.100    Unconstitutionality.

5.32.110    Administration.

5.32.120    False returns.

5.32.130    Noncompliance – Civil penalty.

State law reference(s): Utility tax, RCW 82.16.010 et seq.; excise tax on telephone business, RCW 35A.82.060; network telephone service, RCW 35A.82.065; referendum procedure, RCW 35.21.706; minimum waiting period, RCW 35.21.865; tax limitation, RCW 35.21.870.


5.32.010 Purpose.

The provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be deemed to be an exercise of the power of the city to license for revenue. (Ord. 2005-035; Ord. 423 § 1, 1981)


5.32.015 Definitions.

The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

“Cellular telephone service” means any two-way voice and/or data telephone or similar communications system based in whole or in substantial part on wireless radio communications, including cellular mobile service, and which is not subject to regulation by the Washington State Utilities and Transportation Commission that conflicts with or overrides this chapter. Cellular telephone service includes other wireless radio communications services including, without limitation, specialized mobile radio, paging services, personal communications and data services, and any other evolving wireless radio communications technology that accomplishes a purpose substantially similar to cellular telephone service. Cellular telephone service is included within the definition of “telephone business” for the purposes of this chapter.

“Competitive telephone service” means the providing by any person, firm, or corporation of telecommunications equipment or apparatus, or service related to that equipment or apparatus such as repair or maintenance service, if the equipment or apparatus is of a type which can be provided by persons that are not subject to regulation as telephone companies under RCW Title 80 and for which a separate charge is made.

“Gross income” means the value proceeding or accruing from the performance of the particular public service business involved, including operations incidental thereto, but without any deduction on account of the cost of the commodity furnished or sold, the cost of materials used, labor costs, interest, discounts, delivery costs, taxes, or any other expense whatsoever paid or accrued and without any deduction on account of losses. In addition, when determining total gross income from cellular telephone service, “gross income” shall include all income from cellular telephone service (including roaming charges incurred outside this state) provided to customers whose place of primary use is in the city, regardless of the location of the facilities used to provide the service. The customer’s place of primary use is, with respect to each telephone: (1) the customer’s address shown on the telephone service company’s records; or (2) the customer’s place of residence if the telephone is for personal use, and in both cases must be located within the licensed service area of the home service provider. Roaming charges and cellular telephone charges to customers whose place of primary use is outside the city of Sequim will not be taxable even though those cellular services are provided within the city of Sequim. There is a rebuttable presumption that the address shown on the cellular telephone service company’s records is the place of primary use and is accurate. If the cellular telephone service company knows or should have known that a customer’s place of primary use address for a telephone is within the city, then the gross income from cellular telephone service provided to that customer with respect to that telephone is to be included in the company’s gross income.

“Natural gas” or “gas,” as used in this chapter, shall not include propane delivered by means other than distribution pipeline as defined in RCW 81.88.010(3), as presently enacted or hereafter amended.

“Network telephone service” means the providing by any person, firm, or corporation of access to a local telephone network, local telephone network switching service, toll service, or coin telephone services, or the providing of telephonic, video, data, or similar communication, or transmission for hire via a local telephone network, toll line or channel, cable, microwave, or similar communication or transmission system. “Network telephone service” includes interstate service, including toll service, originating from or received on telecommunications equipment or apparatus in this state if the charge for the service is billed to a person in this state. “Network telephone service” includes the provision of transmission to and from the site of an Internet provider via a local telephone network, toll line or channel, cable, microwave, or similar communication or transmission system. “Network telephone service” does not include the providing of competitive telephone service, the providing of cable television service, the providing of broadcast services by radio or television stations, or the provision of Internet service as defined in RCW 82.04.297, including the reception of dial-in connection, provided at the site of the Internet service provider.

“Telephone business” means the business of providing network telephone service and cellular telephone service, as those terms are defined in this section, and includes cooperative or farmer line telephone companies or associations operating an exchange. “Competitive telephone service” shall not be considered “telephone business.” Telephone business shall include 100 percent of the business and total gross income derived from calls originating and/or billed to subscribers within the city. (Ord. 2008-015 § 1; Ord. 2005-035)

State law reference(s): Similar provisions, RCW 82.04.065.


5.32.020 License required.

After the effective date of this chapter, no person, firm or corporation shall engage in or carry on any business, occupation, act or privilege for which a tax is imposed by SMC 5.32.030 without first having obtained, and being the holder of, a license so to do, to be known as an occupation license. Each such person, firm or corporation shall promptly apply to the city clerk for such license upon such forms as the city clerk shall deem reasonably necessary to enable the clerk’s office to administer and enforce this chapter and, upon acceptance of such application by the clerk, the clerk shall thereupon issue such license to the applicant. The occupation license shall be personal and nontransferable and shall be valid as long as the licensee continues in the business and complies with this chapter. (Ord. 2005-035; Ord. 423 § 2, 1981)


5.32.030 Taxes levied.

In addition to the other business and license fees required by the ordinances of the city, the city levies upon all persons, firms, or corporations (including the city) engaged in certain business activities, a utilities tax as set forth herein.

From and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, there is levied upon and shall be collected from every person, firm or corporation engaged in carrying on the following business for hire or for sale of a commodity or a service within or partly within the corporate limits of the city, the tax for the privilege of so doing business as hereinafter defined, as follows:

A. 1. Upon any telephone business there shall be levied a tax as established by Resolution R-2007-17 as adopted and as hereafter amended, which includes revenues from intrastate toll, derived from the operation of such businesses within the city. Gross operating revenues for this purpose shall not include charges which are passed on to the subscribers by a telephone company pursuant to tariffs required by regulatory order to compensate for the cost to the company of the tax imposed by this chapter.

2. “Telephone business” means the business of providing access to a local telephone network, local telephone network switching service, toll service or coin telephone services, or providing telephonic, video, data or similar communication or transmission for hire, via a local telephone network, toll line or channel, or similar communication or transmission system. It includes cooperative or farmer line telephone companies or associations operating an exchange. “Telephone business” does not include the providing of competitive telephone service, nor the providing of cable television service.

3. “Competitive telephone service” means the providing by any person of telephone equipment, apparatus or service, other than toll service, which is of a type which can be provided by persons that are not subject to regulation as telephone companies under RCW Title 80 and for which a separate charge is made.

B. There is levied a tax on the sale, delivery or distribution of electricity and electrical energy and for the privilege of carrying on the business, a tax to be equal to six percent of the total gross operating revenues derived from sales of such electricity to ultimate users within the city or as hereafter amended by resolution; provided, however, that there shall not be any tax levied for the installation charges of electrical units.

C. There is levied upon every person, firm, or corporation engaging in or carrying on a business of selling, wheeling, furnishing, distributing, or producing gas, whether manufactured or natural, for commercial or domestic use or purposes, a fee or tax in an amount which has been established by Resolution R-2007-17 and as hereafter amended by resolution.

D. There is levied upon every person, firm, or corporation engaging in or carrying on a business providing solid waste collection services, a tax in an amount which has been set by Resolution R-2007-17 and as hereafter amended by resolution.

E. There is levied upon every person (including the city) engaging in or carrying on the business of selling, furnishing, or distributing water, sewer, or drainage services, a tax in an amount which has been set by Resolution R-2007-17 and which shall be as amended by resolution in the future. (Ord. 2008-002 § 2; Ord. 2005-035; Ord. 423 § 3, 1981)


5.32.040 Quarterly installments – Due when.

A. The tax imposed by this chapter shall be due and payable in quarterly installments and remittance shall be made on or before the twentieth day of the month next succeeding the end of the quarterly period in which the tax accrued. Such quarterly periods are as follows:

1. First quarter: January, February and March.

2. Second quarter: April, May and June.

3. Third quarter: July, August and September.

4. Fourth quarter: October, November and December.

B. The first payment made under this chapter shall be made by April 30, 1982, for the three-month period ending March 31, 1982. On or before the due date the taxpayer shall file with the city clerk a written return, upon such form and setting forth such information as the clerk shall reasonably require, together with the payment of the amount of the tax. (Ord. 2005-035; Ord. 423 § 4, 1981)


5.32.050 Deductions from gross operating revenues.

In computing the tax there shall be deducted from the gross operating revenues the following items:

A. The amount of credit losses and uncollectibles actually sustained by the taxpayer;

B. Amounts derived from transactions in interstate or foreign commerce or from any business in which the city is prohibited from taxing under the Constitution of the United States or the Constitution of the state;

C. Amounts derived by the taxpayer from the city. (Ord. 2005-035; Ord. 423 § 5, 1981)


5.32.060 Records to be kept.

Each taxpayer shall keep records reflecting the amount of his gross operating revenues, and such records shall be open at all reasonable times to the inspection of the city clerk, or his duly authorized subordinates, for verification of the tax returns or for the fixing of the tax of a taxpayer who fails to make such returns. (Ord. 2005-035; Ord. 423 § 6, 1981)


5.32.070 Failure to pay tax.

If any person, firm or corporation subject to this chapter fails to pay any tax required by this chapter within 30 days after the due date thereof, there shall be added to the tax a penalty of 12 percent of the amount of the tax, and any tax due under this chapter and unpaid, and all penalties thereon, shall constitute an debt to the city and may be collected by court proceedings, which remedy shall be in addition to all other remedies, and shall include reasonable attorneys’ fees. The city may, pursuant to Chapter 19.16 RCW, use a collection agency to collect taxes, interest, and penalties owed or assessed, or it may seek collection by court proceedings, which remedies shall be in addition to all other remedies. (Ord. 2005-035; Ord. 423 § 7, 1981)


5.32.080 Overpayments – Credits – Refunds – Appeals.

Any money paid to the city through error or otherwise not in payment of the tax imposed by this chapter or in excess of such tax shall, upon the request of the taxpayer, be credited against any tax due or to become due from such taxpayer hereunder or, upon the taxpayer ceasing to do business in the city, be refunded to the taxpayer. Any taxpayer aggrieved by the amount of tax, interest, or penalties determined by the clerk or finance director to be due under the provisions of this chapter may appeal such determinations to the city manager. Taxpayers shall be required to remit the amounts determined to be due under this chapter prior to filing an appeal. (Ord. 2005-035; Ord. 423 § 8, 1981) 


5.32.090 Notice of annexation.

Whenever the boundaries of the city are extended by annexation, all persons, firms and corporations subject to this chapter will be provided copies of all annexation ordinances by the city. (Ord. 2005-035; Ord. 423 § 9, 1981)


5.32.100 Unconstitutionality.

The invalidity or unconstitutionality of any provision or section of this chapter shall not render any other provision or section of this chapter invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 2005-035; Ord. 423 § 10, 1981)


5.32.110 Administration.

The city clerk is authorized to adopt, publish and enforce, from time to time, such rules and regulations for the proper administration of this chapter as shall be necessary, and it shall be a violation of this chapter to violate or to fail to comply with any such rule or regulation lawfully promulgated hereunder. (Ord. 2005-035; Ord. 423 § 11, 1981)


5.32.120 False returns.

It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation subject to this chapter to fail or refuse to pay the tax when due, or for any person, firm, or corporation to make any false or fraudulent application or return or any false statement or representation in, or in connection with such return, or to aid or abet another in any attempt to evade payment of the tax, or any part thereof, or to testify falsely upon any investigation of the correctness of a return upon the hearing of an appeal or in any manner hinder or delay the city or any of its officers in carrying out the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2005-035)


5.32.130 Noncompliance – Civil penalty.

Any person, firm, or corporation subject to this chapter who fails or neglects to make tax returns or who makes a false statement or representation in or in connection with a utility tax return, or who otherwise violates or refuses to comply with this chapter, is subject to a cumulative penalty in the amount of $100.00 per day for each violation, in addition to the nonpayment penalty imposed under SMC 5.32.070. All penalties imposed under this chapter shall constitute a debt to the city. The city may, at its discretion, pursuant to Chapter 19.16 RCW, use a collection agency to collect taxes, interest, and penalties owed or assessed pursuant to this chapter, or the city may seek collection by court proceedings, which remedies shall be in addition to all other remedies. (Ord. 2005-035)


Chapter 5.36 WRECKING YARDS

(Repealed by Ord. 2020-004)


Chapter 5.40 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT

Sections:

5.40.010    Purpose and intent.

5.40.020    Findings.

5.40.030    Definitions.

5.40.040    Prohibition.

5.40.050    Regulated uses.

5.40.060    Sexually-oriented business permit required.

5.40.070    Investigation and application.

5.40.080    Issuance of permit.

5.40.090    Licenses for managers and entertainers of sexually-oriented businesses required.

5.40.100    Licenses required for sexually-oriented businesses – Fee.

5.40.110    Licenses for managers and entertainers of sexually-oriented businesses required – Fee.

5.40.120    Licenses for models and escorts.

5.40.130    Manager on premises.

5.40.140    License nontransferable.

5.40.150    License – Posting and display.

5.40.160    Specifications – Adult cabarets and adult theaters.

5.40.170    Standards of conduct and operation applicable to adult cabarets.

5.40.180    Regulations of adult bookstores, novelty stores, arcades and video stores.

5.40.190    Other video store regulations.

5.40.200    Exemptions.

5.40.210    License – Name of business and place of business.

5.40.220    Inspections.

5.40.230    Hours of operation.

5.40.240    Alcohol prohibited.

5.40.250    Barkers prohibited.

5.40.260    Recordkeeping requirements.

5.40.270    Denial, suspension or revocation of license or permit procedures – Appeal.

5.40.275    Suspension or revocation of license/permit – Duration.

5.40.280    Applicability to currently operating businesses.

5.40.290    Limitations of liability.

5.40.300    Penalties for violation.

5.40.310    Public nuisance/injunctions.


5.40.010 Purpose and intent.

It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually-oriented businesses and related activities to promote health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the city of Sequim, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location of sexually-oriented businesses within the city. It is not the intent of the city that it should be the purpose or effect of this chapter to impose a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually-oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent of the city that it should be the effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually-oriented materials protected by the State or Federal Constitutions, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually-oriented material to their intended market. Neither is it the intent of the city that it should be the purpose or effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene materials. (Ord. 2001-023 § 1)


5.40.020 Findings.

Based upon a wide range of evidence presented to the Sequim city council and to other jurisdictions, including but not limited to the testimony of law enforcement officers and members of public, and on other evidence, information, publications, articles, studies, documents, case law and material submitted to and reviewed and considered by the city council and staff, the councils of other cities within the region and in other jurisdictions, nonprofit organizations and other legislative bodies, the city council makes the following findings:

A. Certain conduct occurring on premises offering sexually-oriented business creates secondary impacts that are detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and therefore such conduct must be regulated as provided herein.

B. Regulation of the sexually-oriented business industry through permitting and/or licensing is necessary because, in the absence of such regulation, significant criminal activity has historically and regularly occurred.

C. Proximity between entertainers and patrons during adult entertainment performances can facilitate sexual contact, prostitution and related crimes. Concerns about crime and public sexual activity are legitimate and compelling concerns of the city, which demand reasonable regulation of adult entertainment establishments in order to protect the public health, safety and general welfare.

D. It is necessary to license entertainers in the sexually-oriented industry to prevent the exploitation of minors, to ensure that each such entertainer is an adult, and to ensure that such entertainers have not assumed a false name, which would make regulation of the entertainer difficult or impossible.

E. The evidence supporting the need to protect minors and families from the criminal and other unlawful activities associated with the operation of sexually-oriented businesses is compelling. The provisions of this chapter are necessary to ensure that sexually-oriented uses in Sequim are conducted a reasonable distance away from places where minors regularly gather, often in large numbers.

F. It is necessary to have a licensed manager on the premises of sexually-oriented businesses at such times as such establishments are offering sexually-oriented business so there will, at all necessary times, be an individual responsible for the overall operation of the establishment, including the actions of patrons, entertainers and other employees.

G. The license fees required herein are nominal fees imposed as necessary cost recoupment measures designed to help defray the substantial expenses incurred by the city in regulating the sexually-oriented businesses, and in increased police costs in enforcement.

H. Enterprises providing sexually-oriented businesses are increasingly associated with ongoing prostitution, disruptive conduct and other criminal activity. Such businesses are currently not subject to effective regulation and constitute an immediate threat to the public peace, health and safety. The hours of operation of such businesses have a significant impact on the occurrence of illegal drug transactions and other criminal activities.

I. Due to the information presented regarding the connection of prostitution with sexually-oriented businesses, there is concern over sexually-transmitted diseases, which is a legitimate health concern of the city and thus requires regulation of sexually-oriented businesses in order to protect the health, safety and well being of the public.

J. Many cities, including Seattle and Tacoma, have experienced negative secondary impacts from sexually-oriented business land uses. The skid row effect is one of these secondary impacts and is evident in certain parts of Seattle. Such an effect would be significantly magnified in Sequim due to the difference in size and characteristics of the city.

K. The city of Sequim may rely on the experiences and studies of other cities, counties and organizations in assessing the need for regulation of sexually-oriented business uses, operations and licensing.

L. The city takes notice of studies and experiences of other cities and counties in combating the specific adverse impacts of sexually-oriented businesses.

M. Regulation of sexually-oriented businesses should be developed to prevent deterioration and/or degradation of the vitality of the community before the problem exists, rather than in response to an existing problem.

N. Increased levels of criminal activities occur in the vicinity of sexually-oriented businesses. Additionally, hidden ownership interests for the purpose of skimming profits, avoiding payment of taxes, and racketeering have historically occurred in sexually-oriented businesses, in the absence of regulations.

O. The city council therefore finds that the protection and the preservation of the public health, safety and welfare requires establishment of this chapter.

P. There are sufficient important and substantial government interests to provide a constitutional basis for reasonable regulation of time, place, and manner under which sexually-oriented businesses can operate.

Q. It is not the intent of this chapter to unconstitutionally suppress any speech activities protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution nor Article 1, Section 5 of the Washington State Constitution, but to enact content-neutral ordinances which address the secondary effects of sexually-oriented businesses, as well as the health problems associated with such businesses.

R. In a family community, sexually-oriented businesses are not uniformly compatible with community standards, as defined during the numerous public hearings.

S. The law enforcement resources available for responding to problems associated with or created by sexually-oriented businesses are limited and are best conserved by regulating and licensing sexually-oriented businesses and those associated with them.

T. In order to assure that all conditions, regulations, etc. are met, the city has established a reasonable time period for review of license applications. (Ord. 2001-023 § 1)


5.40.030 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words are defined as follows:

A. “Sexually-oriented business” shall mean those businesses defined as follows:

1. “Adult arcade” shall mean an establishment containing any individual viewing areas or booths, where, for any form of consideration, one or more still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors, or similar machines, or other image producing machines are used to show films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

2. “Adult bookstore,” “adult novelty store,” or “adult video store” shall mean a commercial establishment which has 30 percent or more of its inventory or floor space used for the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of any one or more of the following:

a. Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other visual representations or sexually-oriented paraphernalia or novelty items, which are characterized by the depiction, description or reproduction of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

b. An establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of materials depicting, describing or reproducing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, and still be categorized as adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such establishments from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store so long as 30 percent or more of its inventory or floor space is offering for sale or rental, for some form of consideration, the specified materials which depict or describe specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.

c. Video stores that sell and/or rent video tapes or other photographic reproductions and associated equipment shall come within this definition if 30 percent or more of the inventory or floor space includes the rental or sale of video tapes or other photographic reproductions or associated equipment which are characterized by the depiction, description or reproduction of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

3. “Adult cabaret” shall mean a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served, which features sexually-oriented live entertainment.

4. “Adult motel” means a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment:

a. Which offers sleeping accommodations to the public for any form of consideration and provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; or 

b. Which offers a sleeping room for rent for a rental fee period of time that is less than 20 hours; or 

c. Which allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room for a period of time that is less than 20 hours.

5. “Adult motion picture theater” shall mean a commercial establishment where films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions characterized by the depiction or description of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities are shown for any form of consideration. 

6. “Adult theater” shall mean a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which, for any form of consideration, features persons who appear live in a semi-nude or nude state, or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.

7. “Escort agency” means a person or business association that furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as its business purpose for a fee, tip, or other consideration. This shall not include any escort service offered by a charity or nonprofit organization for medical assistance or assistance to the elderly or infirm.

8. “Nude or semi-nude model studio” shall mean any place where a person who appears nude or semi-nude, or displays specified anatomical areas, is provided for money or any other form of consideration, to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons. 

B. “Barker” shall mean any person who is located at the entrance of or outside of a sexually-oriented business, and attempts to solicit business for the same by using voice or gestures. 

C. “City” means the city of Sequim, Washington.

D. “Director” means the city manager, or designee.

E. “Employee” means any and all persons, including managers, entertainers, and independent contractors who work in or at or render any services directly related to the operation of any sexually-oriented business of live entertainment, adult theater, or adult use establishments, whether or not such person is paid compensation by the operator of said business. 

F. “Entertainer” means any person who provides sexually-oriented live entertainment in an adult cabaret or adult theater, whether or not they are an employee of the business and whether or not a fee is charged or accepted for such entertainment, and whether or not nude, semi-nude or clothed.

G. “Manager” means any person who manages, directs, administers, or is in charge of the affairs and/or the conduct of a sexually-oriented business.

H. “Escort” means a person who provides services for an escort service as defined herein, who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person.

I. “Establishment” shall mean and include any of the following:

1. The opening or commencement of any sexually-oriented business as a new business; or

2. The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually-oriented business, to any sexually-oriented businesses defined herein; or 

3. The addition of any of the sexually-oriented businesses defined herein to any other existing sexually-oriented business; or 

4. The relocation of any such sexually-oriented business; or 

5. An existing sexually-oriented business.

J. “Nude or state of nudity” shall mean the appearance or less than complete and opaque covering of the human anus, male genitals, female genitals, or the areola or nipple of the female breast. 

K. “Operator” shall mean and include the owner, significant stockholder or significant owner of interest, permit holder, custodian, manager, operator, or person in charge of any permitted or licensed premises. 

L. “Permitted and/or licensed premises” shall mean any premises that require a license and/or permit and that is classified as a sexually-oriented business. 

M. “Permittee and/or licensee” shall mean a person in whose name a permit and/or license to operate a sexually-oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a permit and/or license. 

N. “Person” shall mean any individual, firm, joint venture, co-partnership, association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

O. “Semi-nude” shall mean a state of dress in which clothing completely and opaquely covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areola and nipple of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. 

P. “Specified anatomical areas” shall mean and include any of the following:

1. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, anus, or areola of the female breasts or any artificial depiction of the same; or 

2. Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.

Q. “Specified criminal activities” shall mean any conviction for acts which are sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape, or distribution of obscenity or erotic material to minors, prostitution, pandering, or racketeering.

R. “Specified sexual activity” shall mean and include any of the following: 

1. The fondling or other intentional touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; or 

2. Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; or 

3. Masturbation, actual or simulated; or 

4. Human genitals or artificial depictions of the same in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or 

5. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (R)(1) through (4) of this section.

S. “Sexually-oriented live entertainment” means: 

1. Any performance or dance of any type conducted in a commercial premises for a member or members of the public where such exhibition, performance or dance involves a person who is nude or semi-nude; or 

2. Any exhibition, performance, or dance of any type conducted in a commercial premises for a member or members of the public where such exhibition, performance or dance is distinguished or characterized by the performer’s exposure of specified anatomical areas or performance of specified sexual activities; or 

3. Any exhibition, performance or dance intended to sexually stimulate a member of the public where such exhibition, performance or dance is performed for, arranged with, or engaged in with fewer than all members of the public on the premises at the time, with separate consideration paid, either directly or indirectly, for such performance, exhibition or dance.

T. “Obscenity” shall mean the definition of lewd material provided by RCW 7.48.050, including any matter:

1. Which the average person applying contemporary community standards would find when considered as a whole, appeals to the prurient interests in sex; or

2. Which explicitly depicts or describes patently offensive representations or descriptions of: 

a. Ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated; or 

b. Masturbation, fellatio, cunnilingus, bestiality, excretory functions or lewd exhibitions of the genital or genital areas; or 

c. Violent or destructive sexual acts, including, but not limited to, human and or animal mutilation, dismemberment, rape and/or torture; or 

d. Has a dominant theme which appeals to the prurient interests of minors and sex; which is patently offensive because it affronts contemporary community standards relating the description or representation of sexual matters or sadomasochistic abuse; and 

e. Which when considered as a whole lacks serious, literary, artistic, political or scientific value.

U. “Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually-oriented business” shall mean and include any of the following: 

1. The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; or 

2. The transfer of securities which constitutes a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 

3. The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of a person possessing the ownership or control. (Ord. 2001-023 § 1)


5.40.040 Prohibition.

A. For the reasons stated in the recitals and in SMC 5.40.010 and 5.40.020, a person shall not use any property or premises for a sexually-oriented business within the city of Sequim, except as permitted in this chapter.

B. No person shall operate a sexually-oriented business, as defined in this chapter, in any zone district in the city except as specifically permitted or conditionally permitted by SMC Title 18, Zoning.

C. No person shall operate a sexually-oriented business without first being issued a city of Sequim business license as required by Chapter 5.04 SMC. (Ord. 2001-023 § 1)


5.40.050 Regulated uses.

All sexually-oriented businesses are subject to the provisions of SMC 5.40.040 and the regulations contained in this chapter. (Ord. 2001-023 § 1)


5.40.060 Sexually-oriented business permit required.

A. A person may not conduct or operate a sexually-oriented business without a permit issued by the city for the particular type of business.

B. The city manager, or designee, is responsible for granting, denying, revoking, renewing, suspending, and canceling sexually-oriented business permits and related licenses. The city manager, along with the building official and/or his/her/their designee(s) are responsible for ascertaining whether a proposed sexually-oriented business for which a permit and/or license is being applied for complies with all requirements enumerated herein and all other applicable zoning laws and/or regulations now in effect or as amended or enacted subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

C. An application for a sexually-oriented business permit shall be made on a form provided by the city. Each person desiring to operate a sexually-oriented business shall file with the city clerk or designee an application supplied by the city.

D. The completed application shall contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the following documents: 

1. If the applicant is an individual/sole proprietor: 

a. The individual/owner shall state his/her legal name and any aliases, stage names, or previous names, date of birth, positive identification and submit satisfactory proof that he/she is 18 years of age or older, business, mailing address and business telephone number. 

2. If the applicant is a partnership:

a. The partnership shall state its complete name, and the legal names of all partners, including their dates of birth, and submit satisfactory proof that each is 18 years of age and whether the partnership is general or limited, and a copy of the partnership agreement, if any.

3. If the applicant is a corporation:

a. The corporation shall state its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of the state of Washington, the legal names, dates of birth, proof that each is 18 years of age or older and the capacity of all officers, directors and principal stockholders, the name of the registered corporate agent, and the address of the registered office for service of process. 

b. As a part of the application process, each officer, director, or principal stockholder, as defined above, shall provide the city clerk or designee with an affidavit attesting to their identity and relationship to the corporation. Principal stockholders shall mean those persons who own 10 percent or greater interest in the sexually-oriented business.

c. Whether the applicant or a partner, corporate officer, or director of the applicant holds another license under this chapter or a license for a similar live adult entertainment or sexually-oriented business, including a motion picture theater and a panorama, from the jurisdiction of another city or county or state, and, if so, the name and address of each other licensed business. 

d. A summary of the business history of the applicant and applicant control persons in owning or operating the live adult entertainment or other sexually-oriented business, providing names, addresses, and dates of operation for the businesses and whether a business license or live adult entertainment establishment license has been revoked or suspended and the reason for the revocation or suspension.

e. For the applicant and all applicant control persons, all criminal convictions or forfeitures within five years immediately preceding the date of the application, other than parking offenses or minor traffic infractions, including the dates of conviction, nature of the crime, name and location of the court, and disposition. 

f. For the applicant and all applicant control persons, a description of business, occupation, or employment history for the three years immediately preceding the date of the application. 

g. Authorization for the jurisdiction and the jurisdiction’s agents and employees to seek information to confirm statements set forth in the application. 

h. The location and doing-business-as name of the proposed live adult entertainment establishment, including a legal description of the property, street address, and telephone number, together with the name and mailing address of each owner and lessee of the property. 

i. A complete set of fingerprints for the applicant or each applicant control person, taken by the law enforcement agency for the jurisdiction, or such other entity as authorized by the law enforcement agency. 

j. A scale drawing or diagram showing the configuration of the premises for the proposed live adult entertainment establishment, including a statement of the total floor space occupied by the business, and marked dimensions of the interior of the premises. Performance areas, seating areas, manager’s office and stations, restrooms, and service areas must be clearly marked on the drawing. An application for a license for a live adult entertainment establishment must include building plans that demonstrate conformance with the jurisdiction’s building code requirements. 

k. Applicants for a permit and/or license under this chapter shall have a continuing duty to promptly supplement application information required in the event that said information changes in any way from what is stated on the application. The failure to comply with said continuing duty within 30 days from the date of such change by supplementing the application on file with the city finance department shall be grounds for suspension of a permit and/or license.

l. In the event the city manager or designee determines or learns at any time that the applicant has improperly completed the application for a proposed sexually-oriented business permit or license, he/she shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact and allow the applicant 10 days to properly complete the application. (The time period for granting or denying a permit shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is allowed an opportunity to properly complete the application). 

m. The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this section, must have a current city business license, and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with all health, fire, and building codes applicable in the city. 

n. The applicant shall be required to pay a preliminary nonrefundable processing fee established by resolution at the time of filing an application under this section. Note: This is a processing fee. License fees shall also be required in the event the application is approved. 

o. The fact that a person possesses other types of state or city permits and/or licenses does not exempt him/her from the requirement of obtaining a sexually-oriented business permit. 

p. The application form for licenses and permits issued under this chapter shall contain a provision providing that under penalty of perjury the applicant verifies that the information contained therein is true to the best of his/her knowledge.

q. Attached to the license shall be a one-and-one-half-inch by two-inch color photograph of the applicant, including corporate applicants, showing the full face of the same, taken by the city, at a charge of $2.00, to be paid by the applicant at the time of the application. The license, when issued, shall have affixed to it the photograph of the applicant. (Ord. 2001-023 § 1)


5.40.070 Investigation and application.

A. Upon receipt of an application properly filed with the city clerk or designee, and upon payment of the nonrefundable processing fee, the city manager or designee shall immediately stamp the application as received and shall immediately thereafter send photocopies of the application to the various departments of the city or other agencies responsible for enforcement of health, fire, and building codes and laws. Each department or agency shall promptly conduct an investigation of the application and the proposed sexually-oriented business. Said investigation shall be completed within 20 working days of receipt of the application by the city clerk or designee, unless circumstances support extending the same. If so, the city shall inform the applicant of the same and why. At the conclusion of its investigation, an appropriate representative of each department or agency shall indicate on the photocopy of the application its recommendation as to approval or disapproval of the application, date it, sign it, forward it to the city clerk or designee, and in the event that the department or agency recommendation is for disapproval, the specific reasons for the recommendation shall be stated, citing applicable laws, regulations and reasons.

B. A department or agency shall recommend disapproval of an application if it finds that the proposed sexually-oriented business will be in violation of any provision of any statute, code, ordinance, regulation, or other law in effect in the city, or if the applicant does not meet the conditions as specified in this chapter. After its indication of approval or disapproval, each department or agency shall immediately return the photocopy of the application to the city clerk or designee. (Ord. 2001-023 § 1)


5.40.080 Issuance of permit.

A. The city manager or designee shall grant or deny an application for a permit within 30 days from the date of its proper filing unless the city or applicant establishes a good reason for an extension.

B. Grant of Application for Permit. 

1. The city manager or designee shall grant the application unless one or more of the criteria set forth in subsection (C) of this section, Denial of Application for Permit, is present.

2. The permit, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the sexually-oriented business. The permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually-oriented business so that it can be easily read at any time. It shall be valid for the period of time provided in this chapter.

C. Denial of Application for Permit. The city manager or designee shall deny the application for any of the following reasons:

1. An applicant is under 18 years of age or will be employing a person under 18 years of age.

2. An applicant is overdue on his/her payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against him/her or imposed upon him/her in relation to a sexually-oriented business.

3. An applicant has failed to provide information required by this chapter, SMC 5.40.060, or the application for the issuance of the permit, or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form.

4. The applicant has failed to comply with any provision or requirement of this chapter.

5. The applicant has failed to comply with any city codes or other state or federal regulations or court order.

6. The applicant has been convicted, forfeited bail or otherwise had an adverse finding against him or her for a specified criminal activity within the four years prior to the application date. (Ord. 2001-023 § 1)


5.40.090 Licenses for managers and entertainers of sexually-oriented businesses required.

A. A person may not work as a manager, assistant manager, or entertainer at a live adult entertainment establishment without a manager’s or an entertainer’s license issued by the city. An applicant for a manager or entertainer’s license must complete an application on forms provided by the clerk or designee containing the information identified in this subsection. A nonrefundable application fee must accompany the application. The clerk or designee shall provide a copy of the application to the law enforcement agency of the jurisdiction for its review, investigation, and recommendation. An application for a manager or entertainer’s license must be signed by the applicant and certified to be true under penalty of perjury. The manager’s or entertainer’s license application must require the following information:

1. The applicant’s name, mailing address, home telephone number, date and place of birth, fingerprints taken by the law enforcement agency of the jurisdiction or such other entity as authorized by the local law enforcement agency, and any stage names or nicknames used in entertaining;

2. The name and address of each live adult entertainment establishment at which the applicant intends to work; 

3. Documentation that the applicant has attained the age of 18 years. Any two of the following are acceptable as documentation of age: 

a. A motor vehicle operator’s license issued by a state, bearing the applicant’s photograph and date of birth; 

b. A state-issued identification card bearing the applicant’s photograph and date of birth; 

c. A passport issued by the United States of America; 

d. An immigration card issued by the United States of America; or 

e. Other identification that the jurisdiction determines to be acceptable and reliable; 

f. A complete statement of all convictions of the applicant for misdemeanor or felony violations in the jurisdiction or another city, county, or state within five years immediately preceding the date of the application, except parking violations or minor traffic infractions; 

g. A description of the applicant’s principal activities or services to be rendered; 

h. Two two-inch by two-inch color photographs of the applicant, taken within six months of the date of application showing only the full face; and 

i. Authorization for the city and its agents and employees to investigate and confirm statements in the application.

B. The clerk or designee may request additional information or clarification if necessary to determine compliance with this chapter.

C. The contents of an application for an entertainer’s license and any additional information submitted by an applicant for an entertainer’s license are subject to public disclosure under Chapter 42.17 RCW. Nothing in this subsection prohibits the exchange of information among government agencies for law enforcement or licensing purposes.

D. An entertainer shall provide the entertainer’s license to the live adult entertainment establishment manager on duty on the premises before the entertainer’s performance. The manager shall retain the license of the entertainer so as to be readily available for inspection by the jurisdiction during business hours of the live adult entertainment establishment.

E. The clerk or designee shall issue a live adult entertainment establishment manager’s or entertainer’s license within 14 days from the date the complete application and fee are received unless the clerk or designee determines that the applicant failed to provide information required to be supplied according to this chapter, made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application, failed to meet a requirement for issuance of a license under this chapter, failed to comply with any city codes or other state regulations, or has been convicted, forfeited bail or otherwise had an adverse finding against him or her for a specified criminal activity within the four years prior to the application date. If the clerk or designee determines that the applicant does not qualify for the license, then he/she shall deny the application in writing and shall cite the specific reasons for the denial, including applicable laws. If the clerk or designee fails to approve or deny an application for a live adult entertainment establishment manager’s license within 14 days of filing of a complete application, the applicant may, subject to all other applicable laws, commence work as a live adult entertainment establishment until notified by the city designee that the license is denied, but the city designee may not extend the application review time for more than an additional 20 days.

F. An applicant for an entertainer or manager’s license must be issued a temporary license upon receipt of a complete license application and fee. The temporary license automatically expires on the fourteenth day following the filing of the complete license application and fee unless the clerk or designee fails to approve or deny the license application, in which case the temporary license is valid until approval or denial of the application or until the final determination of an appeal from a denial of the application. The city designee may not extend the application review time for more than an additional 20 days. (Ord. 2001-023 § 1)


5.40.100 Licenses required for sexually-oriented businesses – Fee.

A. No sexually-oriented business shall be operated or maintained in the city of Sequim unless the owner or operator has obtained a sexually-oriented business permit as set forth in this chapter, and the applicable licenses from the clerk or designee.

B. The annual fee for a sexually-oriented business license shall be established in resolution, in the amount provided as the annual fee for an adult entertainment business license. The amount shall be used for the cost of administration and enforcement of this chapter.

C. The above-referenced licenses expire on the thirty-first day of December each year. Application for renewal must be made no later than 30 days before expiration.

D. The clerk or designee shall renew a license upon application unless he/she is aware of a fact that would disqualify the applicant from being issued the license for which the applicant seeks renewal and if the application complies with this chapter. The clerk or designee shall provide written notice to the licensee of the decision not to renew the license. The notice must include the reason for the decision not to renew and inform the licensee of the right to appeal the decision to the designated hearing body.

E. The applicant must be 18 years of age or older. (Ord. 2001-023 § 1)


5.40.110 Licenses for managers and entertainers of sexually-oriented businesses required – Fee.

A. No person shall work as a manager or entertainer at any sexually-oriented business without having first obtained the appropriate entertainer or manager’s license from the city, as described above. A nonrefundable processing fee established by resolution shall accompany the application.

B. The annual fee for such a license shall be established by resolution, in the amount provided as the annual fee for an adult entertainer/manager license. The amount shall be used for the cost of administration and enforcement of this chapter.

C. The above-referenced licenses expire one year after the date of issuance or renewal, and must be renewed no later than 14 days prior to the expiration date.

D. The clerk or designee shall renew a license upon application unless he/she is aware of a fact that would disqualify the applicant from being issued the license for which the applicant seeks renewal and if the application complies with this chapter. The clerk or designee shall provide written notice to the licensee of the decision not to renew the license. The notice must include the reason for the decision not to renew and inform the licensee of the right to appeal the decision to the designated hearing body. (Ord. 2001-023 § 1)


5.40.120 Licenses for models and escorts.

No person shall work as a model at a nude or semi-nude model studio or as an escort as defined herein without having first obtained a model or escort license from the clerk or designee.

A. Each such applicant shall complete an application containing the information identified in SMC 5.40.090 and the same procedures shall be followed as set forth in SMC 5.40.110. A nonrefundable processing fee established by resolution shall accompany the application.

B. The annual fee for such a license shall be established by resolution, in the amount provided as the annual fee for an adult entertainer/manager license. The amount shall be used for the cost of administration and enforcement of this chapter.

C. The above-referenced licenses expire one year after the date of issuance or renewal, and must be renewed no later than 14 days prior to the expiration date.

D. The applicant must be 18 years of age or older. (Ord. 2001-023 § 1)


5.40.130 Manager on premises.

A licensed manager shall be on duty at all sexually-oriented business premises at all times, whether the business provides live or other performances. The responsibilities of the manager include but are not limited to:

A. A licensed manager shall be on duty at a live adult entertainment establishment at all times adult entertainment is provided or members of the public are present on the premises. The name and license of the manager must be prominently posted during business hours. The manager is responsible for verifying that a person who provides adult entertainment within the premises possesses a current and valid entertainer’s license.

B. The licensed manager on duty shall not be an entertainer.

C. The manager or an assistant manager licensed under this chapter must maintain visual observation of each member of the public at all times an entertainer is present in the public or performance areas of the live adult entertainment establishment. If there is more than one performance area, or the performance area is of such a size or configuration that one manager or assistant manager is unable to visually observe, at all times, each entertainer, each employee, and each member of the public, a manager or assistant manager licensed under this chapter must be provided for each public or performance area or portion of a public or performance area visually separated from other portions of the live adult entertainment establishment.

D. The manager is responsible for and must ensure that the actions of members of the public, the entertainers, and all other employees comply with this chapter. (Ord. 2001-023 § 1)


5.40.140 License nontransferable.

No license or permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferable. (Ord. 2001-023 § 1)


5.40.150 License – Posting and display.

A. Every entertainer, manager, escort or model shall post his/her license in his/her work area so that it is readily available for public inspection.

B. Every person, corporation, partnership, or association licensed under this chapter shall display its license in a prominent place within the establishment. In the case of adult cabarets, the name of the manager on duty shall be prominently posted during business hours. (Ord. 2001-023 § 1)


5.40.160 Specifications – Adult cabarets and adult theaters.

A. Separation of Sexually-Oriented Live Entertainment Performance Area. The portion of adult cabaret, adult theater or any other premises in which sexually-oriented live entertainment is performed shall be either:

1. A stage or platform, visible to all members of the public at the premises, at least 24 inches in elevation above the level of the patron seating areas, and shall be separated by a distance of at least six feet from all areas of the premises to which patrons have access. A continuous railing at least three feet in height and located at least six feet from all points of the sexually-oriented live entertainment performance area shall separate the performance area and the patron areas; or

2. A private table stage comprised of seating, beverage tray, and entertainment surface. The beverage tray shall be no more than 38 inches from the floor and the performance surface shall be no less than 50 inches above the floor level. Additionally, the outermost edge of the entertainment surface shall be separated from the outermost edge of the beverage tray by no less than 24 inches measured horizontally. All private table stages shall be visible from the entrance of the establishment and from a manager’s station and shall not be obscured by any curtain, door, wall or other enclosure.

B. Lighting. Sufficient lighting shall be provided and equally distributed in and about the parts of the premises which are open to and used by patrons so that all objects are plainly visible at all times, and so that on any part of the premises which are open to and used by patrons a program, menu, or list printed in eight point type will be readable by the human eye with 20/20 vision from two feet away.

C. Submittal of Plans. Building plans and lighting calculations showing conformance with the requirements of this section shall be included with any application for an adult cabaret or adult theater business license. Building plans must be in compliance with all building, planning and other applicable state, local and federal regulations. (Ord. 2001-023 § 1)


5.40.170 Standards of conduct and operation applicable to adult cabarets.

A. Standards for Patrons, Employees and Entertainers. The following standards of conduct must be adhered to by patrons, entertainers and/or employees of adult cabarets at all times live performances are provided: 

1. No employee or entertainer shall be unclothed or in less than opaque and complete attire, costume or clothing so as to expose to view any portion of female breast below the top of the areola or any portion of the pubic region, anus, buttocks, vulva or genitals, except in the performance areas described in SMC 5.40.160(A). 

2. An employee or entertainer mingling with the public may not be unclothed or in less than opaque and complete attire, costume, or clothing as described in subsection (A)(1) of this section. 

3. An employee or entertainer mingling with a member of the public may not conduct a dance, performance, or exhibition in or about the nonperformance area of the live adult entertainment establishment unless that dance, performance, or exhibition is performed at a distance of at least six feet from the member of the public for whom the dance, performance, or exhibition is performed. The distance of six feet is measured from the torso of the dancer to the torso of the member of the public.

4. No patron or customer shall go into or upon the sexually-oriented live performance areas described in SMC 5.40.160(A).

5. No member of the public, employee or entertainer or patron shall allow, encourage, or knowingly permit any person upon the premises to touch, caress, or fondle the breasts, buttocks, anus, pubic area, or genitals of themselves or another.

6. An employee or entertainer may not caress, fondle, or erotically touch a member of the public or another employee. An employee may not encourage or permit a member of the public to caress, fondle, or erotically touch that employee. A member of the public may not caress, fondle or erotically touch an employee or entertainer. 

7. No employee or entertainer shall perform acts of or acts which simulate sexual intercourse, masturbation, bestiality, sodomy, oral copulation, flagellation, or any sexual acts the performance of which are prohibited by law.

8. No employee or entertainer shall use artificial devices or inanimate objects to depict any of the prohibited activities described in this subsection.

9. No entertainer shall be visible from any public place outside the premises during the actual or apparent hours of his/her employment or performance on the premises.

10. No tip or gratuity or other payment offered to or accepted by an adult entertainer may be offered or accepted prior to any performance, dance or exhibition provided by the entertainer. No entertainer performing in the performance area shall be permitted to accept any form of gratuity or other payment offered directly to the entertainer by any patron. Any gratuity or other payment offered to any entertainer performing upon any stage area must be placed upon the stage or platform separation rail, or in the case of private table stages, placed directly upon the table stage surface. Any gratuity or tip or other payment offered to any adult entertainer conducting any performance, dance or exhibition in or about the nonstage area of the adult entertainment establishment shall be placed into a receptacle provided for receipt of gratuities by the adult entertainment establishment or provided through a manger on duty on the premises. 

11. It is unlawful for any entertainer, employee, manager, or waitperson to perform more than one such function at an adult cabaret on the same business day.

12. Except as provided in subsection (A)(10) of this section, no customer or patron of an adult cabaret shall give to an entertainer, either directly or indirectly, or otherwise provide an entertainer with, a gratuity or other payment, except an initial entrance fee or similar fee set out by the premises.

13. Entertainers are required to use separate restroom facilities.

14. At least one sign on each private table stage in English, 12 point print or larger, shall be conspicuously displayed stating the following:

CITY OF SEQUIM ENTERTAINMENT REGULATIONS:

(a) Entertainers may not extend any portion of their body beyond the edge of the performance stage;

(b) Touching or any physical contact is prohibited and may lead to arrest of patron and/or entertainer;

(c) Entertainers are not permitted to accept tips or gratuities or other payments directly from patrons. All tips or gratuities or other payments must be placed upon the stage surface, railing, or placed in common receptacle.

15. At least two additional signs, readable from at least 20 feet distance, shall be posted in the premises. One shall be posted conspicuously at the entrance to the establishment, and the other shall be conspicuously placed within the entertainer’s dressing room. These signs shall state the following:

THE ADULT CABARET OR ADULT THEATER IS REGULATED BY THE CITY OF SEQUIM.

ENTERTAINERS ARE:

(a) Not permitted to engage in any type of sexual conduct.

(b) Not permitted to appear semi-nude or nude except on stage.

(c) Entertainers are not permitted to accept tips or gratuities or other payments directly from patrons. All tips or gratuities or other payments must be placed upon the stage surface, railing, or placed in common receptacle.

(d) Touching between patrons and entertainers is prohibited and may lead to arrest of patron and/or entertainer.

16. There must be at least one employee not an entertainer on duty and situated in any public area at all times that any patron, member or customer is present inside the premises.

17. Doors to areas on the premises which are available for use by persons other than the owner, manager, operator or their agents or employees may not be locked during business hours. 

18. No person may operate or maintain any warning system or device, of any nature or kind, for the purpose of warning or aiding and abetting the warning of patrons, members, customers or any other persons that police officers or health, fire or building inspectors are approaching or have entered the premises.

B. Standards for Owner or Operator of Adult Cabarets or Adult Theaters. At any adult cabaret or adult theater where live performances are provided:

1. Admission must be restricted to persons of the age of 18 years or more pursuant to RCW 9.68A.150, and the identification of all patrons must be checked by the employees of the premises.

2. Sufficient lighting shall be provided in or about the parts of the premises which are open to and used by the public so that all objects are plainly visible at all times, and allows for the reading of a program, menu, or list printed in eight point type by the human eye with 20/20 vision from two feet away.

3. It is unlawful for any manager to perform more than one such function at an adult cabaret on the same business day, and it is unlawful for any manager to allow or permit any entertainer, employee, manager, or waitperson to perform more than one such function at an adult cabaret on the same business day.

4. All prices, costs, charges of any services, performances, products, function or items for which a charge or cost is to be paid shall be listed and identified, in English, on a chart, sign or similar board, of sufficient size to be readable at 20 feet, conspicuously displayed and visible from the entrance area of the establishment. (Ord. 2001-023 § 1)


5.40.180 Regulations of adult bookstores, novelty stores, arcades and video stores.

All adult bookstores, adult novelty stores, adult arcades, or adult video stores having facilities for customers’ viewing of depictions of human nudity and/or specified sexual activity of any nature, including depictions of specified sexual activities, shall comply with the following regulations:

A. Construction/Maintenance.

1. The viewing areas within the sexually-oriented adult arcade premises shall each be visible from the entrance of the establishment and from a manager’s station and shall not be obscured by any curtain, door, wall or other enclosure. As used in this section “viewing area” means the area where a patron or customer would be positioned while watching a film, video or other viewing device. 

2. All areas shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition at all times with sufficient lighting so that all objects are plainly visible at all times or listed print in eight point type will be readable by the human eye with 20/20 vision from two feet away. 

3. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment.

4. No steps or risers are allowed in any adult arcade booth or station.

5. No adult arcade station or booth shall have more than one stool type seat. In order to prevent obscuring the occupant of an adult arcade station or booth from view, no stool for seating within an adult arcade station or booth shall have any seat back or sides.

6. All ventilation devices between the adult arcade booths must be covered by a permanently affixed ventilation cover. Ventilation holes may only be located one foot from the top of the booth walls or one foot from the bottom of the booth walls. There may not be any other holes or openings (“glory holes,” etc.) in the booths.

7. No person may operate any kind of warning device or system for the purpose of warning or aiding or abetting the warning of any patron, employee or other persons that the police, health, fire or building inspector or other public officials are approaching or entering the premises.

8. The licensee shall not permit any doors to public areas on the premises to be                           locked during business hours, in violation of the applicable provisions of the Sequim Building Code, Uniform Fire Code, and National Fire Protection Association Code, or other applicable codes.

9. No person under 18 years of age shall be permitted in such premises. The employees shall check identification of all who enter.

B. Unlawful Conduct. The following conduct or activity is unlawful:

1. Masturbation or sexual activity of any kind in viewing booths.

2. Two or more customers in a viewing booth at the same time.

3. For the owner or manager to knowingly allow any of the disallowed conduct.

4. Noncompliance with any other regulations set forth in this chapter.

C. Signs. At least two signs shall be conspicuously and permanently posted on the premises in readable English type from 10 feet away, advising customers using viewing booths that:

1. Masturbation in such booths is prohibited and unlawful.

2. That it is unlawful for more than one customer to occupy a viewing booth at any time.

3. Violations are subject to criminal prosecution. (Ord. 2001-023 § 1)


5.40.190 Other video store regulations.

Video stores that do not fit the definition of a sexually-oriented business as provided above but that sell or otherwise distribute films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other visual representations which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, and less than 30 percent of their revenues inventory or floor space includes such items, shall be subject to state regulations, and the following:

A. All such items as are described above shall be physically segregated and closed off from other portions of the store such that these items are not visible and/or accessible from other portions of the store.

B. No advertising for such items shall be posted or otherwise visible, except where such items are authorized by law for display.

C. Signs, in English, readable at a distance of 20 feet shall be posted at the entrance to the area where such items are displayed stating that persons under the age of 18 are not allowed access to the area where “erotic” items as defined by state statute and/or court order are displayed.

D. The manager or attendant shall take reasonable steps to monitor the area where such “erotic” items are displayed to ensure that persons under 18 years of age do not access the age-restricted area.

E. Rental or sale of obscene material (as defined herein) shall be considered a moral nuisance, and subject to abatement pursuant to this chapter and RCW 7.48.058.

F. Employees of such video stores shall check identification for the age of all persons renting or purchasing such “erotic” items.

G. The store shall not employ anyone under 18 if the store sells or otherwise distributes films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other visual representations which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. (Ord. 2001-023 § 1)


5.40.200 Exemptions.

This chapter shall not be construed to prohibit:

A. A person appearing in a state of nudity or semi-nudity, modeling in a class operated by: a proprietary school, licensed by the state of Washington; a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; a private college university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or the modeling of clothing or lingerie in a full-service restaurant where no consideration is charged, whether directly or indirectly, specified anatomical areas are opaquely covered and not exposed by the model and the models are not within six feet of any patron of the restaurant;

B. Plays, operas, musicals, or other dramatic works that are not obscene;

C. Classes, seminars, and lectures held for serious scientific or educational purposes that are not obscene; or

D. Exhibitions, performances, expressions or dances that are not obscene. (Ord. 2001-023 § 1)


5.40.210 License – Name of business and place of business.

No person granted a permit and/or license pursuant to this chapter shall operate a sexually-oriented business under a name not specified in his/her license, nor shall he/she conduct business under any designation or at a location not specified in his/her permit and/or license. (Ord. 2001-023 § 1)


5.40.220 Inspections.

A. All books and records required to be kept pursuant to this chapter shall be open to inspection by the chief of police or designee of the city of Sequim during the hours when the licensed premises is open for business. The purpose of such inspection shall be to determine if the books and records meet the requirements of this chapter.

B. The licensed premises shall be (as an implied condition of receiving a sexually-oriented business permit and/or license) open to inspection by the city’s chief of police, fire or health officials, or their designees during the hours when the sexually-oriented business premises is open for business. The purpose of such inspection shall be to determine if the licensed premises is operated in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. It is hereby expressly declared that unannounced inspections are necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 2001-023 § 1)


5.40.230 Hours of operation.

It is unlawful for any sexually-oriented business premises, except adult motels, to be conducted, operated, or otherwise open to the public between the hours of 4:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. (Ord. 2001-023 § 1)


5.40.240 Alcohol prohibited.

Alcoholic beverages are prohibited from being served or present at any business subject to regulation under this chapter. (Ord. 2001-023 § 1)


5.40.250 Barkers prohibited.

The use of “barkers” as defined herein by any sexually-oriented business, or business offering sexually-oriented material, shall be prohibited. (Ord. 2001-023 § 1)


5.40.260 Recordkeeping requirements.

A. Within 30 days following each calendar quarter, each sexually-oriented business licensee shall file with the clerk or designee a verified report showing the licensee’s gross receipts and amounts paid to entertainers, models, or escorts, if applicable, by quarter for the preceding calendar year.

B. Each sexually-oriented business licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of two years from the date of termination of employment the names, addresses, Social Security numbers and ages of all persons employed or otherwise retained as entertainers, models, and escorts by the licensee. (Ord. 2001-023 § 1)


5.40.270 Denial, suspension or revocation of license or permit procedures – Appeal.

A. When the clerk or designee refuses to grant a license or permit, or revokes or suspends the same, the applicant must be notified in writing, describing the reasons for the revocation or suspension, and of applicant’s right to appeal to the city hearing examiner.

B. Whenever the clerk or designee has found or determined that any violation or change in circumstances of this chapter has occurred, the clerk or designee will issue a notice of violation and suspension or revocation (“notice”) to the licensee or permit holder.

The notice must include the following:

1. Name(s) of person(s) involved.

2. Description of the violation(s), including date and section of this chapter violated.

3. Description of the administrative action taken.

4. Rights of appeal as set forth in Chapter 2.10 SMC.

The notice must be served personally or by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to licensee’s last known address. Proof of personal service must be made at the time of service by a written declaration under penalty of perjury, executed by the person effecting the service, declaring the time, date, and the manner by which service was made. The decision may be appealed to the city hearing examiner in the manner described in Chapter 2.10 SMC.

C. The suspension or revocation of a license must be immediately effective unless a stay is specifically requested in the written request for an appeal.

D. Upon receiving a timely notice of appeal, the city clerk will forward the administrative record of the licensing decision to the city hearing examiner pursuant to Chapter 2.10 SMC.

E. Appeals under this title are handled pursuant to Chapter 2.10 SMC.

F. The hearing examiner’s decision constitutes the final administrative review.

G. Either party may seek judicial review of the hearing examiner’s final decision as provided by law. (Ord. 2019-004 (Exh. B); Ord. 2001-023 § 1)


5.40.275 Suspension or revocation of license/permit – Duration.

A. The city shall suspend any license as required by this chapter for a period of 30 days upon the licensee’s first violation of this chapter or other applicable ordinances, statutes, or regulations.

B. The city shall suspend any license required by this chapter for a period of 90 days upon the licensee’s second violation within a 24-month period of this chapter or other applicable ordinances, statutes or regulations.

C. The city shall revoke any license required by this chapter for a period of two years upon the licensee’s third, or any subsequent, violation of this chapter or other applicable ordinances, statutes or regulations.

D. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter, the city shall revoke or deny the renewal of any license required by this chapter for two years if the licensee has made any false or misleading statements or misrepresentations to the city.

E. Application for a new license may be made following the expiration of the applicable revocation period. (Ord. 2001-023 § 1)


5.40.280 Applicability to currently operating businesses.

Any sexually-oriented business legally operating upon the effective date of this chapter shall be exempted from the permit and application requirements of SMC 5.40.060, 5.40.070 and 5.40.080 for the remainder of 2001. This section shall not be construed to exempt any legally operating adult bookstore from ceasing to operate portions of such business as an adult arcade pursuant to other regulations. (Ord. 2001-023 § 1)


5.40.290 Limitations of liability.

None of the provisions of this chapter are intended to create a cause of action or provide the basis for a claim against the city, its officials, or employees for the performance or the failure to perform a duty or obligation running to a specific individual or specific individuals. Any duty or obligation created herein is intended to be a general duty or obligation running in favor of the general public. (Ord. 2001-023 § 1)


5.40.300 Penalties for violation.

Any person violating any provision(s) of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person convicted of such a violation shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000 or a jail term of not more than 90 days, or both. Each such person is guilty of a separate misdemeanor for each and every day which any violation of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted by any such person and said person shall be punished accordingly. Any persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall also be subject to license suspension or revocation and nuisance abatement as set forth herein. (Ord. 2001-023 § 1)


5.40.310 Public nuisance/injunctions.

Any sexually-oriented businesses in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a public nuisance, which, in addition to all other remedies, may be abated by injunctive relief. (Ord. 2001-023 § 1)


Title 6 ANIMAL CONTROL*

Chapters:

6.02    General Provisions

6.04    Dogs and Cats

6.06    Potentially Dangerous and Dangerous Dogs

6.08    Livestock

6.10    Rabies and Quarantine

6.11    Impound Procedures

6.12    Enforcement and Penalties

6.13    Kennels and Catteries

6.14    Animal Cruelty

6.15    Inherently Dangerous Animals

6.16    Fees and Costs

*Code reviser’s note: Ord. 2000-024 readopts the provisions of Ord. 99-007, codified in this title.


Chapter 6.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

6.02.010    Purpose.

6.02.015    Definitions.

6.02.020    Liability for damages.

6.02.030    Responsibility for payment of costs and fees.

6.02.040    Animal shelter.

6.02.045    Disposal of animal carcasses.

6.02.050    Agreements.

6.02.060    Severability.

6.02.070    Effective date.


6.02.010 Purpose.

It is the public policy of the city of Sequim to secure and maintain reasonable levels of animal control within the incorporated areas of the city. To this end, it is the purpose of this title to provide a means of controlling errant animal behavior so that it shall not become a public nuisance.

Nothing in this title shall be construed as creating any duty on the part of the city to protect human health and safety, injury to property, or prevent a nuisance.

It is also the policy of the city of Sequim to prevent the inhumane treatment of animals. Therefore, it is also the purpose of this title to provide for the humane use, care, and treatment of animals to the end that cruelty to such animals will be reduced or eliminated. (Ord. 99-007)


6.02.015 Definitions.

In construing the provisions of this title, except where otherwise plainly declared or clearly apparent from the context, words used herein shall be given their common and ordinary meaning; in addition, the following definitions shall apply:

1. “Abandon” means to desert, leave behind, or quit providing for an animal.

2. “Abatement” means the termination of any violation by reasonable and lawful means determined by the animal control officer in order that a person or persons presumed to be the owner shall comply with this chapter.

3. “Abuse” means to mistreat or wrongfully use an animal.

4. “Adult dog or cat” means any dog or cat over the age of six months.

5. “Agent of the owner of livestock” means any person who rents pasture to the owner of livestock, or any tenant of any person who rents pasture to the owner of livestock, or any person who is the caretaker of the pasture or livestock.

6. “Ameliorate” means to make or become better; improve.

7. “Animal” means any domestic animal as defined in SMC 6.02.015(18), any inherently dangerous animal kept by any person as defined in SMC 6.02.015(29) and (30), and all livestock as defined in SMC 6.02.015(34).

8. “Animal control authority” means the city of Sequim acting alone or in concert with other local governmental units for enforcement of the animal control laws of the city and state and the shelter and welfare of animals.

9. “Animal control officer” means any individual employed, contracted or appointed by the animal control authority for the purpose of aiding in the enforcement of this title or any other law or ordinance relating to the licensing of animals, control of animals or seizure and impoundment of animals. Animal control officer includes any state or local law enforcement officer, deputy sheriff, or other employee whose duties in whole or in part include assignments which involve the enforcement of animal control laws. Animal control officer also includes those humane society employees authorized by the court, pursuant to RCW 16.52.011, to enforce animal control laws.

10. “Animal shelter” means a facility which is used to house or contain stray, homeless, abandoned or unwanted animals and which is owned, operated or maintained by a public body, an established humane society, animal welfare society, society for the prevention of cruelty to animals or other nonprofit organization or person devoted to the welfare, protection and humane treatment of animals.

11. “Bite” means the act of the animal’s teeth seizing, penetrating human or animal skin or clothing. 

12. “Canine” means a Canis familaris, bred in a great many varieties, and includes both male and female, and hereafter referred to as “dog.”

13. “Commercial kennel or cattery” means:

a. Any establishment, person, or business which takes in for resale or boarding another person’s dogs or cats.

b. Any establishment, person, or business which produces for sale more than three litters of cats or dogs per year.

14. “Committed” means a notice of civil infraction was issued, and the infraction was not dismissed by the court, and the court entered a default judgment for the infraction or determined that the infraction was committed, regardless of the filing of any appeal by the violator, or the violator fails to respond to a notice of civil infraction.

15. “Cruelty” means every act or failure to act which results in unnecessary physical pain or suffering to an animal.

16. “Director” means the chief of police or his/her designee.

17. “District court” means Sequim municipal court, which functions through the Clallam County District Court, Division 1.

18. “Domestic animal” means those domestic animals such as any dog, cat, rabbit, bird, or other such animal normally kept as a pet.

19. “Equestrian” means a person who is riding or leading any horse.

20. “Euthanasia” means the humane destruction of an animal accomplished by a method that involves instantaneous unconsciousness and immediate death, or by a method that causes painless loss of consciousness and death during such loss of consciousness.

21. “Feline” means a Felis catus, bred in a great many varieties, and includes both male and female, and hereafter referred to as “cat.”

22. “Feral” means any wild animal or any animal having escaped from domestication and becoming wild. 

23. “Harboring” means allowing any animal to remain, be lodged, fed, or sheltered on the property one owns, occupies or controls, for more than 24 hours.

24. “Harboring of an inherently dangerous mammal and/or inherently dangerous reptile” means to allow an inherently dangerous mammal or inherently dangerous reptile to remain, lodge, be fed, or to be given shelter or refuge within the person’s home, store, yard, enclosure, outbuilding, abandoned vehicle or building, place of business, or any other premises in which the person resides or over which the person has control.

25. “Horse” means a domesticated equine, bred in a great many varieties, and includes other animals such as mules and jackasses.

26. “Hours of darkness” means the hours from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise, and any other time when persons or objects may not be clearly discernible at a distance of 200 feet.

27. “Humane trapping” means capturing any animal without causing intentional injury or death to the animal, and providing reasonable protection and care for the animal until it is delivered to a shelter or turned over to the animal control officer or owner.

28. “Infraction” means an offense which is not a crime and is subject to the provisions of this chapter.

29. “Inherently dangerous mammal” means any live member of the canidae, felidae, or ursidae families, including hybrids thereof, which, due to their inherent nature, may be considered dangerous to humans, and which includes:

a. Canidae, including any member of the dog (canid) family not customarily domesticated by man, or any hybrids thereof, such as wolf hybrids, but not including domestic dogs (Canis familiaris).

b. Felidae, including any member of the cat family not customarily domesticated by man, or any hybrids thereof, but not including domestic cats (Felis catus).

c. Ursidae, including any member of the bear family, or any hybrids thereof.

30. “Inherently dangerous reptile” means any live member of the class reptilia which:

a. Is venomous, including, but not necessarily limited to, all members of the following families: Helodemidae (beaded lizards – gila monster, Mexican beaded lizard), 

Viperidae (vipers and adders), Crotalidae (pit vipers), Altractaspididae (mole vipers), Hydrophilidae (sea snakes), and Elapidae (cobras); or

b. Is a “rear fanged” snake of the family Colobridae (rear fanged snakes) that are known to be dangerous to humans, including, but not necessarily limited to, all members of the following families: Dispholidus typous (boomslang snake), Thebtornis kirtlandii (twig snake), and Rhabdophis spp. (speckled belly keelback and red-necked keelback); or

c. Is a member of the order Crocodilia (crocodiles, alligators and caimans).

31. “Lawful fence,” in addition to the description of lawful fence described in the Revised Code of Washington, shall mean any fence or physical barrier with the capability of safely holding/restraining the animal(s) being secured within.

32. “Leash” means a chain, rope, leather strip, nylon strip, or other device no longer than 20 feet that is in good condition and capable of holding/restraining the animal to which it is attached.

33. “Leash control” means a dog is on a leash and under human control.

34. “Livestock” means horses, mules, jackasses, cattle, sheep, llamas, goats, swine, poultry and rabbits. 

35. “Microchip” means a commercially sold and nationally recognized, and registered with the city or Clallam County, small, magnetic device commonly inserted under the skin of an animal and which contains a magnetic or electronic animal identification number.

36. “Neglect” means the act of leaving an animal without food, water, or care in a situation where the conditions present an immediate, direct, and serious threat to the life, safety, or health of the animal.

37. “Notice of violation” means a verbal warning, or a written warning, or a civil notice of infraction.

38. “Notification” means the service of a notice on the animal’s owner, any resident of the owner’s residence, or the mailing of the notice by certified and regular mail.

39. “Owner” means any person, firm, corporation, organization, or department possessing, harboring, keeping, having interest in, or having control or custody of an animal. Owner also means any person, firm, corporation, organization or department having interest in or having control or custody of property.

40. “Poultry” means chickens, turkeys, ratites, and other domesticated fowl.

41. “Premises” means any house, dwelling unit, or building and the curtilage surrounding it.

42. “Private kennel or cattery” means any establishment, person, or business having more than 10 adult dogs, 10 adult cats, or a combination thereof, and producing no more than three litters of dogs or cats for sale per year.

43. “Proper enclosure of a dangerous dog” means while on the owner’s property a dangerous dog shall be securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure, suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the animal from escaping. Such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top, and shall also provide protection from the elements for the dog.

44. “Public roadway” means that portion of a highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic.

45. “Quarantine” means the placing and restraining of any animal by agents in charge thereof, within a certain described and designated enclosure or area within the county, as may be directed by the animal control officer.

46. “Rabies vaccination certificate” means a rabies vaccination certificate issued by a licensed veterinarian. The certificate shall be signed by the veterinarian and shall indicate the expiration date of the vaccination and the type of vaccine used.

47. “Ratite” means ostrich, emu, rhea, or other flightless bird.

48. “RCW” means Revised Code of Washington.

49. “Responsive to voice control” means immediately responsive to the owner by voice or other signal.

50. “Right-of-way” means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.

51. “Running at large” means to be off the premises of the owner and not under the control of the owner or competent person authorized by the owner.

52. “Running in packs” means a group of three or more dogs running upon either public or private property not that of its owner in a state in which either its control or ownership is in doubt or cannot readily be ascertained, and when such dogs are not restrained or controlled.

53. “Severe injury” means any physical injury that results in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery, or multiple bites to a human.

54. “Shelter officer” means any individual employed by a shelter for the purpose of controlling and providing care for impounded and surrendered animals or destroying animals by euthanasia.

55. “Under control” means the animal is under leash control so as to be thereby restrained from approaching any other person, other animal, or entering upon the property of another and from causing or being the cause of physical injury or property damage; provided, that dogs under proper supervision engaged in agricultural activities, or dogs used by law enforcement agencies, or any animal when otherwise safely and securely confined or completely controlled within or upon any vehicle, are considered under control.

56. “Vehicle” means every device, including bicycles, capable of being moved upon a public or private roadway and in, upon, or by which any person may be transported.

57. “Working dog” means any dog which is trained to be used for the control, protection or herding of livestock for farming purposes and which is so engaged and behaving according to its training.

58. “Zoonotic” means a disease communicable under natural conditions from animals to humans. (Ord. 99-007)


6.02.020 Liability for damages.

The owner of any animal in violation of this title shall be liable to the owner of any animal killed or injured, any property damaged, or to any person injured by such animal for the amount of damages sustained and costs of collection, to be recovered in a civil action; except, that this section is not intended to place liability on the owner of any animal if the injury or damages were sustained by a person who at the time was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner of the animal, or was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the animal, or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. (Ord. 99-007)


6.02.030 Responsibility for payment of costs and fees.

It is the responsibility of the owner of every animal treated, impounded, and/or destroyed under this title to pay the costs of treatment, transportation, housing, impoundment, euthanasia and fees for such animal. Abandonment of the animal does not relieve the owner of such responsibility.

It is unlawful for the owner of animals treated, impounded, and/or adopted pursuant to the provisions of this title to fail to or refuse to pay the impound fees; transportation, boarding, veterinary care, licensing, adoption, euthanasia costs; or other required fees or costs as set forth in the title. (Ord. 2001-014 § 2; Ord. 99-007)


6.02.040 Animal shelter.

A. There shall be one or more animal shelters within the county for detaining animals surrendered to or apprehended by the animal control officer.

B. The animal shelter shall have facilities for housing animals that are injured or ill, or possibly contagious with infectious disease; facilities for housing dogs and cats under quarantine; and facilities for the humane destruction of animals by euthanasia.

C. The animal control authority shall operate said shelter(s), or contract with a public or private or nonprofit organization, for shelter services.

D. Shelter officers employed by the designated shelter shall have the authority to collect license fees as set forth in SMC 6.16.010, and impound fees and costs as set forth in SMC 6.16.030.

E. No animal at the shelter shall be used, sold, loaned or given away for medical or research purposes whether the animal is dead or alive. (Ord. 99-007)


6.02.045 Disposal of animal carcasses. 

It shall be unlawful to dispose of or dump dead animals, animal carcasses, or animal parts on public property or private property other than one’s own, without the permission of the owner. It shall be unlawful for a commercial establishment charging for the disposal of animals to dispose of animals by dumping or burying without proper permits. Violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor. (Ord. 99-007)


6.02.050 Agreements.

The city council of the city of Sequim may enter into agreements with any veterinarian, governmental agency, city, corporation or individual it deems necessary to carry out the provisions of the title. (Ord. 99-007)


6.02.060 Severability.

If any portion of this title is held invalid, it is the intent of the city council of the city of Sequim that such part shall be deemed severable and the invalidity thereof shall not affect the remaining parts of this title. (Ord. 99-007)


6.02.070 Effective date. 

This title shall take effect 10 days after adoption; except, that the mandatory licensing requirements contained in SMC 6.04.015 shall take effect on July 1, 1999. (Ord. 99-007)


Chapter 6.04 DOGS AND CATS

Sections:

6.04.010    Dog control zone.

6.04.015    Dog licensing – Regulations – Universal license.

6.04.020    Civil violations.

6.04.025    Dog(s) kept outside.

6.04.030    Control of dogs – Civil violations.

6.04.035    Unlawful release.

6.04.040    Animal waste – Owner responsibility.

6.04.045    Voluntary cat licensing –Regulations.

6.04.050    Control of cats – Civil violations.

6.04.060    Humane trapping or catching of dogs and cats – Procedure.


6.04.010 Dog control zone. 

All of incorporated city of Sequim shall be designated a dog control zone in accordance with Chapter 16.10 RCW. (Ord. 99-007)


6.04.015 Dog licensing – Regulations – Universal license.

A. All dogs over the age of six months shall be licensed. A license is valid for one year from the date of purchase. The city may establish a license for microchipped and spayed or neutered dogs that is valid for the life of the dog. A late penalty shall be added if the owner fails to renew an expired license within 30 days of license expiration. There shall be a fee for replacement of any lost license tag. License fees may be paid to either city or private licensing outlets as designated by the city manager or by the city manager’s designee. An approved service charge in addition to the regularly set fees may be collected and retained by all private licensing outlets so designated for each dog license issued. Upon payment of the license fee, the licensing outlet shall give the owner of such dog a license and a metallic tag for each dog licensed and shall transmit the license form to the animal control authority who shall maintain records of all licenses.

B. The city of Sequim agrees to accept the Clallam County universal license to fulfill the city’s animal licensing requirements. City of Sequim lifetime licenses already issued shall continue to be accepted or a Clallam County universal license may be issued in its place, at the owner’s expense, at the same cost as a replacement tag.

C. All licenses issued pursuant to the chapter shall be dated and numbered, and shall bear the name “Clallam County universal license” and include the name and address of the owner of the dog and a description of the dog. If the owner presents proof that the dog is microchipped, the microchip number will be recorded on the license. A metallic tag bearing a serial number corresponding to the owner of the dog will be issued to the owner. 

D. It shall be the duty of every owner to attach the valid metallic license tag to the collar worn by his/her dog when the dog is off the owner’s property. A dog with permanent, readily scannable microchip identification shall not be required to wear a collar with the metallic license tag attached; except, that neither the city nor the animal shelter shall be liable for the failure of a scanner to detect the presence of a microchip.

E. Upon the sale or other transfer of ownership of any dog, the dog shall be relicensed by the new owner.

F. All license fees, late penalties, and service charges collected under the provisions of this section, other than civil penalties and criminal fines, are set forth in SMC 6.16.010, the city fee and rate code and ordinance, or, for license fees, the Clallam County Code.

G. Exceptions. Licenses are not required in the following circumstances:

1. Nonresidents temporarily residing in the city of Sequim for a period of less than 60 days.

2. Dogs held for rehabilitation by a recognized rescue organization; except, that such dogs cannot be bred or held for longer than 90 days without licensing. (Ord. 2010-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 99-007)


6.04.020 Civil violations. 

The following dog licensing regulations are designed to protect public health and safety and welfare of dogs. The owner of a dog shall license his/her dog as required in SMC 6.04.015. The violation of SMC 6.04.015(C), (D) or (E) is a Class 1 civil infraction. It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the following regulations:

A. Owning an unlicensed dog over the age of six months;

B. Owning a dog over the age of six months that is off its owner’s property while not wearing a collar with a current valid metallic license tag attached, or I.D. not otherwise permanently identified with a microchip that can be correlated with a license number, as provided for in SMC 6.04.015(C);

C. Owning a dog wearing a license tag registered to another dog;

D. Falsely representing whether any dog is neutered, nonneutered, spayed, nonspayed, or microchipped for the purpose of securing a dog license. (Ord. 99-007)


6.04.025 Dog(s) kept outside. 

Every dog kept or left outdoors shall have food, water, and shelter available.

A. Food and water shall be available daily.

B. Shelter shall be available at all times and shall consist of a structure which has a watertight roof and is capable of protecting the dog from the elements. The structure must be large enough for the dog to enter, be able to stand up, turn around, and lay inside. (Ord. 99-007)


6.04.030 Control of dogs – Civil violations.

The following dog control regulations are designed to protect public health and safety and welfare of dogs. The owner of a dog is strictly liable to control his/her dog as required herein. This means that the penalty for violation of these regulations is imposed without regard to any wrongful intention of the violator. The violation of subsection (A) of this section is a Class 1 civil infraction. It is unlawful for the owner of a dog to fail to prevent said dog from:

A. Inflicting a bite on a human or animal (except poultry, rabbits, and cats that are allowed to roam off their owner’s property);

B. Running at large;

C. Not being under control while off the owner’s property;

D. Entering any place where food is stored, prepared, served or sold to the public, or any public building or hall. This subsection shall not apply to any dog serving the blind or deaf, or to dogs used by armored car services, private security companies, or law enforcement agencies;

E. Being accessible to other dogs, while in heat, for purposes other than controlled or planned breeding;

F. Chasing, running after or jumping at vehicles using public roadways; 

G. Snapping, growling, snarling, barking in a threatening manner or jumping upon, chasing or otherwise threatening persons while the dog is not restrained and is off the property of the owner;

H. Howling, yelping, whining, barking, or making other noises in such a manner as to disturb any person or groups of persons to an unreasonable degree; except, that working dogs as defined in SMC 6.02.015 are exempted. The following examples constitute prima facie evidence of disturbing a person or group to an unreasonable degree; provided, however, these examples are not exclusive:

1. Two or more complaints from different complainants within a 24-hour period;

2. Barking, howling, yelping, or whining for more than one hour;

3. Prolonged barking between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.;

I. Entering upon another person’s property without the authorization of that person; 

J. Being kept, harbored or maintained and known to have a contagious disease unless under the treatment of a licensed veterinarian;

K. Running in packs while off the owner’s property;

L. Damaging or destroying the property of another person, including destroying wildlife that has purposefully been attracted to the person’s property;

M. Being staked, tethered or kept on public property for longer than one hour without prior consent of the animal control officer;

N. Entering another’s property and injuring or killing any poultry and rabbits that are housed in an adequate enclosure or cats that are in their owner’s property. (Ord. 99-007)


6.04.035 Unlawful release. 

It is unlawful for a person to release any animal not belonging to them from a tether line, run, chain, fenced area, or other means used to restrain/secure the animal. The only exception would be if failure to release the animal would result in injury or death to the animal. (Ord. 99-007)


6.04.040 Animal waste – Owner responsibility.

The owner of any dog which defecates while off its owner’s property shall pick up, bag, and properly dispose of the waste. (Ord. 99-007)


6.04.045 Voluntary cat licensing –Regulations.

A. Any cat may be licensed at the option of the owner. License fees may be paid to either city or private licensing outlets as designated by the city manager. A service charge in addition to the regularly set fees may be collected and retained by all private licensing outlets designated by the city manager for each cat license issued. Upon payment of the license fee, the licensing outlet shall give the owner of such cat a license and metallic tag for each cat licensed.

B. All license fees and service charges collected under provisions of this section are set forth in SMC 6.16.010. (Ord. 99-007)


6.04.050 Control of cats – Civil violations.

The following cat control regulations are designed to protect public health and safety and welfare of cats. The owner of a cat is strictly liable to control his/her cat as required herein. This means that the penalty for violation of these regulations is imposed without regard to any wrongful intention of the violator. It is unlawful for the owner of a cat to fail to prevent said cat from:

A. Being accessible to other cats, while in heat, for purposes other than controlled or planned breeding;

B. Being kept, harbored or maintained and known to have a contagious disease unless under the treatment of a licensed veterinarian;

C. Being a threat to the safety of humans and/or other domestic animals;

D. Inflicting a bite on a human; damaging or destroying the property of another person, including destroying wildlife that has purposefully been attracted to the person’s property. (Ord. 99-007)


6.04.060 Humane trapping or catching of dogs and cats – Procedure.

Any person 18 years of age or older may humanely trap or catch any dog or cat that has entered the premises of that person’s property without the authority of that person. After trapping or catching any dog or cat the person shall deliver it to the city shelter or turn it over to the animal’s owner or the animal control officer within 24 hours. (Ord. 99-007)


Chapter 6.06 POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS AND DANGEROUS DOGS

Sections:

6.06.005    Definitions.

6.06.010    Potentially dangerous dog – Reasons to declare – Exceptions.

6.06.020    Dangerous dog – Reasons to declare.

6.06.030    Declaration of dangerous or potentially dangerous dog – Notice, hearing, and appeal.

6.06.040    Potentially dangerous dog – Registration, requirements, annual fee.

6.06.050    Dangerous dog – New declarations – Existing declarations.

6.06.060    Potentially dangerous dog – Proper restraint and enclosure.

6.06.070    Dangerous dogs – Requirements for restraint and enclosure.

6.06.080    Potentially dangerous or dangerous dog – Ownership.

6.06.090    Potentially dangerous or dangerous dog – Violations and penalties.

6.06.100    Provocation as a defense.

6.06.110    List of potentially dangerous and dangerous dogs.


6.06.005 Definitions.

For purposes of this chapter, the definitions codified in RCW 16.08.070 as now enacted and as amended are incorporated into this chapter by reference.

For purposes of this chapter, “off the owner’s property” does not include any dog lawfully utilizing the city’s dog park. (Ord. 2017-020 § 1 (Exh. A))


6.06.010 Potentially dangerous dog – Reasons to declare – Exceptions.

The animal control officer may declare as potentially dangerous any dog that:

A. When unprovoked, inflicts a bite that penetrates the skin on a human or domestic animal or livestock (except poultry, rabbits and cats that are allowed to roam off the owner’s property);

B. When unprovoked, chases or threatens a person upon any property other than the owner’s in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack;

C. Has been declared potentially dangerous by any other governmental jurisdiction for similar violations of state statutes or local ordinances; or

D. Chases, harries or harasses domestic animals, livestock, or game animals while the dog is off the owner’s property;

Except that:

E. Dogs will not be declared potentially dangerous if the threat, injury, or damage was sustained by a person who (1) at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the dog’s owner; (2) was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog or has in the past been observed or reported to have tormented, abused, or assaulted the dog; or (3) was committing or attempting to commit a crime. (Ord. 2017-020 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 99-007)


6.06.020 Dangerous dog – Reasons to declare. 

The animal control officer may declare as dangerous any dog that has:

A. Inflicted severe injury on a human being without provocation;

B. Killed a domestic animal or livestock (except poultry, rabbits, or cats that are allowed to roam off the owner’s property);

C. Been previously found to be potentially dangerous and the owner has been properly notified and the dog again bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans or domestic animals; or

D. Been declared dangerous by any other governmental jurisdiction for similar violations of state statutes or local ordinances. (Ord. 2017-020 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 99-007)


6.06.030 Declaration of dangerous or potentially dangerous dog – Notice, hearing, and appeal.

A. Whenever the animal control officer finds any dog in violation and determines that the dog should be declared dangerous or potentially dangerous, the officer will prepare a notice declaring the dog to be dangerous or potentially dangerous, and serve the notice by personal service or by regular and certified mail, return receipt requested, on the dog’s owner. If the notice cannot be personally served or the owner refuses to accept mail, the notice may be prominently posted on the owner’s residence. The notice must contain the following:

1. The name and address of the owner of the dog being declared potentially dangerous;

2. The breed, color, sex, and license number (if known) of the dog;

3. The facts upon which the determination of potentially dangerous dog is based;

4. That the dog immediately be restrained as required in SMC 6.06.060 or 6.06.070;

5. That the potentially dangerous dog must be registered with the city animal control officer within 10 calendar days of receiving the notice, unless a hearing is requested as provided for in subsection (A)(7) of this section;

6. In the case of a potentially dangerous dog, that if there are future similar problems with the dog, the dog could be declared dangerous pursuant to SMC 6.06.020 and required to be registered as provided for in SMC 6.06.050;

7. That the notice constitutes a final determination that the dog is dangerous or potentially dangerous, unless the owner of the dog requests a hearing within 10 calendar days of service of the notice. An owner is deemed “served” notice on the date that (a) the owner is personally served; (b) the owner’s property is posted; or (c) the date the notice is deposited with the United States Postal Service. An owner is deemed to have “received” the notice (a) upon the date of personal service or posting the owner’s property, or (b) three days after depositing the notice with the United States Postal Service. Owners may submit hearing requests in writing to the Clallam County district court. Hearing requests must contain enough information to allow the court clerk to adequately identify the incident subject to the hearing request and accurate contact information for the owner.

B. If the dog’s owner requests a hearing as provided for in subsection (A)(7) of this section, a hearing will be held within 30 calendar days of the receipt of the hearing request, unless it is continued for good cause or as agreed upon by the parties. The animal control officer will notify the owner of the date, time and place of the hearing, and the right to present evidence as to why the dog should not be declared dangerous or potentially dangerous. The hearing will be held before the Clallam County district court. The hearing will be informal and open to the public. At the hearing, the animal control officer’s records are admissible evidence as to whether the dog is dangerous or potentially dangerous. The dog’s owner may require the animal control officer to be present at the hearing and may present evidence and examine witnesses present. The burden of proof is on the animal control officer to establish by a preponderance of the evidence that the dog is dangerous or potentially dangerous.

C. The district court will provide the dog’s owner with the judge’s written decision within 10 days of the hearing. The district court decision may be appealed as provided under the general laws of the state of Washington.

D. If the potentially dangerous dog declaration is upheld, the owner has 10 days from the notification date to comply with the registration requirements set forth in SMC 6.06.040.

E. If the dangerous dog declaration is upheld, the owner has 30 calendar days to comply with SMC 6.06.050(A).

F. A finding that a dog is not potentially dangerous or dangerous does not prevent the animal control officer from seeking to have the dog declared dangerous or potentially dangerous as the result of any subsequent action by the dog. (Ord. 2017-020 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 99-007)


6.06.040 Potentially dangerous dog – Registration, requirements, annual fee.

A. The owner of a dog declared potentially dangerous must register the dog and pay the initial registration fee as set forth in SMC 6.16.020(A) within 10 calendar days of notification as provided for in SMC 6.06.030, unless a hearing has been timely requested.

B. The city may require the owner of a dog being declared potentially dangerous to have the dog equipped with a microchip at the owner’s sole expense. This can be done through a local veterinarian. If required, proof of microchipping and the microchip number must be presented to the animal control officer when licensing the dog.

C. The owner of a dog declared potentially dangerous must renew the registration annually and pay the renewal fee for the calendar year as set forth in SMC 6.16.020(B).

D. A dog license fee already paid by the owner, as set forth in SMC 6.16.010, will not be applied toward the cost of the initial registration; however, on the second and subsequent calendar years the cost of renewal includes licensing.

E. Any potentially dangerous dog for which a certificate of registration or renewal has not been obtained by its owner is subject to being impounded by the animal control authority. The owner bears the responsibility and sole costs for all impound fees, which must be paid in full before the animal is released unless the owner enters into a voluntary compliance agreement. (Ord. 2017-020 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 99-007)


6.06.050 Dangerous dog – New declarations – Existing declarations.

A. Any dog declared to be dangerous after January 1, 2018, must, after the exhaustion of any appeal, be humanely euthanized. Alternatively and upon the owner’s written application, a dangerous dog may, at the owner’s sole expense, be (1) sent to a secure animal facility and maintained at all times in compliance with Chapter 16.08 RCW; or (2) removed from the city and maintained at all times in compliance with Chapter 16.08 RCW. The owner is responsible for paying all fees owed to the city and the animal facility for the care of the animal. The owner bears the burden to establish that an animal facility is available that meets the criteria for a secure animal facility, that the animal facility will accept the dog, and that the owner is willing and able to pay all expenses for transporting and maintaining the care of the dog. Placements under subsection (A)(1) or (2) of this section require the owner to enter into a voluntary compliance agreement with the city, which must include insurance requirements set forth in subsection (B)(3) of this section.

B. For dangerous dogs declared prior to January 1, 2018, the owner of a dangerous dog must maintain a certificate of registration for such animal from the animal control authority for as long as the animal remains within the city limits. The certificate of registration will be issued only if the owner of the dangerous dog presents sufficient proof of all of the following:

1. A proper enclosure confines a dangerous dog in accordance with SMC 6.06.070 as set forth below.

2. The owner of a dog declared dangerous must have the dog equipped with a microchip at owner’s sole expense. This can be done through a local veterinarian. Proof of microchipping and the microchip number must be presented when licensing the dog.

3. A surety bond issued by a surety insurer qualified under Chapter 48.28 RCW in a form acceptable to the animal control authority in the sum of at least $250,000, payable to any person injured by the dangerous dog, or a policy of liability insurance, such as homeowner’s insurance, issued by an insurer qualified under RCW Title 48 in the amount of at least $250,000, insuring the owner or keeper for any personal injuries inflicted by the dangerous dog.

C. The owner of a dangerous dog under subsection B of this section must pay an annual registration fee for the calendar year as set forth in SMC 6.16.020(D). A dog license fee already paid by the owner, as set forth in SMC 6.16.010(A) and (B), will not be applied toward the cost of the initial registration; however, on the second and subsequent calendar years, the cost of registration includes licensing.

D. Any dangerous dog for which a certificate of registration or renewal has not been obtained by its owner is subject to being impounded by the animal control authority. The owner bears the responsibility and sole cost for all impound fees, which must be paid in full before the animal is released unless the owner enters into a voluntary compliance agreement.

E. Any dangerous dog in the city pursuant to subsection B of this section that is not restrained, registered, or insured in accordance with this chapter or escapes from its owner or enclosure, regardless of whether it injures another person or animal, is immediately subject to subsection A of this section and will be handled accordingly.

F. This section does not apply to police dogs as defined in RCW 4.24.410. (Ord. 2017-020 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 99-007)


6.06.060 Potentially dangerous dog – Proper restraint and enclosure.

A. The owner of a potentially dangerous dog must restrain his/her dog, as required herein, immediately upon being notified that the dog has been declared potentially dangerous by the animal control officer, regardless of the owner’s intent to request a hearing or file any appeal.

B. A potentially dangerous dog must be restrained as follows:

1. While on the owner’s property, a potentially dangerous dog must be restrained by a fence, kennel or sufficiently strong chain, leash or other confinement suitable to prevent the dog from leaving the owner’s property and restrained in such a manner as to keep the dog at least 25 feet from the normally used path or entrance to any occupied building, residence, or utility meter (water, electric, etc.); or

2. While off the owner’s property, a potentially dangerous dog must be under physical restraint of the owner or other responsible person.

C. While restrained on the owner’s property, a potentially dangerous dog must be provided with a structure that provides the dog protection from the elements. (Ord. 2017-020 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 99-007)


6.06.070 Dangerous dogs – Requirements for restraint and enclosure.

A. While on the owner’s property, a dangerous dog must be securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure, suitable to prevent the entry of children and designed to prevent the animal from escaping. Such pen or structure must have secure sides, a secure top, and provide the dog protection from the elements.

B. While outside the enclosure, a dangerous dog must be muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash and under physical restraint of the owner or other responsible person. The muzzle must be made and worn in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration, but prevents it from biting any person or animal.

C. The owner must post the premises with a clearly visible warning sign that displays a warning symbol that informs children of the presence of a dangerous dog. (Ord. 2017-020 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 99-007)


6.06.080 Potentially dangerous or dangerous dog – Ownership.

The owner of a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog must not transfer ownership or move the dog without first notifying the animal control authority and obtaining authorization from the animal control officer to do so. Prior to destroying any potentially dangerous or dangerous dog, the owner must give notification to the animal control officer, or provide proof of destruction within 48 hours of the death of the dog. (Ord. 2017-020 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 99-007)


6.06.090 Potentially dangerous or dangerous dog – Violations and penalties.

Violation of any section of this chapter is a misdemeanor.

A. It is unlawful for the owner of a potentially dangerous dog to:

1. Transfer ownership, move, or destroy the dog without first complying with the provisions of SMC 6.06.080.

2. Fail to provide proper restraint and/or enclosure for dogs declared potentially dangerous as defined in SMC 6.06.060.

3. Fail to maintain registration and license for potentially dangerous dogs.

B. It is unlawful for the owner of any dangerous dog to:

1. Fail to secure the liability insurance coverage or bond required hereunder; 

2. Fail to post a clearly visible sign that displays a warning symbol that informs children of the presence of a dangerous dog;

3. Fail to maintain the dog inside the dwelling of the owner or inside a proper enclosure; 

4. Fail to keep the dog under physical restraint of a responsible person and muzzled when outside the dwelling or enclosure;

5. Transfer ownership, move, or destroy the dog without first complying with the provisions of SMC 6.06.080. (Ord. 2017-020 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 99-007)


6.06.100 Provocation as a defense.

Proof that the injured person provoked the attack is a complete defense to an action for damages. (Ord. 2017-020 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 99-007)


6.06.110 List of potentially dangerous and dangerous dogs. 

A list of potentially dangerous and dangerous dogs will be maintained by the animal control authority. The list will be made available to the public for normal copying costs. The list will include the general description of the dog and the address at which the dog is normally kept. (Ord. 2017-020 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 99-007)


Chapter 6.08 LIVESTOCK

Sections:

6.08.020    Stock-restricted area.

6.08.030    Stock at large in restricted area.

6.08.040    Stock on highway right-of-way – Violations.

6.08.050    Livestock at large – Violations.

6.08.060    Riding horses – Violations.

6.08.070    Waiver for riding horses.


6.08.020 Stock-restricted area. 

All of Clallam County, except national park lands and tribal lands, is designated a stock-restricted area. (Ord. 99-007)


6.08.030 Stock at large in restricted area.

No person owning or in control of any livestock shall willfully or negligently allow such livestock to ran at large in any stock-restricted area or to wander or stray upon the right-of-way of any public highway lying within a stock-restricted area when not in the charge of some person. (Ord. 99-007)


6.08.040 Stock on highway right-of-way – Violations.

It shall be unlawful for any person to herd or move any livestock over, along, or across the right-of-way of any public highway, or portion thereof, within any stock-restricted area, without having in attendance a sufficient number of persons to control the movement of such livestock and to warn or otherwise protect vehicles traveling upon such public highway from any danger by reason of such livestock being herded or moved thereon. (Ord. 99-007)


6.08.050 Livestock at large – Violations.

Any person who owns or has possession, charge, or control of livestock shall not allow them to run at large.

A. Livestock escaping from or being outside of any area fenced to restrain them more than three times in a six-month period shall constitute prima facie evidence of inadequate fencing.

B. It shall not be necessary for any person to fence against such animals, and it shall be no defense to any action or proceeding brought pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 99-007)


6.08.060 Riding horses – Violations.

The following regulations are designed to protect public health and safety as well as the welfare of equines. It is unlawful for the equestrian to violate any of the following regulations:

A. Riding or leading any horse within the incorporated areas of the city on any paved public roadway or alley during the hours of darkness, or on any sidewalk or planting strip at any time.

B. Riding or leading any horse that is not under control on any public roadway. 

C. Riding any horse on any street or alley within the city or any park which is posted against horseback riding.

D. No person shall ride a horse on private property without permission of the owner or occupier thereof. (Ord. 99-007)


6.08.070 Waiver for riding horses. 

The chief of police may issue waivers in writing of the prohibitions enumerated in SMC 6.08.060 in the event of a parade or other special event. (Ord. 99-007)


Chapter 6.10 RABIES AND QUARANTINE

Sections:

6.10.015    Rabies vaccination required – Regulations.

6.10.020    Dogs and cats – Rabies vaccination required – Civil violation.

6.10.021    Quarantine of animals – Procedures.

6.10.022    Quarantine at the shelter – Procedures.

6.10.023    Quarantine upon the premises of a licensed veterinarian – Procedures.

6.10.040    Wolves and wolf hybrids.

6.10.050    Failure to comply – Civil violation.

6.10.075    Bitten animals.

6.10.080    Animal rabies control.


6.10.015 Rabies vaccination required – Regulations.

A. All mammals kept as pets shall be vaccinated against rabies in accordance with the standard contained in the Compendium of Animal Rabies Control as amended, published by the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians, Inc.

B. The animal control officer may issue a notice of infraction to the owner of any dog or cat, if the officer has reasonable cause to believe said dog or cat is not vaccinated against rabies.

C. Failure or refusal by the owner to produce a rabies vaccination certificate for his/her dog or cat, upon request by the animal control officer, shall be reasonable cause for the officer to issue a notice of infraction to the owner for violation of SMC 6.10.020. (Ord. 99-007)


6.10.020 Dogs and cats – Rabies vaccination required – Civil violation. 

The following regulation is designed to protect public health and safety as well as the welfare of dogs and cats. The penalty for violation of this regulation is imposed without regard to any wrongful intention of the violator. It is unlawful for the owner of any dog or cat over the age of six months to fail to have said dog or cat vaccinated against rabies in accordance with the standards described in SMC 6.10.015(A). (Ord. 99-007)


6.10.021 Quarantine of animals – Procedures.

A. Whenever the animal control officer suspects that any animal capable of transmitting rabies is infected with such disease or the animal has bitten, inflicting a bite wound where the skin is perforated, he/she shall immediately impound and hold the animal until the director, his designee, or the shelter officer reviews pertinent details as follows:

1. Rabies vaccination status;

2. History of other incidents;

3. Provocation of attack;

4. Need for quarantine;

If, after examination of the above details, the need for quarantine is established, the animal control officer shall prescribe procedures for, and a period for, quarantine not to exceed 10 days and he/she shall notify the owner in writing. At the discretion of the animal control officer, such animal shall be quarantined at the shelter or upon the premises of any licensed veterinarian where conditions of quarantine are strictly kept.

B. The quarantined animal shall not be released from quarantine until after the period of quarantine has expired, the animal has been examined by a licensed veterinarian and found free from any signs or symptoms of rabies or other zoonotic disease, the required vaccinations are obtained, and the owner has paid the cost of quarantine and examination. Animals found to be affected by rabies shall be humanely destroyed. (Ord. 99-007)


6.10.022 Quarantine at the shelter – Procedures.

A. If the animal becomes sick or dies or shows any signs or symptoms of rabies during the quarantine period, the shelter officer shall immediately notify the animal control officer. Upon notification, the shelter officer shall make arrangements to have the animal examined by a licensed veterinarian at the owner’s expense. If the veterinarian determines or suspects that the animal is infected with rabies or other zoonotic disease, he/she shall immediately notify the animal control officer and any other government authority as required by law. Upon notification, the animal control officer shall notify any person bitten by the animal of the findings of the veterinarian.

B. At the end of the quarantine period, and within five days thereafter, the shelter officer shall make arrangements to have the animal examined by a licensed veterinarian at the owner’s expense. The veterinarian shall examine the animal and report his/her findings as provided in SMC 6.10.023(B)(1) and (2).

C. Any animal impounded and/or quarantined at the shelter shall not be released until the owner or other authorized person pays impound fees and costs as set forth in SMC 6.16.030. The owner shall pay impound fees and costs as set forth in SMC 6.16.030.

D. Any animal surrendered by its owner may be humanely destroyed by euthanasia after the end of the quarantine period and after examination by a licensed veterinarian. The owner shall pay impound fees and costs as set forth in SMC 6.16.030. (Ord. 99-007)


6.10.023 Quarantine upon the premises of a licensed veterinarian – Procedures.

A. If the animal becomes sick or dies or shows any signs or symptoms of rabies during the quarantine period, the veterinarian shall immediately implement normal rabies procedures and notify the animal control officer and any other government authority as required by law. Upon notification, the animal control officer shall notify any person bitten by the animal of the findings of the veterinarian.

B. At the end of the quarantine period, and within five days thereafter, the veterinarian shall examine the animal and update required vaccinations at the owner’s expense, and report his/her findings as follows:

1. If the veterinarian determines or suspects that the animal is infected with rabies or other zoonotic disease, he/she shall immediately notify the animal control officer and any other government authority as required by law. Upon notification, the animal control officer shall notify any person bitten by the animal of the findings of the veterinarian;

2. If the veterinarian determines that the animal is healthy, he/she shall provide a signed statement (on form provided by the animal control authority) indicating that the animal was examined and found free from any signs or symptoms of rabies or other zoonotic disease. The veterinarian shall deliver or mail the statement to the animal control officer. Upon the receipt of the statement, the animal control officer shall file the statement with his/her report and notify any person bitten by the animal of the findings of the veterinarian. (Ord. 99-007)


6.10.040 Wolves and wolf hybrids. 

The owner of any dog which has been declared, by a veterinarian or by acceptable documentation, as a wolf or wolf hybrid, and has inflicted a bite on a human or domestic animal or livestock, shall notify the animal control officer of the bite. The animal control officer shall impound the animal pursuant to Chapter 6.11 SMC.

Any wolf or wolf hybrid that has bitten shall be euthanized by a veterinarian and shall be tested for rabies. The owner of the wolf or wolf hybrid impounded by the animal control officer will be liable for all expenses incurred. (Ord. 99-007)


6.10.050 Failure to comply – Civil violation. 

The preceding regulation is designed to protect public health and safety. The penalty for violation of SMC 6.10.040 is imposed without regard to any wrongful intention of the violator. Violation of SMC 6.10.040 is a Class 1 civil violation. (Ord. 99-007)


6.10.075 Bitten animals. 

The procedures outlined in the Compendium of Animal Rabies Control, as amended, published by the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians, Inc., shall be followed when an animal is bitten by another animal found to be rabid. (Ord. 99-007)


6.10.080 Animal rabies control. 

Any questions left unanswered in this section will be referred to the Compendium of Animal Rabies Control, as amended, published by the National Association of State Public Veterinarians, Inc. (Ord. 99-007)


Chapter 6.11 IMPOUND PROCEDURES

Sections:

6.11.010    Impounding authorized.

6.11.020    Notification of owner after impounding.

6.11.030    Requirements for holding of animals after notification.

6.11.040    Redemption of impounded animals.

6.11.050    Disposition of animals.

6.11.060    Fees and payment.


6.11.010 Impounding authorized.

The animal control officer may impound any animal under the following conditions:

A. Any dog or cat that has been humanely trapped as provided for in SMC 6.04.060. 

B. Any animal found in violation of the provisions of this title if the owner is unknown, or if known, if the owner is not readily available.

C. Any animal neglected or abandoned by its owner.

D. Any animal that is sick or injured and the owner is not present or able to take charge of the animal.

E. Any animal remaining at the scene of a crime or accident and the owner has been incarcerated or hospitalized.

F. Any animal seized by the court.

G. Any potentially dangerous or dangerous dog, inherently dangerous mammal, or inherently dangerous reptile found in violation of the provisions of this title.

H. Any inherently dangerous mammal or inherently dangerous reptile which has inflicted a bite or is found running at large. (Ord. 99-007)


6.11.020 Notification of owner after impounding. 

The animal control officer upon impounding an animal shall make a complete record, entering the description of each animal. If the owner of the animal is known or if the animal is identifiable by license or other identification, the shelter office shall attempt to notify the owner within 48 hours by service or posting of notice that his/her animal has been impounded and where it may be redeemed. The reading of a license tag or scanning for a microchip shall constitute reasonable attempts to identify the animal. The city or animal shelter shall not be liable for the failure of a scanner to detect the presence of a microchip. (Ord. 99-007)


6.11.030 Requirements for holding of animals after notification.

A. If the owner is known, the animal shall be held at least 96 hours after the attempt to notify is accomplished.

B. If the owner is unknown, the animal shall be held at least 72 hours after the time of impound.

C. If the animal has been impounded pursuant to a quarantine and has not been found to be suffering from rabies, the animal shall be held at least 72 hours after the end of the quarantine period and examination by a licensed veterinarian. (Ord. 99-007)


6.11.040 Redemption of impounded animals. 

In addition to other fees required by this chapter, persons redeeming animals must pay fees as required for impound, transportation, boarding, vaccination, veterinary care, licensing, and adoption.

A. Any dog or cat impounded pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 6.04 SMC may be redeemed by the owner or other authorized person upon payment of the impound fees and costs as set forth in SMC 6.16.030. The owner or other authorized person redeeming an unlicensed dog over the age of six months shall pay twice (two times) the license fee, any late penalty fee if applicable, a $25.00 deposit for animals for which rabies vaccinations are not current. The deposit will be refunded when the animal is vaccinated and proof of vaccination is presented to the shelter officer.

B. Prior to redemption of a dog that has been declared dangerous, the owner shall present proof of insurance coverage or bonding, notices, registration and the existence of a proper enclosure. (Ord. 99-007)


6.11.050 Disposition of animals.

A. Animals redeemed within the time periods as set forth in SMC 6.11.030 may be adopted, or humanely destroyed by euthanasia at the discretion of the shelter officer except those animals known to have bitten or which have been found dangerous or potentially dangerous shall not be adopted. Livestock not redeemed within the time limits may also be sold; provided, that no such animals will be adopted, sold, or destroyed if the owner is known to be physically or mentally incapacitated due to injury or serious illness and therefore incapable of handling his/her affairs.

B. Upon receipt of written permission from the owner, animals may be adopted or humanely destroyed by euthanasia without regards to the holding periods outlined in SMC 6.11.030.

C. Any animal, as may be determined by the shelter officer or licensed veterinarian, to be suffering from serious injury or disease may be humanely destroyed by euthanasia.

D. Any animal, as may be determined by the shelter officer, to be feral may be humanely destroyed by euthanasia.

E. Any previously declared dangerous dog that has bitten shall be humanely destroyed by euthanasia after the quarantine period.

F. Inherently dangerous animals and/or inherently dangerous reptiles which have bitten or have been found running at large shall be humanely destroyed by euthanasia or transferred to a suitably licensed facility such as a zoo. (Ord. 99-007)


6.11.060 Fees and payment. 

Housing fees shall be established by the director for each animal. Such fees shall include all costs of housing such animals regardless of whether such costs are incurred at a city-owned or operated facility, a contracted facility, or by a private person or facility. (Ord. 99-007)


Chapter 6.12 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES

Sections:

6.12.020    Enforcement power.

6.12.025    Obstructing the animal control officer.

6.12.040    Rules and procedures – Infractions.

6.12.060    Violation as constituting a public nuisance.

6.12.070    Penalties.


6.12.020 Enforcement power.

A. Animal control officers are authorized to take such lawful action as may be required to enforce the provisions of this title and the laws of the state of Washington as they pertain to animal cruelty, shelter, welfare and enforcement of control. Animal control officers employed by the city of Sequim shall be specifically commissioned by the police chief to issue a notice of infraction/citation when the civil infraction/misdemeanor occurs in the officer’s presence or if the officer has reasonable cause to believe that a civil infraction/misdemeanor was committed.

B. Animal control officers authorized by the court pursuant to RCW 16.52.011 to enforce animal control laws act under the authority from the authorizing court.

C. Animal control officers, unless authorized by the owner thereof, shall not enter a building designated for and used for private purposes, unless a proper warrant has first been issued upon a showing that the officer has reasonable cause to believe an animal is being maintained in the building in violation of this title or the laws of the state of Washington. 

D. Animal control officers, while in hot pursuit of any animal in violation of this title, may enter upon any public or private property, except any building designated for and used for private purposes, for the purpose of abating the animal violation being pursued.

E. Animal control officers, while checking on the welfare of any animal, may enter upon any public or private property, except any building designated for and used for private purposes, for the purpose of aiding any animal that is sick, injured, abandoned or neglected, and the owner or the authorized person is not present or able to take charge of the animal.

F. Animal control officers may humanely euthanize any injured animal in the field if, in the judgment of the animal control officer, the animal has received injuries that will result in death. Prior to euthanizing any animal where the owner is known, animal control officers will cause an attempt to be made to contact the owner. Animal control officers shall not be liable for improper euthanasia of injured animals if the decision to euthanize was made in good faith. (Ord. 99-007)


6.12.025 Obstructing the animal control officer.

A. Every person who: (1) in any such statement or report shall make any knowingly untrue statement to the animal control officer; or (2) shall knowingly hinder, delay, or obstruct the animal control officer in the discharge of his/her official duties, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 

B. Every person who shall knowingly deny, prevent, obstruct or attempt to deny, prevent or obstruct the animal control officer from pursuing any animal observed in violation of this title shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 

C. Every person who shall fail or neglect, after a proper warrant has been presented, to promptly permit the animal control officer to enter private property to perform any duty imposed by this title shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 99-007)


6.12.040 Rules and procedures – Infractions.

Rules and procedures relating to the processing of infractions shall be as stated in Chapter 7.80 RCW now or as hereinafter amended. (Ord. 99-007)


6.12.060 Violation as constituting a public nuisance. 

In addition to the foregoing remedies, the violation of any provision of this title shall constitute a public nuisance, and may be abated in any manner authorized by Chapters 7.48 and 9.66 RCW. (Ord. 99-007)


6.12.070 Penalties.

The provisions of this title shall be enforced without regard to the wrongful intention of the violator. The progressive enforcement detailed below is intended for multiple violations of any provision of this title, not necessarily multiple violations of the same provision. Unless otherwise noted in this title, enforcement and penalties for violations shall be as follows:

A. The first violation of any provision of this title otherwise classified shall be a Class 3 civil infraction.

B. The second violation of any provision of this title not otherwise classified shall be a Class 2 civil infraction. Any violation listed as a Class 2 civil violation shall be a Class 1 civil violation if it is the second violation and as a misdemeanor if it is the second or subsequent violation of any provision of this title.

C. The third violation of any provision of this title not otherwise classified shall be a Class 2 civil violation. Any violation listed as a Class 1 civil violation shall be a misdemeanor if the violation is the second or subsequent violation of any provision of this title.

D. The fourth and any subsequent violation of any provision of this title not otherwise classified shall be a misdemeanor.

Penalties for civil infractions and misdemeanors specified in this title shall be as defined in the Revised Code of Washington now or as hereinafter amended. (Ord. 99-007)


Chapter 6.13 KENNELS AND CATTERIES

Sections:

6.13.020    Commercial kennels and catteries.

6.13.030    Private kennels and catteries.

6.13.040    Denial, revocation or suspension of license.

6.13.050    Violations.

6.13.060    Exemptions.


6.13.020 Commercial kennels and catteries.

A. Commercial kennels and catteries located in the city of Sequim shall be licensed as required by this section. Commercial licenses shall be per calendar year. The fee for a commercial license is payable to the city of Sequim animal control. An additional fee shall be paid if the license is not renewed by January 31st of each calendar year. Upon applying for license the requester must provide proof of their business license. 

B. Applications for commercial licenses shall be made to the city of Sequim animal control. Each application shall be made on forms developed by the city of Sequim. 

C. The following operation standards shall be observed in connection with a commercial kennel/cattery:

1. Suitable shelter, food, water, medical attention, and exercise of animals shall be provided;

2. Food shall be stored in a fashion which prevents spoilage and infestation; 

3. The facilities shall be maintained and operated in a healthful, sanitary manner, free from disease, infestation and foul odors;

4. Sick animals shall be isolated from healthy ones in quarters adequately ventilated to prevent contamination of healthy animals;

5. Animals shall receive adequate food, water and care on days when the facility is not open for business;

6. Animals shall be immunized from disease as is usual and customary for the animal’s age and species;

7. Maintenance of a written record of all animals born, sold, immunized (to include type of immunization) or which die, and the cause of death;

8. Dead animals shall be properly disposed of by freezing and holding for pick-up, incineration in a crematorium, or through contract with the Clallam County Humane Society;

9. Animal feces shall be properly bagged, sealed, and disposed of.

D. The animal control officer or his or her agents may inspect existing or proposed kennels/catteries in connection with its licensing investigation, upon receipt of a complaint, or when inspections are necessary to ensure compliance with this title. (Ord. 99-007)


6.13.030 Private kennels and catteries.

A. Private kennels and catteries located in the city of Sequim shall be licensed as required by this section. Private licenses shall be per calendar year. The fee for a private license is payable to the city animal control. An additional fee shall be paid if the license is not renewed by January 31st of each year.

B. Applications for private licenses shall be made to the city animal control. Each application shall be made in writing on forms developed by the city animal control.

C. The following standards shall be observed in connection with a private kennel/cattery:

1. Animals must have an adequate supply of drinking water, sanitary sleeping quarters, and adequate shelter and exercise areas appropriate to their size, breed characteristics and climate;

2. All animals shall be supplied with sufficient food and water as often as the feeding habits of the respective animals require, but not less than, in the case of puppies or kittens under four months of age, three times every 24 hours, and in the case of adults, once every 24 hours;

3. All animals shall be maintained so as to eliminate excessive and nighttime noise; 

4. All animal feces shall be properly bagged, sealed, and disposed of.

D. The animal control officer or his or her agents may inspect existing or proposed kennels/catteries in connection with its licensing investigation, upon receipt of a complaint, or when inspections are necessary to ensure compliance with this title. (Ord. 99-007)


6.13.040 Denial, revocation or suspension of license.

A. The city of Sequim animal control authority may refuse issuance or renewal of a license, or revoke or suspend said license, upon finding after such investigation or hearing as it deems necessary that:

1. The license fee has not been paid; 

2. The application is not complete;

3. Upon the inspection by the animal control officer or his or her authorized agent, the business does not meet the operational standards for a kennel/cattery as set forth in this chapter;

4. Such license was issued illegally, or by mistake or inadvertence, or was procured by fraud, misrepresentation, false or misleading statements, evasions or suppression of material facts, or that any of the material facts contained in the application are false;

5. Any person owning an interest in, or sharing in the profits of, the business has, within a two-year period, been:

a. Guilty of two or more violations of this title; or

b.  Guilty of a violation of any provisions of Chapter 16.52 RCW; or

c. Guilty of any other misconduct, or improper, fraudulent, or wrongful behavior relating to the operation of a kennel/cattery;

6. Any servant, agent, employee or representative of a commercial kennel/cattery has been guilty of any act or omission while on the premises of the commercial kennel/cattery, where said act constitutes a criminal violation of this chapter, or Chapter 16.52 RCW, or has been guilty of any misconduct or improper, fraudulent or wrongful behavior relating to the operation of a commercial kennel/cattery if:

a. The circumstances surrounding any of the foregoing acts or omissions are such as to establish that such act was knowingly allowed by any person sharing in profits of said business, or if a corporation, any officer or director thereof, or any person acting as a proprietor, manager, or person in charge of such business; or

b. In any event, if three or more such acts or omissions have occurred on the premises within a two-year period;

7. The operation of the kennel/cattery constitutes a public nuisance.

B. Any applicant who has duly made application for a commercial license under the provisions of this section and has been denied such license, or any person holding a license which is revoked or suspended under the provisions of this section, may file a petition with the director or his designee demanding a hearing for the purpose of contesting such denial, revocation or suspension; provided, that such petition must be filed within 10 days following notification of such denial, revocation or suspension. Such denial, revocation or suspension shall be stayed upon the filing of such petition pending final determination of the director. The director shall set a date, no less than 10 days following the mailing of notice thereof for a hearing, of which all interested parties shall be notified. All evidence bearing on the questions of whether such denial, revocation or suspension is proper under the provisions of this section may be received at that hearing. If the director shall determine upon such hearing that such denial, suspension or revocation is not proper under the provision of this chapter, he/she shall notify the city of Sequim animal control, which shall cause the license to be issued or reinstated forthwith. If the director determines upon such hearing that such license should be denied, suspended or revoked under the provisions of this section, he/she shall issue such order in writing. An appeal of such an order may be made in the district court of Clallam County in the matter provided under the general laws of the state of Washington. (Ord. 99-007)


6.13.050 Violations.

A. Operation of a private or commercial kennel or cattery without obtaining a valid license is a Class 1 civil violation.

B. Failure to observe operational standards of commercial kennels or catteries shall be a misdemeanor. 

C. Failure to observe operational standards of private kennels or catteries shall be a Class 1 civil violation.

D. Refusal to allow inspection of any kennel or cattery by an animal control officer or his or her agent is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 99-007)


6.13.060 Exemptions.

Medical facilities, veterinarian clinics, Humane Societies, government-operated shelters, game farms, zoological facilities, and state and federally licensed research facilities are exempt from the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 99-007)


Chapter 6.14 ANIMAL CRUELTY

Sections:

6.14.020    Unlawful acts.

6.14.030    Cruelty, responsibility for.

6.14.040    Ownership, trespass – Not a defense.

6.14.050    Exclusions.

6.14.060    Limitations on application of section.

6.14.070    Penalty.


6.14.020 Unlawful acts. 

Unlawful behavior shall include, but not be limited to, any of the following:

A. Torturing, beating, maiming, poisoning, mutilating, injuring, or crippling any animal.

B. Failure to provide any animal in one’s charge with access to food, water, shelter, space, veterinary care, air ventilation, sanitation, sunlight, exercise, protection from extreme heat or cold sufficient to maintain the animal’s proper weight, nutrition, and health.

C. Keeping, using, owning, or possessing any property, paraphernalia, or animal for the purpose of animal fighting or animal baiting; giving, receiving, or wagering money in relation to any animal fighting or baiting; causing an animal to fight; or training an animal to fight other animals.

D. Tormenting or abusing any animal.

E. Abandonment or neglect of any animal over whom a person has ownership, charged care, custody, or possession. Abandonment shall include the leaving of an unattended animal at a commercial or public establishment in an effort to give away or sell such animal.

F. Confinement, placement, or transport of an animal in any vehicle in a manner that jeopardizes the safety of the animal or the public or which could subject the animal to injury or suffering.

1. When transporting any living animal on the outside part of any vehicle, such animal shall be caged, harnessed, or enclosed, keeping such animal from falling or being thrown from the vehicle transporting it.

G. Driving or working an animal when such animal is unfit for such driving or labor.

H. Driving, working, or loading an animal in any manner or quantity so as to cause suffering to the animal.

I. Dyeing or artificially coloring any animal with any toxic paint or chemical or with intent to alter the identity of any animal for unlawful purposes of administering or purposefully exposing any animal to caustic, noxious, or poisonous substance.

J. Any violation as defined by Chapter 16.52 RCW. (Ord. 99-007)


6.14.030 Cruelty, responsibility for.

A. In addition to any other penalties, a person charged with animal cruelty, based on probable cause, shall pay all costs necessary to restore the animal(s) injured to good health or to otherwise ameliorate the effects of the cruelty. In addition, the charged person shall pay all costs incurred for boarding and caring for any animal cruelly treated by the charged person. 

B. In addition to any of the penalties, the court may prohibit any person charged under this section from owning any interest in, or possessing or having care or control of, an animal, or any species of animal designated by the court, for a period of time to be determined by the court. The court may also require forfeiture to the city of any animals owned, possessed, or in the care or custody of a person charged under this section. 

C. The owner of an animal which is subjected to an act of cruelty by a person or persons in violation of this section may bring a civil action to recover the damages sustained by such owner. (Ord. 99-007)


6.14.040 Ownership, trespass – Not a defense.

A. It shall not be a defense to the crime of cruelty to animals for the person committing the cruel act(s) to assert that he is the owner of the animal(s) that were the victim(s) of the alleged cruelty.

B. Trespass shall not be a defense to any action under this section. (Ord. 99-007)


6.14.050 Exclusions.

Nothing in this section is intended to prohibit accepted practices used in the commercial raising or slaughtering of livestock or poultry, or products thereof, or the use of animals in the normal and usual course of rodeo events, animal shows, or the customary use or exhibiting of animals in normal and usual events at fairs as defined in RCW 15.76.120. Nothing in this section is intended to prohibit the humane and sanitary procedures performed by a veterinarian to meet commonly accepted breed standards. All neutering of livestock must be performed using commonly accepted and humane procedures. (Ord. 99-007)


6.14.060 Limitations on application of section. 

No part of this section shall be deemed to interfere with any of the laws of this state known as the “game laws.” Nor shall it interfere with the right to kill animals to be used for food or with any properly conducted scientific experiments of investigations, when such experiments or investigations are performed under the authority of the facility of some regularly incorporated college or university of the state of Washington or a research facility registered with the Department of Agriculture and regulated by 7 U.S.C., Section 2131 et seq. (Ord. 99-007)


6.14.070 Penalty.

The penalty for violation of this section is imposed without regard to any wrongful intention of the violator. Violation of SMC 6.14.020(A), (B), or (C) shall be a misdemeanor. Violation of any other section shall be a Class 1 civil infraction. (Ord. 99-007)


Chapter 6.15 INHERENTLY DANGEROUS ANIMALS

Sections:

6.15.010    Purpose.

6.15.020    Running at large.

6.15.030    Harboring and owning inherently dangerous mammals and/or inherently dangerous reptiles.

6.15.040    Exemptions.


6.15.010 Purpose.

It is the public policy of the city of Sequim to prevent the harboring or housing of inherently dangerous mammals and inherently dangerous reptiles within the city of Sequim. To this end, it is the purpose of this chapter to prevent such animals from being kept within the city of Sequim while allowing any such animals that may be housed in the city of Sequim at the time of adoption of the ordinance codified in this title to continue to be so harbored. (Ord. 99-007)


6.15.020 Running at large.

A. No person owning or harboring, having custody, control, or possession of an inherently dangerous mammal and/or inherently dangerous reptile shall permit or allow the same to run at large upon any highway, street, lane, alley, court, or any other place, public or private, or within the premises of such person, in such manner as to endanger any person lawfully entering such premises. 

B. An inherently dangerous mammal and/or inherently dangerous reptile found to be running at large shall be impounded and humanely destroyed by euthanasia or transferred to a suitably licensed facility such as a zoo at the expense of the owner. (Ord. 99-007)


6.15.030 Harboring and owning inherently dangerous mammals and/or inherently dangerous reptiles.

A. It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor, house, and/or own any inherently dangerous mammal and/or any inherently dangerous reptile within the incorporated portions of the city of Sequim, except that: 

B. Any person harboring, housing, and/or owning any inherently dangerous mammal and/or any inherently dangerous reptile within the incorporated portions of the city of Sequim on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title may continue to harbor, house, and/or own such animal if such animal is registered with an animal control authority within 120 days from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title; provided further, that such animal(s) may not be used for breeding and any offspring must immediately be reported to the animal control authority and removed from the city of Sequim. (Ord. 99-007)


6.15.040 Exemptions.

The following are exempt from all provisions in this chapter:

A. Any facility accredited by the Association of Zoos and Aquariums (AZA); 

B. Any licensed or accredited research or medical institutions; 

C. Licensed or accredited educational institutions;

D. Veterinary clinics in possession of inherently dangerous mammals or inherently dangerous reptiles for treatment or rehabilitation purposes;

E. Traveling circuses or carnivals so long as the inherently dangerous mammals or inherently dangerous reptiles are under the direct supervision of these circuses or carnivals; 

F. Persons temporarily transporting inherently dangerous mammals or inherently dangerous reptiles through the city; provided, that the transit time shall not be more than two days, and that they will be transported out of the city within the two-day period; 

G. Any facility licensed by the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) under the Animal Welfare Act; and

H. Any person having a valid wildlife rehabilitation permit from the Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife as a wildlife rehabilitator.

Although the above are exempt from the provisions of this chapter, they must comply with all other applicable federal, state and local regulations, including, but not necessarily limited to, Chapter 16.52 RCW, concerning the prevention of cruelty to animals. (Ord. 99-007)


Chapter 6.16 FEES AND COSTS

Sections:

6.16.010    License fees.

6.16.020    Registration fees.

6.16.030    Impound fees and costs.

6.16.040    Reasonable costs – Determination.

6.16.050    Waiver of fees and costs.

6.16.060    Adopted dogs and cats.


6.16.010 License fees. 

The following fees shall be as established by resolution for each license:

A. Neutered or spayed dog – One-year license;

B. Nonneutered or nonspayed dog – One-year license;

C. Neutered or spayed dog – Three-year license;

D. Nonneutered and nonspayed dog – Three-year license;

E. Spayed or neutered dog – Lifetime license;

F. Spayed or neutered and microchipped dog, or certified assist dog for the disabled – Lifetime license;

G. Impounded dogs (unlicensed);

H. Cats – One-year license;

I. Cats – Current rabies certificate presented at time of licensing; (Free renewal for spayed and neutered cats with proof of rabies vaccination.)

J. Late penalty (all licenses);

K. Additional fee for replacement tag;

L. Service fee (private licensing outlet);

M. Commercial kennel or cattery, per year;

N. Private kennel;

O. Private cattery (more than 10 cats).

License fees may be reduced, upon the request of the owner at the time the license is purchased, by 50 percent upon presentation of an AKC good citizenship certificate for the animal. (Ord. 2005-029 § 2; Ord. 99-007)


6.16.020 Registration fees.

The following fees, as established by resolution, shall be charged annually for each dog registered:

A. Potentially dangerous dog – Initial registration;

B. Potentially dangerous dog – Renewal;

C. Dangerous dog – Initial registration;

D. Dangerous dog – Renewal;

E. Late penalty;

F. Additional fee for replacement tag. (Ord. 2005-029 § 2; Ord. 99-007)


6.16.030 Impound fees and costs. 

The following fees and costs shall be as established by resolution for each animal impounded:

A. Impound Fees.

1. First redemption within a 12-month period;

2. Second redemption within a 12-month period;

3. Third or subsequent redemption within a 12-month period;

4. Potentially dangerous dog;

5. Dangerous dog;

6. Livestock per each animal;

7. Inherently dangerous animal.

B. Transportation Costs.

1. Animals transported by the animal control officer;

2. Animals transported by others.

C. Daily Boarding Costs.

1. Animals boarded at the city shelter;

2. Animal requiring specialized care;

3. Animals boarded by others.

D. Euthanasia Costs.

1. Animals humanely euthanized at the city shelter;

2. Animal humanely euthanized by others.

E. Disposal Costs.

1. Animals disposed of at the city shelter;

2. Animals disposed of by others.

F. Veterinarian costs (includes medications).

G. Rabies vaccination. (Ord. 2005-029 § 2; Ord. 99-007)


6.16.040 Reasonable costs – Determination.

The director shall have the authority to determine what transportation, boarding, euthanasia, disposal, and veterinarian costs are reasonable in connection with services provided to the city by any agent of the animal control authority. (Ord. 99-007)


6.16.050 Waiver of fees and costs. 

The director or his/her designees shall have the authority to waive licensing fees, registration fees, and impound fees and costs, in whole or part, when to do so would further the goals of the animal control authority and be in the public interest. In determining whether a waiver should apply, the following elements must be taken into consideration:

A. The reason the animal was impounded;

B. The reason or basis for the violation, the nature of the violation, the duration of the violation, and the likelihood the violation will not recur;

C. The total amount of the fees charged as compared with the gravity of the violation;

D. The effect on the owner, the animal’s welfare and the animal control authority if the fees and costs are not waived and no payment is received. (Ord. 99-007)


6.16.060 Adopted dogs and cats. 

The animal shelter shall develop and maintain procedures to ensure that all adopted dogs and cats are spayed or neutered, vaccinated for rabies, and licensed. It shall be the responsibility of each adopter to spay or neuter, vaccinate and license each adopted dog and/or cat. Failure of the adopter to comply within 15 days of adoption or when the adopted animal reaches the age of six months shall be a civil violation and may result in the impound of the adopted animal. (Ord. 99-007)


Title 7 (Reserved)


Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY

Chapters:

8.04    Nuisances

8.05    Abatement of Junk Vehicles

8.07    Graffiti Control

8.08    Solid Waste Collection

8.12    Litter

8.16    Repealed

8.20    Fireworks and Sky Lanterns

8.24    Hazardous Activities

8.28    False Alarms

8.30    Fire Restrictions

8.32    Repealed

8.34    Fishing

8.36    Flood Damage Prevention

8.38    Special Events


Chapter 8.04 NUISANCES

Sections:

8.04.010    Purpose.

8.04.015    Compliance, authority and administration.

8.04.020    Definitions.

8.04.030    Types of nuisances.

8.04.040    Prohibited conduct.

8.04.050    Enforcement.

8.04.051    Voluntary abatement.

8.04.052    Notice and order to abate.

8.04.053    Administrative reviews.

8.04.060    Abatement – Suit.

8.04.070    Chronic nuisances.

8.04.080    Commencement of action –Enforcement – Chronic nuisance.

8.04.081    Each day separate offense.

8.04.090    Civil penalty.

8.04.100    Penalty.

8.04.110    Abatement.

8.04.120    Collection of judgments.

8.04.130    Additional relief.

8.04.140    Conflicts.


8.04.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to exercise the police power relating to public nuisances and the abatement of such nuisances, to protect the public health, safety and welfare, and to promote the city’s economic development. It is also the purpose of this chapter to prevent and prohibit those conditions that reduce private property values, interfere with enjoying public and private property, create and constitute fire and other safety and health hazards, generally create a menace to the public health and welfare, and contribute to the degradation of neighborhood character. It is necessary for the public health, safety and welfare to regulate, prevent and prohibit conditions that may constitute disorderly, unsafe, unsanitary, fly-producing, rat-harboring, and/or disease-causing places, conditions, or objects. It is also necessary for the public social and economic welfare to regulate, prevent, and prohibit conditions that degrade the city’s scenic attractiveness, livability, economic development, and environmental quality.

This chapter is also intended to address chronic nuisances. Chronic nuisances have a negative impact on the quality of life in the neighborhoods in which they are located because of the repeated nuisance occurrences or a property owner’s failure to remedy the nuisance. Chronic nuisances are also a financial burden to the city through repeated calls for service. This chapter intends to address nuisance and chronic nuisance conditions, but is not the exclusive remedy for such nuisances. The city retains all rights and enforcement powers available at law or equity and may be used in conjunction with other laws. (Ord. 2018-014 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2016-005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2001-022)


8.04.015 Compliance, authority and administration.

In order to discourage public nuisances and otherwise promote compliance with the Sequim Municipal Code and this chapter, the city code enforcement officer or designee may, in response to field observations, determine that violations of this chapter have occurred or are occurring and may utilize any of the compliance provisions set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2018-014 § 1 (Exh. A))


8.04.020 Definitions.

The words and phrases used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates, have the following meanings:

A. “Abandoned property” means property that meets the criteria set forth in RCW 7.100.010, as enacted or amended.

“Abate” means to repair, replace, remove, destroy or otherwise remedy the condition in question by such means, in such a manner and to such an extent as the enforcement officer, in the officer’s judgment, determines is necessary in the interest of the general health, safety and welfare of the community.

“Administrative review official” means the city manager or any designee other than the person designated as “enforcement officer” as defined in this section.

B. Reserved.

C. “Chronic nuisance property” means property that, within any 365-day period, has three or more nuisance activities or any abandoned property where a nuisance activity exists.

“Continuing violation” means creating, maintaining, permitting, keeping, allowing, or tolerating a nuisance defined under this chapter for more than four consecutive calendar days.

D. “Disposable package or container” means all packages or containers defined as such by rules and regulations adopted by the Washington State Department of Ecology.

E. “Enforcement officer” means any city official or employee designated by the city manager to enforce the provisions of this chapter.

F. Reserved.

G. Reserved.

H. Reserved.

I. Reserved.

J. Reserved.

K. Reserved.

L. “Litter” means and includes all waste material, including but not limited to disposable packages or containers thrown or deposited on public or private property, including the depositing on public property or cars of handbills, but not including the waste of primary process of mining, logging, sawmilling, farming, or manufacturing.

M. Reserved.

N. “Nuisance activity” means any nuisance that occurs or exists upon a property or, if specified in this section, occurs or exists within 200 feet of a property. To be considered a nuisance activity within 200 feet of the property, the nuisance activity must involve the responsible person and/or any person associated with the responsible person. In residential settings, guests and invitees of the responsible person are considered associated with the responsible person.

Nuisance activity includes:

1. Any violation of Chapter 15.04 SMC as it relates to minimum standards of a dwelling unit or habitable spaces occurring or existing on a property, or maintaining or allowing abandoned property, in whole or part, that is not securely closed to entry;

2. Any violation of this chapter through Chapter 8.12 SMC, Litter, occurring or existing on a property;

3. Written notification from the Clallam County department of health regarding unlawful discharge of sewage, human excrement, or other wastes;

4. Criminal conduct occurring or existing on or within 200 feet of a property as described in the following RCWs, as enacted or amended:

a. Most serious offenses, serious violent offenses, and violent offenses, as defined in RCW 9.94A.030;

b. Burglary and trespass, as defined in Chapter 9A.52 RCW;

c. Theft of a motor vehicle or mail, or possession of a stolen motor vehicle or stolen mail, as defined in Chapter 9A.56 RCW;

d. Stalking, as defined in RCW 9A.46.110;

e. Harassment, as defined in RCW 9A.46.020;

f. Failure to disperse, as defined in RCW 9A.84.020;

g. Disorderly conduct, as defined in RCW 9A.84.030;

h. Any level or type of assault, as defined in Chapter 9A.36 RCW;

i. Any domestic violence crime, as defined in RCW 10.99.020;

j. Reckless endangerment, as defined in RCW 9A.36.050;

k. Indecent exposure or other prostitution-related crimes as defined in RCW 9A.88.010;

l. Any firearms/dangerous weapons violation, as defined in Chapter 9.41 RCW;

m. Any potentially dangerous dog or dangerous dog violation, as defined in Chapter 6.06 SMC;

n. Any drug-related activity, which means the manufacture, delivery, sale, storage, possession, or giving away of any controlled substance as defined in Chapter 69.50 RCW, legend drug as defined in Chapter 69.41 RCW, or imitation controlled substance as defined in Chapter 69.52 RCW; and

o. Any arrest pursuant to a warrant of arrest, where the responsible person had prior knowledge of the arrestee’s warrant.

5. For purposes of this chapter, “nuisance activity” does not include conduct where the responsible person is the victim of a crime.

O. Reserved.

P. “Person responsible” or “responsible person,” depending on context, means the property owner, and, if different from the owner, another person in actual or constructive possession of a property, including without limitation any agent, lessee, manager, or other person(s) occupying or having charge or control of any premises.

“Premises” means any building, lot, dwelling, rental unit, parcel, real estate, land, or portion of land whether improved, unimproved, abandoned, or unused, and including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips and property used as commercial, residential, or for any other purpose.

Q. Reserved.

R. “Repeat offender” means any responsible person who has had an abatement order issued in that person’s name within the prior 36 months, regardless of the nuisance’s location, except that in the case of a landlord the prior abatement order must have been issued for the same property.

S. Reserved.

T. Reserved.

U. Reserved.

V. Reserved.

W. “Weed,” “vegetable growth” and “horticultural growth” mean and include but are not limited to trees, plants, shrubs, bushes, flowers, garden vegetables and grasses, and further include all growths of every kind and character, whether domestic or wild, causing the obstruction, interference, or detriment prohibited by this chapter. (Ord. 2018-014 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2016-005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2001-022)


8.04.030 Types of nuisances.

Each of the following places, conditions, or things constitutes a public nuisance. Whenever the enforcement officer alleges that any of these conditions exists upon any premises, the officer may require or provide for the abatement thereof pursuant to this chapter:

A. The growing, maintaining, permitting or allowing of any weed, vegetable or horticultural growth that:

1. Overhangs, encroaches upon, obstructs or in any manner interferes with the full and free use by the public of any street, sidewalk or sidewalk area upon which such property so owned or occupied abuts, which includes city vision triangles and sight clearances; or

2. Has grown and died upon any premises owned, occupied or in control of the responsible person and that constitutes a detriment to the public health, safety or welfare, including but not limited to a fire hazard, or may or has become a breeding place or habitation for insects or rodents; or

3. Is so overgrown upon any premises owned, occupied or in control of the responsible person as to cause degradation of the neighborhood’s character, and is an average length of 12 inches or more.

B. Accumulations of Materials, Garbage, Recyclables, Furniture, Machinery.

1. Building and Construction Materials. Any accumulation, stack, or pile of building or construction materials, including but not limited to metal, wood, wire, electrical, or plumbing materials, not associated with a current, in-progress project and not in a lawful storage structure or container. This provision does not apply to a designated contractor or contractor supplier’s yard.

2. Garbage, Recyclables, Compost, and Infestations.

a. Garbage or recyclables not properly stored in a receptacle with a tight-fitting lid.

b. Any accumulation of broken or neglected items, litter, salvage materials, or junk not in an approved enclosed structure.

c. Creating or maintaining any accumulation of matter, including without limitation foodstuffs or dead vegetation (excluding properly maintained residential compost piles).

d. Structures or exterior property that has or may become habitat for rodent infestation.

3. Furniture, Appliances, Furnishings, and Equipment.

a. Any broken or discarded household furniture, furnishings, equipment, or appliance not in an approved enclosed structure.

b. Any enclosure which may entrap a human or an animal, including accessible refrigeration appliances that have not had the doors secured or removed.

4. Machinery and Equipment. Any broken or inoperable accumulation of, or part of, machinery or equipment not in an approved enclosed structure. This section includes such machinery and equipment as boats, jet-skis, snowmobiles, aircraft, and the like, but does not include junk vehicles, which are regulated pursuant to Chapter 8.05 SMC.

C. Fire Hazards. Any stack or accumulation of newspapers, dead vegetation (excluding properly maintained compost piles), overgrown vegetation, cardboard, or any other paper, cloth, or wood products left in a manner that poses a substantial risk of combustion or the spread of fire, as determined by the fire marshal or designee.

D. Development Code Violations. Any violation pursuant to SMC Title 13, 17, 18, or 19.

E. The maintaining, permitting or existence of any unsightly and unsafe, partially destroyed building or structure, that has not been repaired or removed within a reasonable period. For purposes of this section a “reasonable period” is more than 60 calendar days and less than 180 calendar days, unless a longer time is allowed pursuant to a valid city permit and the permit applicant is diligently working on the building or structure.

F. To obstruct or encroach upon public roads, streets, alleys, trails, or other publicly owned ways, or to otherwise materially impede ingress and egress on any such publicly owned ways. For purposes of this section, obstruction of the city’s vision triangle as described in SMC 18.44.030 as enacted or amended also constitutes a nuisance. (Ord. 2018-014 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2016-005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2001-022)


8.04.040 Prohibited conduct.

A. It is unlawful for any responsible person(s) to create, permit, maintain, tolerate, carry on, or allow, upon the responsible person’s premises, any of the acts or things declared by this chapter to be a public nuisance.

B. It is unlawful for any person to create, maintain, carry on or do any of the acts or things declared by this chapter to be a public nuisance. (Ord. 2018-014 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2016-005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2001-022)


8.04.050 Enforcement.

The following procedures are available in the event of any violation of this chapter:

A. Voluntary abatement pursuant to SMC 8.04.051;

B. Notice and order to abate pursuant to SMC 8.04.052;

C. Civil infraction pursuant to SMC 8.04.090; and

D. Abatement pursuant to SMC 8.04.060 or 8.04.110.

These enforcement procedures are not mutually exclusive. Exercise of one procedure does not prevent use of another procedure. The enforcement officer has the right and authority to determine which enforcement procedure(s) to employ and to combine enforcement procedures to effect the purposes of this chapter and Chapter 1.13 SMC – Code Enforcement. (Ord. 2019-013 (Exh. B); Ord. 2018-014 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2016-005 § 1 (Exh. A))


8.04.051 Voluntary abatement.

When it has been determined that a violation has occurred or is occurring, the city may enter into a voluntary correction agreement, which is a contract between the city and the responsible person under which such person agrees to abate the violation within a specified time and according to specified conditions. Repeat offenders as defined in this chapter are not eligible to enter into voluntary correction agreements. The voluntary correction agreement must include the following:



A. The name and address of the person responsible for the violation; and

B. The street address or other description sufficient for identification of the building, structure, premises, or land upon or within which the violation has occurred or is occurring; and

C. A description of the violation and a reference to the regulation which has been violated and whether the building or structure constitutes abandoned property; and

D. The necessary corrective action to be taken, and a date or time by which correction must be completed; and

E. An agreement by the person responsible for the violation that the city may inspect the premises as necessary to determine compliance with the voluntary correction agreement; and

F. A statement of understanding that if the terms of the voluntary correction agreement are not satisfied, the city may abate the violation and recover its costs and expenses (including without limitation attorney fees, expert witness fees, and court costs) from the person responsible for the violation, and/or they may be subject to a monetary penalty; and

G. A statement of understanding that by entering into the voluntary correction agreement, the person responsible for the violation agrees a violation exists and waives the right to a hearing on the matter. A statement of understanding that the person responsible may get an extension of the time limit for correction or a modification of the required corrective action if the person responsible for the violation has shown due diligence and/or substantial progress in correcting the violation, but unforeseen circumstances delay correction under the original conditions.

H. If the violation involves abandoned property, the enforcement officer must also notify the mortgage servicer as set forth in Chapter 7.100 RCW. (Ord. 2018-014 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2016-005 § 1 (Exh. A))


8.04.052 Notice and order to abate.

A. When it is determined that a violation has occurred or is occurring and the city is unable to secure voluntary correction or a voluntary agreement is not applicable, the city may issue a “notice and order” to the person responsible for the violation. A “notice and order” must include the following:

1. The name and address of the person responsible for that violation; and

2. The street address or description sufficient for identification of the building, structure, premises, or land upon or within which the violation has occurred or is occurring and a notation as to whether the property is abandoned property; and

3. A description of the violation and a reference to the provision(s) of the city regulation(s) which have been violated; and

4. The required corrective action and a date and time by which the correction must be completed, after which the city may abate the unlawful condition using all legal means; and

5. A statement that the order may be appealed by filing a written request for hearing with the director of the department of community development within 15 days of issuance of the order. Failure to timely file a notice of appeal constitutes a waiver of the right to appeal the determination of the order. An appeal hearing, timely requested, will be set no less than 20 days but no more than 60 days from the date the notice and order is issued; and

6. A statement indicating that the hearing will be canceled and no monetary penalty will be assessed, other than city costs and expenses, if the required corrective action is completed prior to the hearing; and

7. A statement that the costs and expenses of abatement incurred by the city and a monetary penalty in an amount per day for each violation may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of civil violation is directed as specified and ordered by the court.

B. Service on the person responsible for the violation may be done personally or by mailing a copy of the citation or the notice and order by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to such person at the person responsible’s last known address. If the person responsible for the violation cannot be personally served within Clallam County and if an address for mailed service cannot be ascertained, notice must be served by posting a copy of the citation or the notice and order conspicuously on the affected property or structure. Proof of service must be made by a written declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the person effecting the service, declaring the time and date of service, the manner by which the service was made and, if by posting, the facts showing the attempts to serve the person personally or by mail.

C. If the violation involves abandoned property, the enforcement officer must also notify the mortgage servicer as set forth in Chapter 7.100 RCW. (Ord. 2018-014 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2016-005 § 1 (Exh. A))


8.04.053 Administrative reviews.

A. General. A person who receives a notice and order may request an administrative review.

B. How to Request Administrative Review. A person, firm, or corporation may request an administrative review of the notice and order for a nuisance(s) by filing a written request with the administrative review official listed as the contact within the notice and order within 10 calendar days of the notification date of violation. The request must state the reasons the administrative review official should review the notice and order and provide all evidence supporting the request. Failure to state the basis for the review in writing is cause for dismissal of the review. Upon receipt of the request for administrative review, the official will review the information provided. The administrative review official will provide a written decision within 30 calendar days of receipt of the request for review, unless extended in writing by the administrative review official. The decision will outline the reasons supporting the administrative review official’s conclusion and, if applicable, set appropriate timelines for achieving compliance. (Ord. 2018-014 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2016-005 § 1 (Exh. A))


8.04.060 Abatement – Suit.

Whenever a public nuisance exists, pursuant to SMC 8.04.050, the city may proceed by a suit in the Clallam County superior court to enjoin and abate it in the manner provided by Chapter 7.48 RCW as amended; or it may elect to enforce the provisions of this chapter by complaint, citation and/or warrant in any court with jurisdiction. (Ord. 2018-014 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2016-005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2001-022)


8.04.070 Chronic nuisances.

A. When the police chief or the chief’s designee(s) (“chief”) or the community development director or the director’s designee (“director”) receives documentation confirming the occurrence of three or more nuisance activities within a 365-day period on or near any property, the chief and director may review such documentation to determine whether sufficient facts and circumstances exist to support finding the property a chronic nuisance. Upon such a finding, the chief will warn the responsible person for such property, in writing, that the property is in danger of being declared a chronic nuisance property.

B. The warning must contain:

1. The street address or a legal description sufficient for identification of the property and a notation of whether the property is abandoned property;

2. A concise description of the nuisance activities that exist or that have occurred on the property;

3. A demand that the responsible person for such property respond to the chief within 10 days of service of the warning to create an abatement action plan pursuant to subsection E of this section;

4. A statement explaining that if legal action is sought and the property is declared a chronic nuisance, the property could be subject to closure; civil penalties could be assessed at up to $250.00 per day for each day from the date of the warning; and/or the city’s costs could be assessed against all responsible persons; and

5. A statement that the responsible person may appeal the determination by submitting a written request for administrative review in accordance with this chapter.

6. If the violation involves abandoned property, the mortgage servicer must also receive notice as set forth in Chapter 7.100 RCW.

C. The chief will serve or cause to be served such warning in accordance with the procedures set forth in SMC 8.04.052(B).

D. If the responsible person fails to respond to the warning within the time prescribed, the chief may issue a notice declaring the property to be a chronic nuisance property and post such notice at the property. The chief will then refer the matter to the city attorney.

E. If the responsible person responds as required by the warning and agrees to abate the nuisance activity, the chief and the responsible person will work out an agreed action plan to abate the nuisance activity within a reasonable amount of time. If the action plan does not result in the abatement of the nuisance activities or if no agreement concerning abatement is reached, the chief may issue and post a notice as set forth in subsection D of this section; however, if the chief or the city attorney determines that the responsible person has taken reasonable steps to abate the nuisance activity, the city attorney will not commence an enforcement action under this chapter, despite the continuance of the nuisance activity.

F. Regardless of whether the nuisance activities are discontinued pursuant to a warning or action plan, the chief may refer the matter to the city attorney for enforcement if, within six months of service of the warning as set forth in this section, the chief receives additional documentation of the occurrence or existence of a nuisance activity as defined in SMC 8.04.020.

G. It is a defense to an action for chronic nuisance that the responsible person, at all material times, could not, in the exercise of reasonable care or diligence, determine that the property had become a chronic nuisance property, or could not, in spite of the exercise of reasonable care and diligence, control the conduct leading to the determination that the property is a chronic nuisance property.

H. The city will offer services or work with appropriate agencies to provide services to a responsible person with known mental or physical disabilities to facilitate such persons taking all lawful and reasonable corrective action necessary to abate the nuisance.

I. An owner who receives a copy of a notice pursuant to subsection B of this section describing a chronic nuisance property committed by a person responsible, other than the owner or owner’s agent, must promptly take all reasonable steps requested in writing by the police chief to assist in abatement of the nuisance property. Such reasonable steps may include the owner taking all acts and pursuing all remedies, including pursuing eviction of the responsible person pursuant to any lease or other agreement in a manner consistent with all applicable Washington State and local law, including without limitation RCW 59.18.580, the victim protection limitation on landlord’s rental decisions. (Ord. 2018-014 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2016-005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2001-022. Formerly 8.04.080)


8.04.080 Commencement of action –Enforcement – Chronic nuisance.

A. Upon referral pursuant to this section, the city attorney may initiate an action in any court of competent jurisdiction to abate a chronic nuisance property, to impose penalties pursuant to this chapter, to seek alternative remedies under city or Washington State laws, and to seek any other relief authorized by law.

B. In determining whether a property is a chronic nuisance property and subject to the court’s jurisdiction, the city has the initial burden of proving by a preponderance of evidence that the property is a chronic nuisance property. The city may submit official police reports and affidavits outlining the information that led to arrest(s) and other chronic nuisance activity, reports from other city departments, and reports from other regulatory authorities. Failure to prosecute or convict an individual of a crime is not a defense to a chronic nuisance action.

C. Once a court determines the property is a chronic nuisance under this chapter, the court may impose a civil penalty against any or all persons responsible for the property and may order any other relief deemed appropriate. A civil penalty may be assessed for up to $250.00 per day for each day the nuisance activity continues to occur following the date of the original warning by the chief, as described in SMC 8.04.100. In assessing the civil penalty, the court may consider the following factors, citing to those found applicable:

1. The actions taken by the responsible person to mitigate or correct the nuisance activity;

2. The repeated or continuous nature of the nuisance activity;

3. The statements of the neighbors or those affected by the nuisance activity; and

4. Any other factor deemed relevant by the court.

D. The court that determines the property is a chronic nuisance property may also assess costs against the responsible person in the amount it cost the city to abate, and/or attempt to abate, the nuisance activities.

E. If the court determines the property is a chronic nuisance property, the court may take one or more of the following actions:

1. Order the property closed and secured against all unauthorized access, use, and occupancy for a period up to one year;

2. Make any order that will reasonably abate nuisance activities, including ordering the property into receivership in accordance with Chapter 7.60 RCW and recovering all reasonable and necessary expenses, without limitation, of abating the nuisance from the property and returning the property to productive use;

3. Authorize the city to take reasonable action to abate and prevent further nuisance activities;

4. Order that the chief has the right to inspect the property at reasonable times to determine whether the court’s orders have been complied with;

5. Impose a civil penalty and costs;

6. Order the responsible person to pay relocation assistance to any tenant who must relocate because of the abatement order and who the court finds has not participated in any nuisance activities at the premises; and

7. Order any other further relief deemed appropriate by the court.

F. Once a determination has been made by the court that the chronic nuisance property is subject to closure, the court may authorize the city to physically secure the premises and initiate such closure. Costs for such closure, or any other court-authorized abatement activity by the city, will be submitted to the court for review. Any civil penalty and/or costs awarded to the city may be filed with the city finance department which may cause the same to be filed as a lien on the property with the Clallam County treasurer’s office. The city will file a formal lis pendens notice when an action for abatement is filed in the court.

G. The court may retain jurisdiction during any period of closure or abatement of the property. (Ord. 2018-014 § 1 (Exh. A))


8.04.081 Each day separate offense.

Each day a violation of this chapter continues constitutes a separate offense under this chapter. (Ord. 2018-014 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2016-005 § 1 (Exh. A). Formerly 8.04.082)


8.04.090 Civil penalty.

A. When it is determined that a violation or offense has occurred or is occurring, and the city is unable to secure voluntary correction or a voluntary agreement is not applicable, the city may issue a notice of civil violation and file the same in municipal court or other court having jurisdiction. The notice must be in the form used for issuing infraction citations and is subject to the civil rules for infractions.

B. Service on the person responsible for the violation may be done personally or by any method authorized by law for serving infraction citations. (Ord. 2018-014 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2016-005 § 1 (Exh. A). Formerly 8.04.100)


8.04.100 Penalty.

A. Violation of, or failure to comply with, any provision of this chapter is a civil offense subject to a fine of $250.00 for each offense.

B. Any person creating, keeping, or maintaining any nuisance, or permitting, allowing, or tolerating any nuisance to be maintained, who neglects or fails to abate or remove the nuisance within 24 hours after creating, keeping, or maintaining the nuisance, or permitting, allowing, or suffering the maintenance of the same, is guilty of maintaining a public nuisance. Each 24-hour period constitutes a separate violation. On the fourth consecutive day that the violation is maintained or allowed to exist, the violation constitutes a continuing offense.

C. A continuing offense or subsequent violation of the same or like provision committed within a 24-month period constitutes a misdemeanor crime and is punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or 90 days in jail, or both. Such fine and jail are in addition to any civil remedy for abatement and collection for the cost and expense thereof.

D. Regardless of any penalties that may be imposed, the person responsible has a continuing duty to correct violations of this chapter. (Ord. 2018-014 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2016-005 § 1 (Exh. A). Formerly 8.04.110)


8.04.110 Abatement.

Any property on which there continues to be a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is subject to abatement by the city.

A. Immediate Abatement. Whenever a nuisance violation causes a condition, the continued existence of which constitutes an immediate and emergent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare of the environment, the city may summarily and without prior notice abate the condition. Notice of such abatement, including the reason for it, must be given to the person responsible for the violation as soon as reasonably possible after the abatement.

B. Abatement – Public Right-of-Way/Easement. Nuisances within a public way or easement, or of such a character and so situated that they can be abated without the invasion or destruction of property or the prejudice of any right, may be abated by the enforcement officer without notice when continuance of the nuisance is likely to result in expense to the city or injury to any person or property.

C. Abatement by City – Safeguards. In any case where a nuisance is to be abated by the enforcement officer, it is the officer’s duty to proceed with due care and without unnecessary destruction of property. In all cases, the enforcement officer is authorized to employ such assistance and adopt such means as may be necessary to effect the entire abatement of the nuisance.

D. Judicial Abatement. The city may seek judicial process, as it deems necessary, to abate a condition that was caused by or continues to be a violation of the Sequim Municipal Code when other methods of remedial action have failed to produce compliance. When an order of abatement is issued through the appropriate court, the costs, including incidental expenses, of correcting the violation will be charged to the person responsible for the violation and/or the owner, lessor, tenant or other person entitled to use and/or control of the property.

E. Liens. For purposes of this section, the term “incidental expenses” includes but is not limited to personnel costs, both direct and indirect and including resonable attorney’s fees; costs incurred in documenting the violation; hauling, storage and disposal expenses; and actual expenses and costs of the city in preparing notices, specifications and contracts, and in accomplishing and/or contracting and inspecting the work; and the costs of any required printing and mailing. All such costs and expenses constitute a lien against the affected property and may be subject to collection following a court judgment. The lien is subordinate to all previously existing special assessment liens imposed on the same property and is superior to all other liens, except for state and county taxes, with which it is on a parity. The city may cause a claim for lien to be filed for record within 90 days from the later of the date that the monetary penalty is due or the date the work is completed or the nuisance abated. The claim of lien must contain sufficient information regarding the notice of civil violation, a description of the property to be charged with the lien, and the owner of record, and the total of the lien. Any such claim of lien may be amended from time to time to reflect changed conditions. Any such lien binds the affected property for the period as provided for by state law.

F. Abatement – Cost. Every person maintaining a nuisance, or permitting, allowing, or suffering a nuisance to be maintained, as prohibited by this chapter or otherwise, is liable for all costs and expenses for abating the same. The costs and expenses may be assessed as a part of any prosecution against the party liable and may be recovered as other costs are recovered after they have been assessed. In all cases where the enforcement officer abates any nuisance, such officer will keep an account of all expenses attending such abatement. The city, in addition to other powers given in this chapter, may forthwith bring suit for recovery of the costs in any court of competent jurisdiction against the person maintaining, keeping, creating, or permitting, allowing, or suffering the nuisance abated. Collection of the costs by such suit will be directed to the city finance department.

G. The provisions of this chapter relative to the abatement of nuisances are not exclusive, and all other rights or remedies of the city, or any citizen thereof, relative to abatement of nuisances, are declared to remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 2018-014 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2016-005 § 1 (Exh. A). Formerly 8.04.120)


8.04.120 Collection of judgments.

If the person cited fails to pay a penalty imposed pursuant to this chapter, the penalty or abatement costs may be referred to a collection agency. The city’s cost for the collection services will be added as costs to the amount to be collected. Alternatively, the city may pursue collection in any other manner allowed by law. (Ord. 2018-014 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2016-005 § 1 (Exh. A). Formerly 8.04.130)


8.04.130 Additional relief.

The city may seek any legal or equitable relief available at any time to mitigate any acts or practices that violate the provisions of this chapter or abate any condition that constitutes a nuisance. (Ord. 2018-014 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2016-005 § 1 (Exh. A). Formerly 8.04.140)


8.04.140 Conflicts.

All city ordinances, in whole or in part, in conflict with this chapter are repealed and/or superseded. (Ord. 2018-014 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2016-005 § 1 (Exh. A). Formerly 8.04.150)


Chapter 8.05 ABATEMENT OF JUNK VEHICLES

Sections:

8.05.010    Purpose.

8.05.020    Definitions.

8.05.030    Exemptions.

8.05.040    Abatement and removal of junk vehicles on private property.

8.05.050    Violation – Penalty.


8.05.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to preserve the character and safety of the city’s neighborhoods by eliminating as nuisances junk vehicles from private property and to provide procedures for the removal of junk vehicles as authorized by RCW 46.55.240. (Ord. 2001-022)


8.05.020 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the following meaning:

A. “Junk vehicle” means any vehicle meeting at least three of the following requirements (RCW 46.55.010(4)):

1. Is three years old or older;

2. Is extensively damaged, such damage including, but not limited to, any of the following: a broken window or windshield or missing wheels, tires, motor or transmission;

3. Is apparently inoperable;

4. Has an approximate fair market value equal only to the approximate value of the scrap in it.

B. “Enforcement officer” means the city manager or any city official or employee designated by him.

C. “Landowner” means an owner of private property or a person in possession or control of private property. (Ord. 2001-022)


8.05.030 Exemptions.

The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:

A. A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner, or where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or

B. A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler or licensed vehicle dealer and is fenced according to the provisions of RCW 46.80.130. (Ord. 2001-022)


8.05.040 Abatement and removal of junk vehicles on private property.

A. The storage or retention of junk vehicles on private property is declared to constitute a public nuisance subject to abatement by removal and disposal. The enforcement officer shall inspect and investigate complaints relative to junk vehicles, or parts thereof, on private property. Upon discovery of such nuisance, the enforcement officer shall cause the police department to inspect said vehicle to determine if the same meets the requirements of RCW 46.55.010(4). If the inspection by the police department confirms that the vehicle in question meets the criteria of RCW 46.55.010 (4), then the enforcement officer shall give notice in writing to the last registered owner of record of the junk vehicle and also to the property owner of record that a public hearing may be requested before the city council or other administrative hearings officer as shall be designated by the city council, and that if no hearing is requested within 10 days, the junk automobile will be removed. Costs of removal may be assessed against the last registered owner of the junk vehicle if the identity of such owner can be determined, or the costs may be assessed the landowner of the property on which the junk vehicle is stored.

B. If a request for a hearing is received, a notice giving the time, location and date of such hearing on the question of the abatement of the junk vehicle or part thereof as a public nuisance shall be mailed, by certified or registered mail with a five-day return receipt requested, to the owner of the land as shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the county assessor and to the last registered and legal owner of record of the junk vehicle unless the junk vehicle is in such condition that the identification numbers are not available to determine ownership.

C. The owner of the land on which the junk vehicle is located may appear in person at the hearing or present a written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the junk vehicle on the land, with his reasons for such denial. If it is determined at the hearing that the junk automobile was placed on the land without the consent of the landowner and that he has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, then the city council shall not assess costs of administration or removal of the junk vehicle against the property upon which the junk vehicle is located or otherwise move to collect such costs from the property owner.

D. After notice has been given of the intent of the city to dispose of the junk vehicle, and after a hearing, if requested, has been held, the junk vehicle, or part thereof, shall be removed, at the request of a police officer, and disposed of by a registered tow truck operator with notice to the Washington State Patrol and the Department of Licensing that the vehicle has been wrecked.

E. The city may, after removal of the junk vehicle from private property, file or record with the county auditor a claim for lien for the costs of removal and disposal, which shall be in accordance with the provisions covering mechanics’ liens in Chapter 60.04 RCW, and said lien shall be foreclosed in the same manner as such liens. The city may alternatively choose in its sole discretion to collect any unpaid charges utilizing whatever legal options are available to the city, including but not limited to turning the matter over to a collection agency, filing a small claim court action, or filing a civil lawsuit in district or superior court. (Ord. 2001-022)


8.05.050 Violation – Penalty.

A. Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this chapter, in addition to any penalty which may be provided in SMC Title 9, may, in the sound discretion of the court in which conviction is obtained, be directed by the court to abate and remove from any public street or highway or public or private right-of-way or public park, or any private property any or all debris and waste deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of the conviction.

B. Each day a violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense under this chapter. (Ord. 2001-022)


Chapter 8.07 GRAFFITI CONTROL

Sections:

8.07.010    Intent and purpose.

8.07.020    Definitions.

8.07.030    Prohibition of graffiti.

8.07.040    Possession of graffiti implements.

8.07.050    Removal of graffiti.

8.07.060    City costs enforceable – Debt – Lien.

8.07.070    Appeal.

8.07.080    Removal by city.

8.07.090    Reward.

8.07.100    Penalty.

8.07.110    Administrative fee.


8.07.010 Intent and purpose.

A. The city of Sequim may provide for the removal of graffiti and other inscribed material from public and privately owned permanent structures located on public or privately owned real property within the city of Sequim. The city of Sequim finds that graffiti on public and privately owned property is obnoxious in that it furthers blight, encourages acts of vandalism and related criminal conduct, depreciates the value of surrounding properties, and is inconsistent with the city’s property maintenance goals and aesthetic standards.

B. The city further finds and determines that unless graffiti is quickly removed; other properties soon become the target of graffiti. The existence of graffiti tends to begin community discontent and contempt for the law as well as encourages other criminal conduct and actions by criminal organizations and gangs. (Ord. 2007-015 § 1)


8.07.020 Definitions.

The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:

A. “Gang” means a group of three or more individuals with a common interest or bond and engaging in activity specifically characterized by an intent to commit criminal acts.

B. “Graffiti or other inscription” shall mean any unauthorized inscription, word, figure or design that is indelibly marked, etched, scratched, drawn or painted on any building, structure or other facility, regardless of the nature of the material of that component, structure or facility.

C. “Graffiti vandalism” means unpermitted defacement of public or private property by means of painting, drawing, writing, etching, or carving, by use of paint, spray paint, ink, knife, or any similar method. “Graffiti” means one or more letters, symbols, or other markings painted, drawn or otherwise applied to a wall, post, column, or other building or structure, or to a tree, or other exterior surface, publicly or privately owned.

D. “Graffiti implements” shall mean any can, bottle, spray device or other mechanism designed to propel liquid which contains ink, paint, dye or other similar substance which is expelled under pressure, either through the use of aerosol devices, pumps, or similar propulsion devices. Additionally, the definition also includes indelible marker(s) which is any marker, pen or similar implement containing anything other that a solution which can be removed with water after it dries and having a flat, pointed or angled writing surface of a width of four millimeters or greater when possessed in a location and manner described in SMC 8.07.040.

E. “Responsible adult” shall mean the parent or legal guardian of a minor under the age of 18 years. (Ord. 2007-015 § 1)


8.07.030 Prohibition of graffiti.

A. It shall be unlawful for any person to apply graffiti or other inscription upon any wall, street, sidewalk, bridge, building, fence, gate, structure, signs or other facility within the city of Sequim.

B. Persons convicted of violating this section, in addition to any other penalties imposed by this code, shall pay restitution to the property owner. If the violator is a minor, the parent or guardian shall be responsible for the payment of restitution within the limits of liability set forth in any applicable RCW section. (Ord. 2007-015 § 1)


8.07.040 Possession of graffiti implements.

It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any graffiti implement while on public or private property without the express consent of the owner of such property, in a manner that warrants a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of property in the vicinity and when such possession is under circumstances evincing an intent to use or employ, or allow the same to be used or employed in the commission of a violation of SMC 8.07.030, or knowing that the same is intended to be so used. Among the circumstances which may be considered by a police officer in determining whether such alarm or immediate concern is warranted, is the fact that the person takes flight upon appearance of an enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or the graffiti implement. Prior to any formal arrest and/or citation being issued to a person for a violation of this subsection, such person shall be afforded an opportunity by the enforcement officer to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which could otherwise be warranted by requesting such person to explain his lawful presence and conduct. (Ord. 2007-015 § 1)


8.07.050 Removal of graffiti.

A. Whenever graffiti exists upon the property owned by another public agency, or a private property owner, the city of Sequim may remove it with the consent of the public entity or private property owner owning said property.

B. Notice of Removal.

1. Whenever the city manager, or his/her designated representative, determines that graffiti exists on any public or private buildings, structures, and places which are visible to any person utilizing any public road, parkway, alley, sidewalk or other right-of-way within the city, and when seasonal temperatures permit the painting of exterior surfaces, the compliance officer I or other designated code enforcement officer or his/her designated representative shall cause a notice to be issued to abate such nuisance. The property owner shall have 15 days after the date of the notice to remove the graffiti or the same will be subject to abatement by the city.

2. The notice to abate graffiti pursuant to this section shall cause a written notice to be served upon the owner(s) of the affected premises, as such owners’ name and address appears on the last property tax assessment rolls of Clallam County, Washington. If there is no known address for the owner, the notice shall be sent in care of the property address. The notice required by this section may be served in any one of the following manners:

a. By personal service on the owner, occupant or person in charge or control of the property;

b. By registered or certified mail addressed to the owner at the last known address of said owner. If this address is unknown, the notice will be sent to the property address.

The notice shall be substantially in the following form:

Notice of Intent to Remove Graffiti

Date:

To:

NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that you are required, by Ordinance of the City of Sequim, at your own expense, to remove or paint over the graffiti located on the property commonly known as (address), Sequim, Washington, which is visible to public view, within fifteen (15) days after the date of this notice; or, if you fail to do so, the City may abate the nuisance by removal or painting over of the graffiti. The cost of the abatement by the City or private contractors employed by the City to abate the nuisance will be assessed upon your property and such costs will constitute a lien upon the land until paid.

All persons having any objection to, or interest in said matters, are hereby notified to submit any objections or comments to the Code Enforcement Officer of the City of Sequim or his/her designated representative, within ten (10) days from the date of this notice. If no objections or comments to the notice are received by the City, the City will, at the conclusion of the fifteen (15) day period, proceed with abatement of the graffiti inscribed on your property at your expense without further notice.

(Ord. 2007-015 § 1)


8.07.060 City costs enforceable – Debt – Lien.

Any and all costs incurred by the city in the abatement of the graffiti nuisance as provided in this chapter shall constitute a debt owed to the city by the property owner or person in charge or control of the property, and shall be enforceable as a lien against the property upon which such nuisance existed, in addition to the other legal remedies available for enforcement of debts. (Ord. 2007-015 § 1)


8.07.070 Appeal.

Within 10 days from the mailing or from personal service of the notice of intent to remove graffiti, the owner or person occupying or controlling the premises affected may appeal the matter to the Sequim city council. Filing of an appeal will stay, during the pendency of the appeal, any enforcement or actions by the city to abate the graffiti nuisance. The city council may delegate the appeal to an appointed hearing officer whose decision shall be a final decision of the city. (Ord. 2007-015 § 1)


8.07.080 Removal by city.

A. Upon failure of persons to comply with the notice by the designated date, or such continued date thereafter as the city manager, or his/her designated representative, approves, then the code enforcement officer is authorized and directed to cause the graffiti to be abated by city forces or by private contract, and the city or its private contractor is expressly authorized to enter upon the premises for such purposes. All reasonable efforts to minimize damage from such entry shall be taken by the city, and any paint used to obliterate or cover graffiti shall be as close as practicable to background color(s). If the code enforcement officer provides for the removal of the graffiti, he/she shall not authorize nor undertake to provide for the painting or repair of any more extensive area than the area where the graffiti is located.

B. Property owners in the city of Sequim may consent in advance to city entry onto private property for graffiti removal purposes.

1. In the event that the owner fails to remove the graffiti after notice has been sent, the city may, at its option, in lieu of the above procedure, abate the graffiti as a nuisance under city ordinances or state law.

C. The public works department shall be responsible for graffiti removal and will budget appropriately as well as coordinate or contract for such removal using city resources, but which may also include private companies and/or civic organizations. (Ord. 2007-015 § 1)


8.07.090 Reward.

The city may pay to any person who provides information that leads to the arrest and conviction of any person who applies any drawing, inscription, figure, or mark, commonly known as graffiti, to a surface of real or personal property, a reward. (Ord. 2007-015 § 1)


8.07.100 Penalty.

A. The violation of any provision of this chapter may be prosecuted as a violation of RCW 9A.48.090, as applicable or otherwise as a misdemeanor.

B. If a minor is personally unable to pay any fine or restitution levied for violating any provision of this chapter, the parent or legal guardian shall be liable for the payment of this fine or restitution for any intentional acts by the minor as state law, RCW 4.24.190, may provide for such acts. (Ord. 2007-015 § 1)


8.07.110 Administrative fee.

As a part of any abatement, an administrative fee for overhead will be charged against the party responsible for violation of any provision of this chapter above and beyond actual staff time and supplies used to enforce, prosecute and remove graffiti. (Ord. 2007-015 § 1)


Chapter 8.08 SOLID WASTE COLLECTION*

Sections:

8.08.010    Purpose – Definitions.

8.08.020    Appointment of solid waste collector.

8.08.030    Solid waste fund established.

8.08.040    Compulsory solid waste service.

8.08.050    Solid waste to be removed.

8.08.060    Trash to be deposited in containers provided by city or contractor.

8.08.070    Location of containers for collection.

8.08.080    Unlawful disposal.

8.08.090    Solid waste (garbage) collection rates and charges.

8.08.100    Acquisition of equipment.

8.08.110    Violation – Penalty.

*Prior legislation: Ords. 575 and 639.


8.08.010 Purpose – Definitions.

A. Purpose. The maintenance of health and sanitation require and it is the intention of this chapter to make the collection, removal and disposal of garbage, refuse and waste matter within the city compulsory and universal.

B. Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall be applicable:

1. “Garbage” or “solid waste” means all solid and semi-solid kitchen refuse subject to decay or putrefaction and all animal or vegetable waste matter which was intended to be used as food.

2. “Trash” means all waste matter not subject to decay or putrefaction, except ashes and dead animals, large or small, which may die or be collected for other than food purposes and except hazardous waste as defined by state law.

3. “Person” means every person, firm, partnership, association, institution and corporation except the city, and shall also be deemed to mean the occupant and/or owner of the premises for which service is rendered. 

4. “Refuse” means discarded waste material of any sort. (Ord. 2002-024; Ord. 144 § 1, 1948)


8.08.020 Appointment of solid waste collector.

The city council is authorized to appoint a suitable and qualified person or entity as collector of solid waste or to contract with a person or company who shall have full control of all work provided for and contemplated by this chapter, or who shall have such powers as provided by contract. (Ord. 2002-024; Ord. 144 § 2, 1948)


8.08.030 Solid waste fund established.

There is created and established a special fund to be designated and known as the solid waste fund, formerly known as the sanitation fund, into which any funds the city is entitled to collect under this chapter shall be deposited and kept and from which all expenses of maintenance and operation which are not the obligation of the contractor shall be paid. (Ord. 2002-024; Ord. 144 § 3, 1948)


8.08.040 Compulsory solid waste service.

A. It is the duty of every person in possession, charge or control of any dwelling, flat, rooming house, apartment house, hospital, hotel, club, restaurant, boarding house or eating house or in possession or control of any public or private place of business, trade or profession within the city at all times from and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter to keep or cause to be kept containers, approved by the solid waste collector or provided by the contracting solid waste collector approved by the city council, for the accumulations of solid waste.

B. It shall be compulsory to take solid waste collection service as provided in this chapter within the limits of the city.

C. The collection and disposal of trash and solid waste shall be exclusive to the city and no person shall offer or shall collect or dispose of solid waste or trash for hire from within the city limits of the city; provided, that upon special application to the city council, and upon a finding by the city council that a particular matter is beyond the capabilities of the city garbage and trash collection services, a permit can be issued to allow persons to remove garbage and/or trash within the limits of the matter for which the permit is granted; provided further, that the city may contract with other public or private entities to perform some or all of the garbage collection services.

D. All containers for trash and rubbish deposited by places of business or residences must be of a type and in such location which meets with the approval of the solid waste collector and the city.

E. No stones, earth, ashes or other incombustible materials except wrappings and trash shall be deposited in either solid waste or trash containers. (Ord. 2002-024; Ord. 460 § 3, 1984; Ord. 144 § 4, 1948)


8.08.050 Solid waste to be removed.

The city solid waste collector shall be the exclusive entity to move and dispose of all solid waste, refuse and trash as may be necessary or as may be contracted for or independently undertaken by the city. (Ord. 2002-024; Ord. 144 § 5, 1948)


8.08.060 Trash to be deposited in containers provided by city or contractor.

Trash must be deposited in the containers provided by the city or in the containers provided by the contract solid waste collector and the city. (Ord. 2002-024; Ord. 446 § 1, 1983; Ord. 144 § 7, 1948)


8.08.070 Location of containers for collection.

All solid waste containers and trash containers shall be placed, at the time of scheduled collection, at locations designated by the solid waste collector and the city. (Ord. 2002-024; Ord. 144 § 8, 1948)


8.08.080 Unlawful disposal.

A. It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association or institution to burn, dump or in any manner dispose of solid waste, trash or refuse upon any streets, alleys, public places or private property, without the permission of the owner, in the city.

B. It shall be further unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association or institution not a resident of the city, nor the operator of a business establishment within the city limits of the city, to deposit refuse, trash or solid waste in collection containers owned or operated by the city or by its contractor.

C. It shall be further unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association or institution to use solid waste or trash collection facilities of the city without providing for payment to the city or its contractor for such use as provided by law. (Ord. 2002-024; Ord. 349 § 1, 1977; Ord. 144 § 9, 1948)


8.08.090 Solid waste (garbage) collection rates and charges.

Charges shall be as provided for in the contract between the city and the private solid waste hauler, the terms of which shall be available in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 2002-024; Ord. 2001-025; Ord. 2000-019; Ord. 99-022 § 2)


8.08.100 Acquisition of equipment.

The city council is authorized from time to time to acquire such equipment and employ such personnel to assist the solid waste collector or provide services in addition to those contracted for as is in their judgment necessary and advisable. All expenditures therefor shall be from the solid waste fund. (Ord. 2002-024; Ord. 144 § 12, 1948)


8.08.110 Violation – Penalty.

Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment in the city jail for not more than 90 days, or by both fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 2002-024; Ord. 144 § 13, 1948)


Chapter 8.12 LITTER

Sections:

8.12.010    Short title.

8.12.020    Litter in general.

8.12.030    Sweeping litter into gutter prohibited.

8.12.040    Merchants to keep sidewalks free of litter.

8.12.050    Owner to maintain premises free of litter.

8.12.060    Litter thrown by persons in vehicles.

8.12.070    Vehicle loading.

8.12.080    Repealed.

8.12.090    Repealed.


8.12.010 Short title.

The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known and may be commonly referred to and cited as the litter control code. (Ord. 302 § 1, 1974)


8.12.020 Litter in general.

No person shall throw, drop, deposit, discard, place or otherwise dispose of litter or any organic material or foodstuff upon any street, alley, sidewalk or any other public place in the city or upon a private residence or other private property not owned by him, or in the waters within the jurisdiction of the city, whether from a vehicle or otherwise except:

A. When such property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or the city for the disposal of garbage and refuse, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to so use such property; or

B. Into a litter receptacle or other container in such manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried away or deposited by the elements upon any part of the public place, private residence or other private property; or

C. When such person is the owner or does have control or custody of the property, or has the prior consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant and provided the litter will not cause a public nuisance or be in violation of any other state or local laws, rules or regulations. (Ord. 629 § 2, 1992; Ord. 302 § 2, 1974)


8.12.030 Sweeping litter into gutter prohibited.

No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, alley or other public place the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalks in front of their premises free of litter. (Ord. 302 § 3, 1974)


8.12.040 Merchants to keep sidewalks free of litter.

No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business within the city shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business premises free of litter. (Ord. 302 § 4, 1974)


8.12.050 Owner to maintain premises free of litter.

The owner or person in control of any private residence or other private property shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter. (Ord. 302 § 5, 1974)


8.12.060 Litter thrown by persons in vehicles.

No person while a driver or passenger in a vehicle shall throw or otherwise deposit litter upon any street or other public place or upon any private residence or private property. (Ord. 302 § 6, 1974)


8.12.070 Vehicle loading.

A. No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any public street unless the vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of its load from dropping, shifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand or gravel may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or water or other substance may be sprinkled on a roadway surface in the cleaning or maintaining of such roadway by a public authority having jurisdiction for the same or by persons under contract or other authorization by such public authority.

B. Any person owning or operating a vehicle from which any glass or other objects of its load have fallen or escaped, which would constitute an obstruction or injure a vehicle or otherwise endanger travel upon the public street shall immediately cause the public street to be cleaned of all such glass or other objects and shall pay any cost therefor. (Ord. 302 § 7, 1974)


8.12.080 Enforcement officers and procedures.

Repealed by Ord. 2018-014. (Ord. 302 § 8, 1974)


8.12.090 Penalties.

Repealed by Ord. 2018-014. (Ord. 629 § 3, 1992; Ord. 302 § 11, 1974)


Chapter 8.16 WEEDS

(Repealed by Ord. 2018-014)


Chapter 8.20 FIREWORKS AND SKY LANTERNS

Sections:

8.20.010    Purpose.

8.20.020    Definitions.

8.20.030    Dangerous and unclassified fireworks prohibited.

8.20.035    Sale and use of sky lanterns unlawful.

8.20.040    Permit required.

8.20.050    Dates when sale permitted.

8.20.060    Discharge of fireworks prohibited.

8.20.070    Storage.

8.20.080    Number of permits limited.

8.20.090    Sale permit – Nontransferable.

8.20.100    Sale permit – Application – Requirements.

8.20.110    Temporary stand – Location – Construction.

8.20.120    Sale permit – Application – Investigation – Grant or denial.

8.20.130    Public display permit required.

8.20.140    Public display standards.

8.20.150    Interpretation and construction of chapter.

8.20.160    Enforcement.

8.20.170    Violation – Penalty.


8.20.010 Purpose. 

It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate the possession and sale of fireworks as defined by the State Fire Marshal. It is also the purpose of this chapter to prohibit the possession, sale or discharge of any dangerous or unclassified fireworks as defined by the State Fireworks Law. This chapter prohibits the discharge of all fireworks within the city, except as authorized under a public display permit or pursuant to RCW 70.77.311(2). If there is any conflict between Washington State law as set forth in Chapter 70.77 RCW and this chapter, Washington State law shall control. (Ord. 2016-020 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-007 § 1)


8.20.020 Definitions.

The definitions of Chapter 70.77 RCW and WAC 212-17-025 and 212-17-028 as now stated or as amended shall govern the interpretation of this chapter, when applicable.

A. “Sky lantern,” “sky candles,” “fire balloons,” and “airborne paper lanterns” mean an unmanned airborne lantern typically made of paper with a light frame containing a candle, fuel cell composed of waxy flammable material or other open flame which serves as a heat source to heat the air inside the lantern to cause it to lift into the air. Manned hot air balloons are not a part of this definition.

B. “Permit” means the official permission granted by the city for purposes of establishing and maintaining a place where fireworks are manufactured, constructed, produced, packaged, stored, sold, exchanged, or discharged. (Ord. 2016-020 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2015-015 § 1 (Exh. A1); Ord. 2013-006 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-007 § 2)


8.20.030 Dangerous and unclassified fireworks prohibited.

The sale, transportation, possession, or discharge of dangerous or unclassified fireworks within the city limits is prohibited. For unclassified fireworks, possession of fireworks without the manufacturer’s license number and the State Fire Marshal’s classification shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2016-020 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-007 § 3)


8.20.035 Sale and use of sky lanterns unlawful.

A. It is unlawful for any person to sell, use, transfer, discharge or ignite any sky lantern within the city limits.

B. It is unlawful for any person to sell, use, transfer, discharge or ignite any sky lantern which becomes aloft within the city limits. (Ord. 2016-020 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2013-006 § 1 (Exh. A))


8.20.040 Permit required.

Any adult person or other group desiring to manufacture, import, possess, or sell any fireworks at wholesale or retail for any use, discharge special fireworks at any place, make a public display of fireworks, or transport fireworks must apply in writing for a permit to the department of community development. Licensees or public carriers delivering to a licensee are exempt from this permit requirement pursuant to RCW 70.77.255(1)(c). (Ord. 2016-020 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2012-005 § 1 (Exh. B); Ord. 95-007 § 4)


8.20.050 Dates when sale permitted.

Fireworks may be sold and purchased within the city limits only on the following dates and times: (A) from noon to 11:00 p.m. on June 28th; (B) from 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. on June 29th through July 4th; and (C) from 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. on July 5th. (Ord. 2016-020 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2002-017; Ord. 95-007 § 5)


8.20.060 Discharge of fireworks prohibited.

Except as authorized by Washington State license and city permit granted pursuant to RCW 70.77.260(2) (public display) or RCW 70.77.311(2) (use for religious or other specific purpose on approved date and at an approved location), discharging or exploding any fireworks within the city limits is prohibited. (Ord. 2016-020 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2002-017; Ord. 95-007 § 6)


8.20.070 Storage.

It shall be unlawful for any person to store fireworks of any class without first applying in writing and receiving a permit for such storage to the city fire marshal at least 45 days prior to the date of the proposed storage. The city fire marshal must investigate the nature, character, and location of the proposed storage area and determine whether it constitutes a hazard or danger to property or any person. The city fire marshal must exercise reasonable discretion when granting, denying, or granting with reasonable conditions any application as he or she may prescribe. (Ord. 2016-020 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-007 § 7)


8.20.080 Number of permits limited. 

No person, firm or corporation shall receive more than one permit for the sale of fireworks during any one calendar year. A permit granted pursuant to this chapter shall entitle the permittee to maintain only one retail outlet. 

The city in any given year shall not issue more than one permit for each 1,500 persons residing within the Sequim city limits. (Ord. 2016-020 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-007 § 8)


8.20.090 Sale permit – Nontransferable. 

The fireworks permit issued for the retail sale of fireworks within the city limits shall be nontransferable, and no person other than the permittee, organization or affiliate shall operate the stand for which the permit is issued, or share or otherwise participate in the benefits of the operation of such stand. (Ord. 2016-020 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-007 § 9)


8.20.100 Sale permit – Application – Requirements. 

Application for a retail sale fireworks permit within the city limits must be made to the director of the department of community development or designee on a form prepared by the department and submitted at least 45 days before the requested effective date of the permit. No permit application may be submitted before January 1st of the year in which such permit is requested. The application must be accompanied by:

A. A valid license issued by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to Chapter 70.77 RCW as now enacted or as hereafter amended, authorizing the permittee to engage in retail fireworks sales;

B. A fee of $100.00, which is established as the fireworks temporary activity permit fee;

C. A public liability and property damage insurance policy from an insurance company licensed to do business in Washington, in the sum of at least $1,000,000 for bodily injury or death suffered by one or more persons in any one accident or occurrence and at least $1,000,000 for property damage for each permit location and by a products liability insurance policy in the amount of at least $1,000,000. The insurance policies must name the city as an additional insured and indemnify the city from any damage or injury caused by the operation of the retail fireworks stands;

D. A $100.00 performance bond, note, or cash deposit, conditioned upon the prompt removal of the temporary stand and the clean-up of all debris from the site of the temporary stand. The bond or deposit will be returned to the applicant if the applicant’s permit is denied; if the application is granted, the bond or deposit shall be returned to the applicant only if he/she removes the temporary stand and cleans up all debris to the satisfaction of the proper city officials. Performance bond or cash deposit will be forfeited to the city for failure to properly clean up the site of the temporary stand or for failure to remove the stand and clean up all debris by July 10th of each year. (Ord. 2016-020 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2012-005 § 1 (Exh. B); Ord. 95-007 § 10)


8.20.110 Temporary stand – Location – Construction. 

A. Authorized fireworks sales shall be from temporary fireworks stands only.

B. A temporary stand may be located only in business or industrial areas or zones within the city.

C. Temporary fireworks stands need not comply with all of the provisions of the Building Code; however, all temporary fireworks stands must be erected in accordance with plans submitted to and approved by the city fire marshal, or building official, or his/her authorized representative. All temporary fireworks stands must be constructed in a safe manner, assuring the safety of attendants and patrons. In the event any temporary fireworks stand is wired for electricity, such wiring must conform to the State Electrical Code and the city electrical code, if any, and be limited to the provision of adequate lighting.

D. All temporary fireworks stands must prominently display signage clearly stating that the discharge of all fireworks within the Sequim city limits is prohibited under this chapter. (Ord. 2016-020 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-007 § 11)


8.20.120 Sale permit – Application – Investigation – Grant or denial. 

A. Upon receiving a complete application, the city fire marshal, or authorized representative, must investigate the safety of the proposed operation. After completing the investigations, the fire marshal or the department of community development will forward the application and investigation results to Fire District No. 3 for comment. After receiving comment, but not more than 30 days from the date of application, or no later than June 10th, the permit shall be granted or denied if the application was submitted at least 30 days prior to the June 10th date. The city may give preference to persons or organizations who have operated temporary fireworks stands in accordance with previously issued city permits. The city will give first preference to local nonprofit groups benefiting youth and second preference to other local nonprofit groups. No more than one fireworks stand for each 1,500 of the official population of Sequim may be granted.

B. The approved permit must be prominently posted in the temporary fireworks stand. (Ord. 2016-020 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2012-005 § 1 (Exh. B); Ord. 2002-017; Ord. 95-007 § 12)


8.20.130 Public display permit required.

A. Any person, firm, group, or corporation desiring to make a public fireworks display must first apply in writing for a permit from the department of community development. Applications must be made at least 45 days in advance of the proposed display.

B. Applicants shall meet all qualifications and requirements of Washington State law regarding public fireworks displays and all fire and safety requirements for public display standards as set forth in SMC 8.20.140.

C. The city fire official must investigate whether the character and location of the proposed display would be hazardous to property or dangerous to any person. Based on the investigation, the fire official will submit a report of findings and a recommendation for or against the issuance of the permit, together with reasons, to the city. The city will grant the application if the application meets all requirements of this chapter and Chapter 70.77 RCW. (Ord. 2016-020 § 1 (Exh. A))


8.20.140 Public display standards.

All public fireworks displays must conform to the following minimum standards and conditions:

A. All public fireworks displays must be planned, organized, and discharged by a Washington State licensed pyrotechnician.

B. A permit must be obtained from the city and approved by the fire marshal or designee prior to any public fireworks display. The permit must include the applicant’s name and address, the pyrotechnician’s name and address, the exact location, date and time of the proposed display, the number, type and class of fireworks to be displayed, the manner in which the fireworks are being stored prior to the public fireworks display.

C. The applicant for a public display of fireworks permit must include with the application evidence of a bond issued by an authorized surety or a certificate of public liability insurance. Such bond or certificate shall conform to the requirements set forth in RCW 70.77.285 and 70.77.355.

D. The permit may be immediately revoked at any time deemed necessary by the fire marshal or designee due to any noncompliance, or weather conditions such as extremely low humidity or wind factor. The display may also be canceled by accidental ignition of combustible or flammable material in the vicinity due to fall debris from the display.

E. Public access areas shall be determined by the city fire marshal or designee and maintained by the applicant in the manner set forth in the approved permit. (Ord. 2016-020 § 1 (Exh. A))


8.20.150 Interpretation and construction of chapter.

This chapter is intended to implement Chapter 70.77 RCW as now enacted or as amended, and shall be interpreted in accordance with Chapter 70.77 RCW and all applicable rules or regulations. (Ord. 2016-020 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2012-005 § 1 (Exh. B); Ord. 95-007 § 14. Formerly 8.20.140)


8.20.160 Enforcement.

The city fire marshal or duly authorized representative is designated as the enforcing officer of this chapter. Any failure or refusal on the part of a licensee to obey the rule, regulation or request of the fire chief shall be grounds for the revocation of a fireworks license. (Ord. 2016-020 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-007 § 15. Formerly 8.20.150)


8.20.170 Violation – Penalty. 

Violation of SMC 8.20.040 and 8.20.060, to the extent it also constitutes a violation of RCW 70.77.488, 70.77.510 or 70.77.515, shall constitute a gross misdemeanor. The penalty for a gross misdemeanor is a fine of not more than $5,000 or imprisonment for no more than 364 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, plus restitution and court costs.

Any person, firm, association, corporation or other group violating any other provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment for no more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day during which he, she or it commits, continues or permits a violation of any provisions of this chapter constitutes a separate violation. (Ord. 2016-020 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-007 § 16. Formerly 8.20.160)


Chapter 8.24 HAZARDOUS ACTIVITIES

Sections:

8.24.010    Pyrotechnic devices.

8.24.020    Black powder or smokeless powder – Ammunition.

8.24.030    Gun shows.

8.24.040    Fireworks sales activities.


8.24.010 Pyrotechnic devices.

The use of any pyrotechnic devices as defined in RCW 70.74.010 shall be prohibited on or in all city-owned property unless specifically approved in writing by the city fire marshal with seven days’ notice to the city council and written approval by the city council. (Ord. 2013-004 § 1(1))


8.24.020 Black powder or smokeless powder – Ammunition.

No black powder or smokeless powder shall be sold in or during a special event on or in city property. No loose ammunition may be displayed or sold at such event on city property. Boxed ammunition may be sold if permitted by the applicant. (Ord. 2013-004 § 1(2))


8.24.030 Gun shows.

Gun shows on city property, at which gun sales are to occur, shall have all firearms, including antique firearms, made inoperable through the use of locks, “zip ties” or other devices to prevent the firearm from being loaded or discharged at the gun show. Sales by licensed firearms dealers at such shows on city property may be permitted if permitted by the applicant. Sales by persons who have not been issued a valid federal firearms license may not be permitted at such gun shows on city property. (Ord. 2013-004 § 1(3))


8.24.040 Fireworks sales activities.

Fireworks sales activities shall, in addition, comply with Chapter 8.20 SMC and Chapter 70.77 RCW as now enacted or as hereafter amended. (Ord. 2013-004 § 1(4))


Chapter 8.28 FALSE ALARMS

Sections:

8.28.010    Purpose.

8.28.020    Definitions.

8.28.030    Emergency response card.

8.28.040    Audible alarms declared nuisance.

8.28.050    Fees – Corrective action – Disconnection.

8.28.060    Administrative decision – Notice.

8.28.070    Appeal from administrative decision – Finality.

8.28.080    Payment of fees required.

8.28.090    Automatic dialing device – Certain interconnections prohibited.

8.28.100    Automatic reset required.

8.28.110    Tampering with alarm systems.

8.28.120    Other false alarms.

8.28.130    Penalties.


8.28.010 Purpose.

It is the intent of this chapter to reduce the number of false alarms occurring within the city and the resulting waste of city resources and to reduce the dangers inherent in emergency response, by providing for corrective administrative action, including fees and potential disconnection and criminal penalties. (Ord. 424 § 12, 1981)


8.28.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the definitions contained in this section shall apply:

A. “Automatic dialing device” means a device which is interconnected and is programmed to select a predetermined telephone number and transmit by voice message or code signal an emergency message indicating a need for emergency response.

B. “Chief of police” includes the chief and/or his designee.

C. “False alarm” means the activation of a burglary, robbery, fire or other emergency alarm by other than a forced entry, attempted forced entry, unlawful entry or actual robbery or attempted robbery on the premises and at a time when no robbery, burglary or crime involving a foreseeable risk of grievous bodily harm is being committed or attempted upon the premises. “False alarm” further includes the activation of an alarm device at a time when no fire exists on the premises or at a time when no threatened fire involving a foreseeable risk of grievous bodily harm is present on the premises. “False alarm” further includes the activation of any other emergency assistance request device at any time when there is no foreseeable risk of grievous bodily harm to any person upon the premises from which the alarm is activated.

D. “Fire chief” means the chief of the city fire department and shall include his designee.

E. “Interconnect” means to connect an alarm system, including an automatic dialing service, either directly or through a mechanical device for the purpose of transmitting a message upon the activation of an alarm system.

F. “Owner” means the person having or maintaining the alarm on premises owned and/or occupied by him.

G. “Person” means any natural person, partnership, joint stock company, unincorporated association or society, or a corporation of any character whatsoever.

H. “Response” shall be deemed to have occurred when the police department or fire department, as the case may be, begins to proceed towards the premises as a result of an activation of an alarm. (Ord. 424 § 2, 1981)


8.28.030 Emergency response card.

It is unlawful, and declared to be a misdemeanor, to have or maintain on any premises a burglary or robbery, fire or other emergency alarm, or alarm system unless there is on file with the city police department an emergency response card containing the name or names and current telephone number or numbers of person(s) authorized to enter such premises and turn off any alarm. Such emergency response card may be in any form as prescribed by the chief of police or his designee. (Ord. 424 § 3, 1981)


8.28.040 Audible alarms declared nuisance.

Any alarm audible on abutting property for a period in excess of 15 minutes is declared to be a public nuisance and may be summarily abated at the discretion of the chief of police or the chief of the fire department, or their designees. (Ord. 424 § 4, 1981)


8.28.050 Fees – Corrective action – Disconnection.

For city response to any false alarms, the city may charge and collect fees from the owner as follows:

A. For a response to premises at which no other false alarm has occurred within the preceding six-month period, referred to in this chapter as a “first response,” no fee shall be charged. Upon a first response, the chief of police shall give notice of conditions and requirements of this chapter to the owner.

B. For a second response to the premises within six months after a first response, the city may charge the owner a fee as established by resolution. Within five working days after notice to do so, owners shall make a written report to the chief of police in the prescribed form setting forth:

1. The cause of such false alarm;

2. The corrective action taken;

3. Whether and when such alarm has been inspected by authorized service personnel;

4. Such other information as the chief of police or his designee may reasonably require to determine the cause of such false alarm, any mitigating circumstances and the corrective action necessary.

The chief of police, or his designee, may direct the owner to have authorized personnel inspect the alarm at such premises and/or to take other corrective action. All costs of inspection and corrective action shall be borne by the owner.

C. For the third response to a premises within six months after a second response, and for each succeeding response within six months of the most recent response, the city may charge the owner an administrative fee as established by resolution. If such third false alarm or any succeeding false alarm occurs as a result of failure to take necessary corrective action prescribed under subsection B of this section, the chief of police or his designee may order the owner to disconnect such alarm until the prescribed corrective action is taken and until such time as verification of such corrective action is provided to the city police department; provided, however, that no disconnection shall be ordered for any premises required by law or administrative regulation to have an alarm system in operation.

D. In the event the chief of police or fire chief, or their designees determine that a false alarm occurred as a direct result of an interruption of electrical power, a telephone line malfunction, or a malfunction of the alarm equipment clearly beyond the control of the person having or maintaining such alarm on the premises owned or occupied by him, the city shall waive any imposition of the applicable false alarm fee. Such waiver shall be at the sole discretion of the chief of police, fire chief, or their designee, as the case may be. (Ord. 2005-029 § 2; Ord. 424 § 5, 1981)


8.28.060 Administrative decision – Notice.

Notice of imposition of any administrative sanction, including the imposition of any fee or order of disconnection under the provisions of this chapter shall be given to the person having or maintaining the alarm on premises owned or occupied by him; provided, that with respect to business premises, the owner, manager or chief administrative agent regularly assigned and employed on the premises at the time of the occurrence of a false alarm shall be presumed to be the person having or maintaining the alarm on the business premises. (Ord. 424 § 6, 1981)


8.28.070 Appeal from administrative decision – Finality.

A. Any person subject to the imposition of a fee, order of disconnection or other administrative sanction under the terms of this chapter shall have a right of appeal therefrom to the city council.

B. Unless a written notice of appeal of the administrative decision is filed with the city clerk within 10 days of the receipt of the notice of the imposition of an administrative sanction under this chapter, the sanction shall be deemed to be final and no right of appeal shall lie therefrom. (Ord. 424 § 7, 1981)


8.28.080 Payment of fees required.

It is unlawful, and a misdemeanor, for any person to fail or refuse to pay any fees imposed under this chapter. In addition to institution of any criminal proceeding, the mayor may authorize the city attorney to collect the fees by appropriate legal action, and in connection with any proceeding to collect fees, the owner, in addition to the fee imposed by this chapter, shall be responsible for a reasonable attorney fee and court costs. (Ord. 424 § 8, 1981)


8.28.090 Automatic dialing device – Certain interconnections prohibited.

A. It is unlawful for any person to program an automatic dialing device to select any telephone line assigned to the city; and it is unlawful for any person to fail to disconnect or reprogram such device within 12 hours of receipt of written notice from the chief of police to disconnect or reprogram the automatic dialing device.

B. Within 60 days after the effective date of this chapter, all existing automatic dialing devices programmed to select a telephone line assigned to the city shall be reprogrammed and/or disconnected. (Ord. 424 § 9, 1981)


8.28.100 Automatic reset required.

Within 60 days after the effective date of this section, all alarms maintained on any premises in the city shall have an automatic reset device which will deactivate the alarm after 15 minutes of continuous operation. Any owner failing to install such an automatic reset device as required in this section is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 424 § 10, 1981)


8.28.110 Tampering with alarm systems.

A. Tampering. It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to tamper with or to cut, break, deface or actuate any alarm device (including auxiliary alarm devices, wires, wire support or appurtenances thereto) or to intentionally transmit an alarm knowing no emergency exists.

B. Exception. Subsection A of this section shall not apply to city employees engaged in their official duties. Subsection A further shall not apply to any competent representative of a manufacturer of burglar alarm equipment who, with the consent of the chief of police, is modifying, adjusting, altering or repairing, or replacing an alarm system or any of its component equipment; provided, that notice shall have first been provided to the city police department.

C. Subsection A of this section shall further not apply to any competent insurance rating engineer who is testing any system in discharge of his duties, and with the permission of the chief of police.

D. Any person doing any work on an alarm system or auxiliary alarm system that may cause a signal to be transmitted to the city over any alarm system or network shall notify the chief of police before such work stating the time and place thereof. (Ord. 424 § 11, 1981)


8.28.120 Other false alarms.

Any person who shall intentionally give, make or turn in a false alarm of fire, or of the need for police, ambulance or other emergency assistance, knowing such alarm to be false, or making the same with reckless disregard to the true conditions, and any person aiding or abetting another in the commission of such act, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 424 § 13, 1981)


8.28.130 Penalties.

Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and may be punished in such manner as provided for misdemeanors pursuant to state statute. (Ord. 424 § 14, 1981)


Chapter 8.30 FIRE RESTRICTIONS

Sections:

8.30.010    Purpose.

8.30.020    Outdoor fires prohibited.

8.30.030    Provisions supplemental.

8.30.040    Violation – Penalty.

8.30.050    Effective date.


8.30.010 Purpose.

A. The city has established a refuse collection system which enables the city’s residents to dispose of substantial amounts of refuse which would in the past have been incinerated.

B. The incineration of refuse, in light of the retirement nature of the community, has constituted a significant health hazard to the citizens of the city.

C. The incineration of refuse has further constituted a severe and serious fire hazard within the city limits of the city.

D. It is the purpose of this chapter to prevent unnecessary outdoor burning which is found to be dangerous to the health and welfare of the city’s citizens. (Ord. 559 § 1, 1989)


8.30.020 Outdoor fires prohibited.

A. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or allow any outdoor fire within the city limits of Sequim except as hereinafter authorized.

B. The following fires are allowed:

1. Normal cooking fires contained in barbecue pits, hibachis, barbecue grills or similar facilities;

2. Small fires for pleasure, religious, ceremonial or like social purposes; not to exceed two feet in diameter or width;

3. Fire from flares, torches, waste gas burners, incense burners and insect pots.

C. The following outdoor fires may be allowed when authorized by permit only:

1. A fire authorized by the Fire District No. 3 chief for the prevention of a fire hazard, provided no alternate means of prevention is reasonably available.

2. A fire authorized by the Fire District No. 3 chief for the disposal of dangerous materials, provided no alternate means of disposal is reasonably available.

3. A fire authorized by the Fire District No. 3 chief for instruction in the method of fighting fires or testing of fire resistive materials and fire protective equipment.

4. A fire for the disposal of waste material provided no alternate means of disposal is reasonably available.

D. The outdoor fire permit required under subsection C of this section shall be obtained from the District No. 3 fire department prior to any burning. (Ord. 559 § 1, 1989)


8.30.030 Provisions supplemental.

This chapter shall be in addition and supplemental to federal, state and other fire codes and ordinances. (Ord. 559 § 1, 1989)


8.30.040 Violation – Penalty.

Any persons convicted of a violation of this chapter, or any part thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished by a fine of not more than $250.00. (Ord. 559 § 1, 1989)


8.30.050 Effective date.

The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be in full force and effect after its passage, approval and publication as provided by law. (Ord. 559 § 1, 1989)


Chapter 8.32 PUBLIC NUISANCE AND DISTURBANCE NOISES

(Repealed by Ord. 2014-004)


Chapter 8.34 FISHING

Sections:

8.34.010    Short title.

8.34.020    Definitions.

8.34.030    Authority to regulate.

8.34.040    Restriction to fishing by children.

8.34.050    Restrictions against fishing by persons 15 years of age or older.

8.34.060    Penalty.


8.34.010 Short title.

The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the “fishing ordinance.” (Ord. 2005-015 § 8)


8.34.020 Definitions.

“Fish” or “fishing” shall include but not be limited to any substantial step to catch, disturb, injure or kill any fish as defined in the Washington State Statutes, RCW Title 77. (Ord. 2005-015 § 1)


8.34.030 Authority to regulate.

The city council hereby delegates to the city manager and his or her designee the authority to regulate fishing in the Sequim reuse demonstration site pond. Those regulations may include regulations as to the method of taking (for instance, barbless hooks), regulations as to the time of taking, regulations as to the limit of taking fish, such limit being initially not more than two fish per day per person; provided, that such regulations shall be posted in a conspicuous manner at the Sequim reuse demonstration site pond. (Ord. 2005-015 § 2)


8.34.040 Restriction to fishing by children.

The council hereby restricts fishing in or at the Sequim reuse demonstration project site pond to children 14 years of age or younger. The state law currently does not require children 14 years of age or younger to have a fishing license. This shall provide an opportunity for children to learn to fish, enjoy the fishing days and fishing at other times. (Ord. 2005-015 § 3)


8.34.050 Restrictions against fishing by persons 15 years of age or older.

No person 15 years of age or older shall fish, or attempt to fish, at the Sequim reuse demonstration project site pond.

Any person 15 years of age or older who shall fish at the Sequim reuse demonstration project site pond shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for each incident. Each incident shall include each attempt, successful or not, to catch a fish or to injure, harass or disturb a fish. (Ord. 2005-015 § 4)


8.34.060 Penalty.

Any person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or by imprisonment in jail not to exceed 90 days for each such violation. (Ord. 2005-015 § 5)


Chapter 8.36 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION

Sections:

8.36.010    Statutory authorization and findings of fact.

8.36.020    Purpose.

8.36.030    Definitions.

8.36.040    General provisions.

8.36.042    Compliance required.

8.36.044    Interpretation and application.

8.36.046    Disclaimer of liability.

8.36.050    Administration.

8.36.060    Variance procedures.

8.36.070    Permit requirements.

8.36.080    Development standards.


8.36.010 Statutory authorization and findings of fact.

The Legislature of the State of Washington has delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry.

In conformance with this responsibility, the city of Sequim finds that flood areas may result in loss of life, property, health and safety, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare. (Ord. 2006-018 § 1)


8.36.020 Purpose.

It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare; reduce the annual cost of flood insurance; and minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:

A. Protect human life and health;

B. Minimize expenditure of public money and costly flood control projects;

C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;

E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and sewer lines, electric, telephone and associated services, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;

F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas;

G. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard;

H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions;

I. Assure the availability of flood insurance within the city of Sequim. (Ord. 2006-018 § 1)


8.36.030 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the definitions contained in this section shall apply:

A. “Area of shallow flooding” designated as an AO or AH zone on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). An AO zone has base flood depths that range from one to three feet above the natural ground without a clearly defined channel and an unpredictable and indeterminate path of flooding. AO is characterized as sheet flow. An AH zone indicates ponding and is shown with standard base flood elevations.

B. “Base flood” means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also referred to as the “100-year flood”). Designated on flood insurance rate maps by the letters A or V.

C. “Basement” means any area of the building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides.

D. “Critical facility” means a facility for which even a slight chance of flooding might be too great. Critical facilities include (but are not limited to) schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire and emergency response installations, and installations which produce, use or store hazardous materials or hazardous waste.

E. “Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood hazard.

F. “Elevated building” means, for insurance purposes, a nonbasement building that has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, post piers, pilings, or columns.

G. “Flood” or “flooding” means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:

1. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or

2. The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.

H. “Flood insurance rate map” means the official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the city of Sequim.

I. “Flood insurance study (FIS)” means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the flood-boundary map, and the water surface elevation more than one foot.

J. “Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.

K. “Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements found at SMC 8.36.080(F)(1)(b), (i.e., provided there are adequate flood ventilation openings).

L. “Manufactured home” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle.”

M. “New construction” means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

N. “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle:

1. Built on a single chassis;

2. Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;

3. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and

4. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

O. “Start of construction” includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

P. “Structure” is a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.

Q. “Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

R. “Substantial improvement” means any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either:

1. Before the improvement or repair is started; or

2. If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, “substantial improvement” is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.

The term can exclude:

1. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct precited existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been previously identified by the city of Sequim code enforcement officer and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

2. Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the Washington State Heritage Register.

S. “Variance” means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter that permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter. (Ord. 2006-018 § 1)


8.36.040 General provisions.

A. Lands to Which This Chapter Applies. This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the city of Sequim.

B. Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration for Clallam County in a scientific and engineering report entitled, “The Flood Insurance Study for Clallam County, WA, Unincorporated Areas,” revised February 23, 2001, with accompanying flood insurance rate map panel 5300210530D, dated December 5, 1989, and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The best available information for flood hazard area identification, as outlined in SMC 8.36.050(B), shall be the basis for regulation until a new flood insurance rate map is issued that incorporates new data. (Ord. 2006-018 § 1)


8.36.042 Compliance required.

No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter as well as all other applicable regulations including but not limited to the manual adopted in SMC 13.104.100. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2006-018 § 1)


8.36.044 Interpretation and application.

In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:

A. Considered as minimum requirements;

B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and

C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. (Ord. 2006-018 § 1)


8.36.046 Disclaimer of liability.

The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administration decision made hereunder. (Ord. 2006-018 § 1)


8.36.050 Administration.

A. The city of Sequim public works director shall be primarily responsible for the administration and implementation of this chapter. The public works director shall perform the following duties:

1. Review all development permits other than for minor and major subdivisions and planned unit developments within flood hazard zones to determine:

a. That the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;

b. That all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required;

c. If the proposed development is located in the floodway, and if so, located to assure the encroachment provisions of this chapter are complied with.

B. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with SMC 8.36.040(B), the public works director shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from federal, state or other source, in order to administer specific standards and floodways.

C. Obtain and record the following information:

1. Where base flood elevation data is provided through the flood insurance study, FIRM, or required as in subsection B of this section, obtain and record the actual (as-built) elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure contains a basement;

2. For all new and substantially improved flood-proofed nonresidential structures:

a. Verify and record the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure was flood-proofed.

b. Maintain the flood-proofing certifications required by this chapter.

D. Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter.

E. Notify adjacent communities and the Washington State Department of Ecology prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.

F. Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished.

G. Make interpretations, where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation pursuant to SMC 8.36.060.

H. The city of Sequim director of the department of community development shall perform the following duties:

1. Review all development permits for minor and major subdivisions and planned unit developments within flood hazard zones to determine:

a. That all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.

2. Transmit to the public works director all information required under the terms of this chapter. (Ord. 2011-017 § 2; Ord. 2006-018 § 1)


8.36.060 Variance procedures.

A. Appeal to Hearing Examiner.

1. The hearing examiner as established by the city of Sequim (Chapter 2.10 SMC) hears and decides requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.

2. The hearing examiner hears and decides requests for variances when it is alleged there is any error in any requirement or decision made by the public works director or the director of the department of community development in the administration of this chapter.

3. Those aggrieved by the decision of the hearing examiner, or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the Clallam County Superior Court and must follow the procedures as established in SMC 20.01.240.

B. Conditions for Variances. In addition to the review criteria established in SMC 18.72.040, the following conditions will need to be met:

1. Generally, the only condition under which a variance from the elevation standard may be issued is for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a small or irregularly shaped lot contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level. As the lot size increases the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.

2. Variances shall not be issued within a designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.

3. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.

4. Variances shall only be issued upon:

a. A showing of good and sufficient cause;

b. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant;

c. A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.

5. Variances as interpreted in the National Flood Insurance Program are based on the general zoning law principle that they pertain to a physical piece of property; they are not personal in nature and do not pertain to the structure, its inhabitants, economic or financial circumstances. They primarily address small lots in densely populated residential neighborhoods.

6. Variances may be issued for nonresidential buildings in very limited circumstances to allow a lesser degree of flood-proofing than watertight or dry flood-proofing, where it can be determined that such action will have low damage potential, complies with all other variance criteria except subsection (B)(1) of this section.

7. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the permitted structure will be built with its lowest floor below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk. (Ord. 2019-004 (Exh. B); Ord. 2011-017 § 2; Ord. 2006-018 § 1)


8.36.070 Permit requirements.

A. A development permit shall be required before construction or development within an area of special flood hazard established in SMC 8.36.040(B). The permit shall be for all structures including manufactured homes, as set forth in SMC 8.36.030, Definitions, and for all development including fill and other activities, also as set forth in SMC 8.36.030, Definitions.

B. The application for a flood hazard development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the city of Sequim public works department. The application may include but shall not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information shall be required:

1. Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor, including basement, of all structures;

2. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structures have been flood-proofed;

3. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that flood-proofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the flood-proofing criteria of this chapter;

4. A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development;

5. The applicant shall provide a habitat assessment, approved by the city, that determines that the development project will not have an adverse effect on habitat or applicant shall provide concurrence from the National Marine Fisheries Services (NMFS) that the project is compliant with ESA. (Ord. 2011-020 § 1; Ord. 2006-018 § 1)


8.36.080 Development standards.

In all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards are required:

A. Anchoring.

1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure.

2. All manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement, and shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. Anchoring methods may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.

B. Construction Materials and Methods.

1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.

2. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.

3. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or otherwise elevated or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.

C. Utilities.

1. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system. Additionally, all water wells shall be located on high ground and not in the floodway.

2. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters.

3. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.

D. Subdivision Proposals.

1. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.

2. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.

3. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage.

4. Where base flood elevation data has not been provided or is not available from another authoritative source, it shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments which contain at least 50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).

E. Review of Building Permits. Where elevation data is not available either through the flood insurance study, FIRM, or from another authoritative source (see SMC 8.36.050(B)), applications for building permits shall be reviewed to assure that proposed construction will be reasonably safe from flooding. The test of reasonableness is a local judgment and includes use of historical data, high water marks, photographs of past flooding, etc., where available. Failure to elevate at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade in these zones may result in higher insurance rates.

F. Specific Standards. In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in SMC 8.36.040 or 8.36.050, the following provisions are required:

1. Residential Construction.

a. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated one foot or more above the base flood elevation.

b. Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding are prohibited, or shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on external walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:

i. A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.

ii. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.

iii. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.

2. Nonresidential Construction.

a. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated one foot or more above the base flood elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:

i. Be flood-proofed so that below one foot or more above the base flood level, the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water.

ii. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.

iii. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting provisions of this subsection based on their development and/or review of the structural design, specifications and plans. Such certifications shall be provided to the official as set forth in SMC 8.36.050(C).

iv. Nonresidential structures that are elevated, not flood-proofed, must meet the same standards for space below the lowest floor as described in subsection (F)(1)(b) of this section.

3. Manufactured Homes. All manufactured homes in the floodplain to be placed or substantially improved on sites shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated one foot or more above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.

4. Recreational Vehicles. Recreational vehicles placed on sites are required to either:

a. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or

b. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect-type utilities and security devices and have no permanently attached additions; or

c. Meet the requirements of subsection (F)(3) of this section and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes.

5. AE and A1 – 30 Zones with Base Flood Elevations but No Floodways. In areas with base flood elevations (but regulatory floodway has not been designated), no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1 – 30 and AE on the city’s FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community.

6. Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in SMC 8.36.040 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters that can carry debris, and increase erosion potential, the following provisions apply:

a. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.

b. Construction or reconstruction of residential structures is prohibited within designated floodways, except for:

i. Repairs, reconstruction or improvements to a structure which do not increase the ground floor area;

ii. Repairs, reconstruction or improvements to a structure, the cost of which does not exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure either before the repair or reconstruction is started or, if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. Any project for improvement of specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or to structures identified as historic places, may be excluded in the 50 percent;

iii. If subsection (F)(6)(b)(i) of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this chapter.

7. Critical Facility. Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent possible, located outside the limits of the special flood hazard area. Construction of new critical facilities shall be permissible within this area if no feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within this area shall have the lowest floor elevated three feet above the base floor elevation or to the height of the 500-year flood, whichever is higher. Access to and from the critical facility should also be protected to the height utilized above. Flood-proofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to all critical facilities to the extent possible. (Ord. 2006-018 § 1)


Chapter 8.38 SPECIAL EVENTS

Sections:

8.38.010    Purpose.

8.38.020    Definitions.

8.38.030    Special events that require a permit.

8.38.040    Protected events under the First and Fourteenth Amendments to the U.S. Constitution.

8.38.050    Exempt activities.

8.38.060    Permit fees – Permit application requirements.

8.38.070    Authority of responsible official – Director authorized to adopt rules and regulations.

8.38.080    General permit conditions.

8.38.090    Denial of special event permit.

8.38.100    Appeal procedure.

8.38.110    Violation – Penalty.

8.38.120    Responsibility – No duty created.


8.38.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to enable the city to plan for potential impacts to the delivery of governmental services, in the interest of public health, safety, and the welfare of the city, by establishing permit requirements for special events; and to provide for the fees, charges and procedures required to administer the permit process. To the extent any provision of this chapter conflicts with a provision of Chapter 18.68 SMC (Temporary Activities) regarding regulation of events, the provisions of this chapter control. (Ord. 2019-009 § 1 (Exh. A))


8.38.020 Definitions.

“Director” means the community development director, designee, or other person authorized to issue special event permits.

“Exempt activity” is any temporary activity that does not require application for or issuance of a special event permit.

“Protected event” includes any temporary activity conducted on public or private property that involves political or religious activity intended primarily for the communication or expression of ideas, the protection of which is constitutionally guaranteed.

“Special event” is a temporary activity that affects the ordinary and normal use by the general public of public property or facilities, or that affects traffic flows, rights-of-way, parking, public safety, or the operations or services of the city or other public agencies.

“Special event permit” means the permit required to be issued by the city of Sequim before a special event is held. (Ord. 2019-009 § 1 (Exh. A))


8.38.030 Special events that require a permit.

Special events that require application for and issuance of a special event permit from the city include, but are not limited to, the following:

A. Activities that affect public property, facilities or operations in a manner that exceeds the ordinary and normal use by the general public.

B. Activities that affect the flow of traffic along public roads, rights-of-way, intersections, parking areas or transit stops in a manner that exceeds the ordinary and normal use by the general public.

C. Activities on public property that involve the consumption or sale of food or alcohol.

D. Activities on public property that involve merchandise or services available for sale or trade.

E. Activities that involve temporary structures such as tents, stages, concession stands, booths or rides being erected on public property, or on private property near enough to public property as to affect the ordinary and normal use of the public property by the general public.

F. Activities on public property that involve potential hazards, including without limitation fire pits or other open flame sources, firearms, firework displays, animals, and air- or watercraft. (Ord. 2019-009 § 1 (Exh. A))


8.38.040 Protected events under the First and Fourteenth Amendments to the U.S. Constitution.

Events or activities that are an exercise of rights protected under the First and Fourteenth Amendments to the U.S. Constitution are protected events. Protected events may require a special event permit if one or more of the activities referenced in SMC 8.38.030 apply. However, if a special event permit is determined to be required, the city will expedite review and processing of the application in a manner that respects the liberty of applicants and the public, will charge no fee, and will limit imposition of conditions to event location, time, manner, traffic control, and assembly/disbanding locations.

Nothing in this section is intended to restrict or constrain spontaneous assemblies or other exercises of the public’s constitutionally guaranteed rights; however, “disorderly conduct” as defined in RCW 9A.84.030(1) is not considered a constitutionally guaranteed right. (Ord. 2019-009 § 1 (Exh. A))


8.38.050 Exempt activities.

Activities that are exempt from this chapter and do not require special event permits include, but are not limited to:

A. Funeral and wedding processions.

B. Government meetings in normal places of assembly.

C. Conferences, conventions, or other gatherings of people held in facilities designed for that purpose.

D. Gatherings of 30 or fewer people in a public park for a single purpose or cause, unless merchandise or services are offered for sale or trade.

E. Temporary outdoor on-site sales lasting no longer than two consecutive weeks conducted by businesses on private property, such as holiday, grand opening, or anniversary sales.

F. Temporary sales of goods conducted by nonprofit organizations on public or private property, such as scout group or school fundraising activities.

G. Private garage, yard, and rummage sales, when operated not more than four days in the same week or more than four times in the same calendar year (see SMC 8.38.040).

H. The indoor exhibition of films or motion pictures.

I. Special events that occur exclusively on city property and are sponsored or conducted by the city of Sequim.

J. Pedestrian processions along a route that is restricted to sidewalks and crossing streets only at pedestrian crosswalks in accordance with traffic regulations and controls.

K. Activities of governmental agencies, including but not limited to military units, which are performed within the scope of such agency’s duties and functions.

L. Spontaneous assemblies or other exercises of the public’s constitutionally guaranteed rights.

M. Fireworks stands. (Refer to Chapter 8.20 SMC.)

N. Outdoor displays of merchandise for sale that do not impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic and are not prohibited elsewhere in the Sequim Municipal Code.

O. Car wash fundraisers for nonprofit or school groups.

P. Regularly scheduled school events, such as athletic events that use existing parking and traffic controls and public safety support, or the practice sessions and games of school and community sports teams.

Q. Lawful picketing by 30 or fewer people on sidewalks in a manner that does not impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic or impair vision triangles.

R. Private events held entirely on private property that do not involve the use of or have an adverse or significant impact on public property, facilities or operations. (Ord. 2019-009 § 1 (Exh. A))


8.38.060 Permit fees – Permit application requirements.

A. Special event permit fees are established by the city’s rates and fees ordinance ( Chapter 3.68 SMC), which is regularly reviewed, amended, and adopted by the city council.

B. Timely Submission of Application. Any person or organization desiring to sponsor a special event should apply for a special event permit at least 60 days before the date on which the event is to occur. Applicant should have all other required permits issued or their applications underway before submitting a special event application with the city. Failure to apply within the 60-day deadline will not be grounds for denying any protected event.

C. Waiver of 60-Day Application Deadline for Non-Protected Events. At the director’s sole discretion, the city will consider an application for a non-protected event that is submitted after the 60-day deadline if there is sufficient time to process and investigate the application and, if applicable, arrange for police and other city services for the event. The director’s decision not to waive an application deadline is final. This subsection does not apply to protected events, which are not subject to the submission deadline in subsection B of this section.

D. Indemnification. An indemnification agreement is required as a condition for issuing a special event permit, except when the activity is a protected event. Before issuing a permit for a nonexempt, non-protected event, the applicant and/or the authorized officer of the event sponsor must agree in writing to reimburse the city for any costs incurred by the city in repairing damage to its property and indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city, its officers, employees, volunteers and agents from and against all causes of action, claims or liabilities occurring in connection with the permitted event, except those which occur due to the city’s sole negligence.

E. Insurance. Proof of insurance is required as a condition for issuing a special event permit, except when the activity is a protected event. The “City of Sequim” must be named as an additional insured on the certificate of liability insurance, and applicant must provide a printout of the insurer’s endorsement language as well as the certificate. The types and amounts of insurance required will be determined by the city based on the risk of exposure of the event. The minimum liability limit requirement is $1,000,000 per occurrence unless a lower minimum amount is specifically agreed to in writing by the director.

F. Fees for City Services. In addition to any application fee that may be required, a special event permit may contain a requirement that the applicant reimburse the city for services and equipment provided for the event, including without limitation the use of police officers and public employees for traffic and crowd control, pickup and delivery of traffic control devices, picnic tables, extraordinary street sweeping, and any other needed, requested or required city services and the cost of operating the equipment to provide such services. The city may provide the applicant in advance with an estimate of these costs and require payment 10 business days prior to the event. If the actual cost for the equipment and services is less than the estimate, the applicant will receive a refund in a timely manner. If the actual cost is greater than the estimate, the applicant will be billed for the difference and failure to timely pay the amount due may result in denial of future permits.

G. Cleanup Deposits. The applicant/sponsor of a nonexempt, non-protected event may be required to pay a cleanup deposit if, in the discretion of the director or designee, the event is likely to create a substantial need for cleanup. The deposit may be refunded after the event if the area used has been cleaned and restored to the same condition as existed prior to the event. If not, the applicant/sponsor will be billed for the actual cost of cleanup and restoration and the cleanup deposit will be applied toward payment of that bill.

H. Waiver of Fees. The city may waive permit fees or service, equipment, and cleanup fees in part or in full if the special event permit application is for a protected event. (Ord. 2019-009 § 1 (Exh. A))


8.38.070 Authority of responsible official – Director authorized to adopt rules and regulations.

The director is the responsible official for purposes of issuing special event permits. The responsible official is authorized to:

A. Issue, issue with conditions, deny or revoke permits for special events occurring within the city limits, pursuant to the procedures established in this chapter.

B. Determine the special event venue, including the setting of reasonable boundaries for the special event venue, balancing the special event requirements and the public health, safety, and welfare.

C. Inform the special event permit applicant of the need to obtain permits from other local, state or federal public agencies in order to be eligible for a special event permit, and ensure that those permits are obtained before issuing the special event permit.

D. Waive permit fees and determine what, if any, limited conditions may be imposed on protected events.

The director is authorized to promulgate additional rules and regulations that are consistent with and that further the terms and requirements set forth in this chapter and the provisions of law that pertain to the conduct and operation of a special event. (Ord. 2019-009 § 1 (Exh. A))


8.38.080 General permit conditions.

The city may condition the issuance of a special event permit by imposing reasonable requirements concerning the time, place and manner of the event, and such requirements as are necessary to protect the safety and rights of persons and property, and the control of traffic.

Special events that require application for and issuance of a special event permit may be located within all zones. Such events must be conducted consistent with the conditions set forth in the issued special event permit.

Before issuing a special event permit the director or designee will consider whether adequate plans for parking exist to meet the need generated by the proposed event; whether the proposed event unreasonably compounds impacts of other activities such as events or construction on the date(s) requested; whether the proposed event location has been unreasonably impacted by the number of events in a one-year period; and any other and additional conditions deemed necessary by the director or designee to reasonably ensure that the proposed event does not create a likelihood of endangering participants or spectators.

Other conditions or considerations include but are not limited to:

A. All temporary structures approved with a special event permit must be removed within 24 hours of the conclusion of the event or as specified in conditions attached to the permit, leaving the site in the same condition as it was prior to the temporary structures’ placement.

B. Fumes, Odors, and Dust. Special events that create noxious fumes, offensive odors, or excessive amounts of airborne dust are not permitted. Applicant is required to meet applicable state standards regarding the control of such nuisances.

C. Other Permit Requirements. The city may require proper insurance, indemnification and hold harmless agreements, proof of possession of any federal, state, county or local required permits or licenses, damage deposits, deposits for payment for cleanup, traffic control, security and other similar requirements, including any applicable provisions for business licenses and collection and reporting of sales tax; which will be identified in the permit.

D. Priority of Permit Issuance. Events sponsored by the city of Sequim have priority when scheduling dates and public venues for special events. All other events, except protected events, will be scheduled on a first-come, first-served basis not more than one year prior to the proposed date of the event. If more than one event sponsor submits an application for an event that would occur on the same date and venue, the following criteria will be applied in the following order:

1. The event and/or the event organizer have a demonstrated history of success in producing events in Sequim, Clallam County or the Olympic Peninsula.

2. The event has been recommended for funding by the lodging tax advisory committee or has received any other city grant.

3. The event supports a city council goal or program initiative. (Ord. 2019-009 § 1 (Exh. A))


8.38.090 Denial of special event permit.

The city through the director or designee may deny an application for a special event permit. Grounds for denial may include, but are not limited to, the following:

A. The applicant provides false or misleading information.

B. The applicant fails to complete the application or to supply other required information or documents, or declares or shows an unwillingness or inability to comply with the reasonable terms or conditions contained in the proposed permit.

C. The proposed event would conflict with another proximate event, interfere with construction or maintenance work in the immediate vicinity, or unreasonably infringe upon the rights of abutting property owners.

D. Another special event permit application has already been received, or has already been approved, to hold another event on the same date, or at the same time, or at the same location requested by the applicant, or so close in date, time, or location as to cause undue traffic congestion, or the police department and/or other city departments are unable to meet the needs for police and other city services for both events, or for other scheduled events or unscheduled governmental functions.

E. The proposed event would unreasonably disrupt the orderly or safe circulation of traffic and would present an unreasonable risk of injury or damage to the public.

F. Insufficient numbers of safety personnel or other necessary city staff are available to safely accommodate the event.

G. The applicant has insufficient off-site parking or shuttle service, or both, when required, to minimize any substantial adverse impacts on general parking and traffic circulation in the vicinity of the proposed event.

If subsection C, D, or E of this section applies, the director must offer the applicant the opportunity to submit an alternate date, time, or location for the proposed event before denying the application. (Ord. 2019-009 § 1 (Exh. A))


8.38.100 Appeal procedure.

Applicants for special event permits have the right to an administrative appeal of the director’s denial of a permit, imposition of any permit condition, fee or deposit, or determination that the applicant’s insurance does not comply with requirements specified in the permit.

A written notice of appeal must be filed with the city clerk within three business days after the applicant or event sponsor receives notification from the director or designee that a permit has been denied, or that certain conditions or fees have been imposed. The notice of appeal must set forth the specific grounds for the appeal and attach any relevant documents for consideration.

Administrative appeals are heard by the city manager, who has sole discretion on whether to grant expedited review. If expedited review is not granted, the city manager will hold the hearing within 10 business days of receipt of the written notice of appeal and render a decision within one business day of the hearing. The city manager’s decision is final. (Ord. 2019-009 § 1 (Exh. A))


8.38.110 Violation – Penalty.

It is unlawful for any person to sponsor or conduct an event requiring a special event permit pursuant to this chapter unless a valid permit has been issued and remains in effect for the duration of the event. It is unlawful for any person to participate in such an event with the knowledge that the sponsor of the event has not been issued a required, valid permit or that a once-valid permit has expired or been revoked.

The special event permit authorizes the permittee/sponsor to conduct only such an event as is described in the permit and in accordance with the terms and conditions of the permit. It is unlawful for the permittee or event sponsor to willfully violate the terms and conditions of the permit, or for any event participant with knowledge thereof to willfully violate the terms and conditions of the permit or to continue with the event if the permit is revoked or expired.

Any person or organization violating the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof is subject to a penalty of a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment of not more than 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment.

In addition, or alternatively, any person violating the provisions of this chapter or the conditions of any permit issued hereunder also subjects the permittee to the provisions as set forth in Chapter 1.13 SMC and a daily civil penalty in the amount specified by SMC 1.13.180. (Ord. 2019-009 § 1 (Exh. A))


8.38.120 Responsibility – No duty created.

This chapter does not create any duty owed by the city of Sequim as to any specific person, party or class. Any duty that may be deemed to exist or arise in connection with the city’s permitting function is deemed exclusively a duty to the general public as a whole and not to any specific person, party or class. (Ord. 2019-009 § 1 (Exh. A))


Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE

Chapters:

9.04    General Provisions

9.08    Definitions

9.12    Offenses by or Against Public Officers and Government

9.16    Offenses Against the Person

9.20    Offenses Against Property

9.24    Offenses Against Public Peace

9.28    Offenses Against Decency

9.32    Offenses by or Against Minors

9.36    Weapons

9.40    Controlled Substances and Intoxicating Beverages

9.42    Keg Sale of Malt Liquor

9.44    Miscellaneous Offenses

9.50    Violation – Penalty


Chapter 9.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

9.04.010    General provisions.


9.04.010 General provisions.

A. The ordinance codified in this title shall be known as and may be cited as the Sequim criminal code.

B. Words in the present tense include the future tense, the masculine includes the feminine and neuter genders and the singular includes the plural, and vice versa.

C. No act committed by a person while in a state of voluntary intoxication shall be deemed less criminal by reason of his condition, but whenever the actual existence of any particular mental state is a necessary element to constitute a specific or degree of crime, the fact of his intoxication may be taken into consideration in determining such mental state. (Ord. 357 § 1, 1977)


Chapter 9.08 DEFINITIONS

Sections:

9.08.010    Definitions.


9.08.010 Definitions.

As defined in this section, the following words and phrases shall be applicable to this title:

A. “Acted” includes, where relevant, omitted to act.

B. “Actor” includes, where relevant, a person failing to act.

C. “Building,” in addition to its ordinary meaning, includes any dwelling, fenced area, vehicle, railway car, cargo container or other structure used for the lodging of persons or for carrying on business therein, or for the use, sale or deposit of goods. Each unit of a building consisting of two or more units separately secured or occupied is a separate building.

D. Criminally Negligent. A person is “criminally negligent” or acts with “criminal negligence” when he fails to be aware of a substantial risk that a wrongful act may occur and his failure to be aware of such substantial risk constitutes gross deviation from the standard of care that a reasonable person would exercise in the same situation.

E. “Deadly weapon” means any explosive or loaded or unloaded firearm, and shall include any other weapon, device, instrument, article or substance, including a vehicle, which under the circumstances in which it is used, attempted to be used, or threatened to be used, is readily capable of causing death or serious bodily injury.

F. “Dwelling” means any building or structure, though movable or temporary, or a portion thereof, which is used or ordinarily used by a person for lodging.

G. Intent. A person acts with “intent” or “intentionally” when he acts with the objective or purpose to accomplish a result which constitutes a crime.

H. Knowingly. A person knows or acts “knowingly” or “with knowledge” when he is aware of a fact, facts or circumstances or result described by an ordinance defining an offense, or he has information which would lead a reasonable person in the same situation to believe that facts exist, which facts are described by an ordinance defining an offense.

I. “Jail” means any place designated by law for the keeping of persons held in custody under process of law, or under lawful arrest, including, but not limited to, any county or city jail.

J. Malice. “Malice” and “maliciously” shall import an evil intent, wish or design to vex, annoy or injure another person. Malice may be inferred from an act done in wilful disregard of the rights of another, or an act wrongfully done without just cause or excuse, or an act or omission of duty betraying a wilful disregard of social duty.

K.    1. “Marijuana” or “marihuana” means all parts of the plant cannabis, whether growing or not, with a THC concentration greater than 0.3 percent on a dry weight basis; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin. The term does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination.

2. “Marijuana concentrates” means products consisting wholly or in part of the resin extracted from any part of the plant cannabis and having a THC concentration greater than 60 percent.

3. “Marijuana processor” means a person licensed by the State Liquor Control Board to process marijuana into usable marijuana and marijuana-infused products, package and label usable marijuana and marijuana-infused products for sale in retail outlets, and sell usable marijuana and marijuana-infused products at wholesale to marijuana retailers.

4. “Marijuana producer” means a person licensed by the State Liquor Control Board to produce and sell marijuana at wholesale to marijuana processors and other marijuana producers.

5. “Marijuana-infused products” means products that contain marijuana or marijuana extracts, are intended for human use, and have a THC concentration greater than 0.3 percent and no greater than 60 percent. The term “marijuana-infused products” does not include either usable marijuana or marijuana concentrates.

6. “Marijuana retailer” means a person licensed by the State Liquor Control Board to sell usable marijuana and marijuana-infused products in a retail outlet.

L. Neglect. Each of the words “neglect,” “negligence,” “negligent” and “negligently” shall import a want of such attention to the natural or probable consequences of an act or omission as an ordinarily prudent person usually exercises under similar circumstances.

M. “Officer” and “public officer” mean a person holding office under a city, county or state government, or the federal government, who performs a public function and in so doing is vested with the exercise of some sovereign power of government, and includes all assistants, deputies, clerks and employees of any public officer and all persons lawfully exercising or assuming to exercise any of the powers or functions of a public officer.

N. Owner. Any person shall be deemed as “owner” of any property who has a general or special interest in the whole or any part thereof, or lawful possession thereof, either actual or constructive.

O. “Peace officer” means a duly appointed city, county, state or federal law enforcement officer.

P. “Person,” “he,” and “actor” include any natural person, and, where relevant, a corporation, joint stock association, partnership or other unincorporated association.

Q. “Public servant” means any person other than a witness who presently occupies the position of or has been elected, appointed or designated to become any officer or employee of the government, and any person participating as an advisor, consultant, or otherwise in performing a governmental function.

R. Principal. Every person concerned in the commission of a misdemeanor, whether that person directly commits the act constituting the offense, attempts to commit or aids or abets in its commission, and whether present or absent, and every person who directly or indirectly counsels, encourages, hires, commands, induces or otherwise procures another to commit a misdemeanor is a “principal,” and shall be proceeded against and punished as such. The fact that the person aided, abetted, counseled, encouraged, hired, commanded, induced or procured, could not or did not entertain a criminal intent, shall not be a defense to any person aiding, abetting, attempting, counseling, encouraging, hiring, commanding, inducing or procuring that person.

S. “Prisoner” includes any person held in custody under process of law, or under lawful arrest.

T. “Property” means anything tangible or intangible, real or personal.

U. “Signature” includes any memorandum, mark or sign made with intent to authenticate any instrument or writing, or the subscription of any person thereto.

V. “Vehicle” means any motor vehicle, aircraft or any vessel equipped for propulsion by mechanical means or sail.

W. “Writing” includes printing. (Ord. 2015-012 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 357 § 2, 1977)


Chapter 9.12 OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST PUBLIC OFFICERS AND GOVERNMENT

Sections:

9.12.010    Official misconduct.

9.12.020    Obstructing a public servant.


9.12.010 Official misconduct.

A public servant is guilty of official misconduct if, with intent to obtain a benefit or to deprive another person of a lawful right or privilege:

A. He intentionally commits an unauthorized act under color of law; or

B. He intentionally refrains from performing a duty imposed upon him by law. (Ord. 357 § 11(15), 1977)


9.12.020 Obstructing a public servant.

A. No person shall, without lawful excuse, refuse or knowingly fail to make or furnish any statement, report or information lawfully required of him by a public servant, or in any such statement or report make any knowingly untrue, misleading or exaggerated statement to a public servant, or knowingly hinder, delay or obstruct any public servant in the discharge of his official powers or duties.

B. No person shall intentionally prevent or attempt to prevent a public servant from lawfully apprehending or arresting a person.

C. No person shall directly or indirectly address any threat or intimidation to a public officer with intent to induce him, contrary to his duty, to do or make or omit or delay any act, decision or determination.

D. No person shall escape from custody or attempt to escape from custody, if he is held on a charge, conviction or sentence.

E. No person shall, by force or fraud, rescue from lawful custody a prisoner held upon a charge, arrest, commitment, conviction or sentence.

F. No person shall advise, aid or assist any person in the custody of any police officer or peace officer to escape custody.

G. No person shall take from the custody of any officer or other person, any personal property in his charge under process of law, or wilfully injure or destroy such property.

H. No person shall knowingly and unlawfully provide contraband to any person confined in a detention center.

I. No person shall have any verbal communication with any prisoner in the city jail, or bring into or convey out of the same, any writing, clothing, food, tobacco or any other article or contraband without the prior authorization by law or by any officer authorized to give such authorization.

J. No person shall, with intent to prevent, hinder or delay the apprehension or prosecution of another person who he knows has committed a crime or is being sought by law enforcement officials for the commission of a crime or has escaped from a detention facility, harbor or conceal such person or warn such person of impending discovery or apprehension, or provide such person with money, transportation, disguise or other means of avoiding discovery or apprehension, or prevent or obstruct by use of force, deception or threat, anyone from performing an act that might aid in the discovery or apprehension of such person, or provide such person with a weapon.

K. No person shall falsely impersonate a public officer, civil or military, or a policeman or fireman, or a private individual having special authority by law to perform an act affecting the rights or interest of another, or, without authority, assume any uniform or badge by which such an officer or person is lawfully distinguished and in such assumed character do any act purporting to be official.

L. No person shall knowingly hinder, delay or obstruct any fireman in the discharge of his official powers and/or duties.

M. No person shall wilfully and without cause tamper with, molest, injure or break any public or private fire alarm apparatus, emergency telephone, radio or other wire or signal, or any fire-fighting equipment or fire hydrant, or wilfully and without having reasonable grounds for believing a fire exists, send, give, transmit or sound any false alarm of fire by shouting in a public place or by means of any public or private fire alarm system or signal, or by telephone. This provision shall not prohibit the testing of fire alarm systems by persons authorized to do so, by a fire department or state fire marshal.

N. No person shall wilfully prevent or attempt to prevent by persuasion, threat or otherwise, any person from appearing before any court as a witness in any action, proceeding or investigation, or any officer authorized to subpoena witnesses, with intent thereby to obstruct the course of justice.

O. No person, after having been lawfully commanded to summon for a peace officer, upon request by a person he knows to be a peace officer, shall unreasonably refuse or fail to summon aid for such police officer. (Ord. 357 § 13, 1977)


Chapter 9.16 OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON

Sections:

9.16.010    Assault.

9.16.020    Frauds.

9.16.030    False identity.

9.16.040    Dangerous conduct.

9.16.050    Custodial interference.

9.16.060    Restraining orders.

9.16.070    Telephone misuse.


9.16.010 Assault.

It is unlawful for any person to commit an assault and battery within the city. A person is guilty of assault when:

A. With intent to cause bodily injury, he causes bodily injury to any person; or

B. He unlawfully and knowingly beats, touches or strikes any other person; or

C. He unlawfully and intentionally places or attempts to place another person in fear of bodily injury; or

D. He, with intent to inflict bodily harm or to create an apprehension thereof, shall attempt or offer, with force and violence, to do a corporeal hurt to another; or

E. He attempts to unlawfully use force or inflict bodily injury on another, accompanied with apparent present ability to give effect to the attempt if not prevented. (Ord. 357 § 4, 1977)


9.16.020 Frauds.

A. Every person who obtains food, lodging, accommodation or service at any motel, hotel, restaurant, boarding house, lodging house or other place of business without paying therefor, with intent to defraud the proprietor or manager thereof, or who obtains credit at a motel, hotel, restaurant, boarding house, lodging house or other place of business by color or aid of any false pretense, representation, token or writing, or who, after obtaining board, lodging, accommodation or service at a motel, hotel, restaurant, boarding house, lodging house or other place of business absconds or surreptitiously removes his baggage therefrom without paying for such food, lodging, accommodation or service, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

B. It is unlawful for any person to knowingly and wilfully operate, or cause to be operated, or attempt to operate, or attempt to cause to be operated, any coin-box telephone or other receptacle designed to receive lawful coin of the United States of America in connection with the sale, use or enjoyment of property or service, by means of a slug or any false, counterfeited, mutilated, sweated or foreign coin, or by any means, method, trick or device whatsoever not lawfully authorized by the owner, lessee or licensee of the machine, coin-box telephone or other receptacle designed to receive lawful coin of the United States of America in connection with the sale, use or enjoyment of property or service, any goods, wares, merchandise, gas, electric current, article of value, or the use or enjoyment of any telephone or telegraph facilities or service without depositing in and surrendering to the machine, coin-box telephone or receptacle, lawful coin of the United States of America to the amount required therefor by the owner, lessee or licensee of the machine, coin-box telephone or receptacle. (Ord. 357 § 7, 1977)


9.16.030 False identity.

No person shall assume a false identity and do an act in his assumed character with intent to defraud another or for any other unlawful purpose, or pretend to be a representative of some person or organization or a public servant and do an act in his pretended capacity with intent to defraud another or for any other unlawful purpose. (Ord. 357 § 11(7), 1977)


9.16.040 Dangerous conduct.

No person shall engage in any conduct which creates a substantial risk of death or serious physical injury to another person. (Ord. 357 § 11(9), 1977)


9.16.050 Custodial interference.

A person is guilty of custodial interference if, knowing that he has no legal right to do so, he takes or entices from lawful custody any incompetent person or other person entrusted by authority of law to the custody of another person or institution. (Ord. 357 § 11(14), 1977)


9.16.060 Restraining orders.

A. Any person having had actual notice of the existence of a restraining order issued by court of competent jurisdiction in an action for the dissolution of a marriage who refuses to comply with the provisions of such order when requested by any peace officer of the state shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

B. The notice requirements of subsection A of this section may be satisfied by the peace officer giving oral or written evidence to the person subject to the order by reading from or handing to that person a copy certified to be an accurate copy of the original on file by a notary public or the clerk of the court of the court order, which copy may be supplied by the court, the complainant or the complainant’s attorney.

C. The remedies provided by this section shall not apply unless restraining orders subject to this section bear the legend:

VIOLATION OF THIS ORDER WITH ACTUAL NOTICE OF ITS TERMS IS A CRIMINAL OFFENSE UNDER CHAPTER 26.09 RCW, AND IS ALSO SUBJECT TO CIVIL CONTEMPT PROCEEDINGS.

D. It is a defense to prosecution under subsection A of this section that the court order was issued contrary to law or court rule; provided that, no right of action shall accrue against any peace officer acting upon a properly certified copy of a court order lawful on its face if such officer used otherwise lawful means to effect the arrest. (Ord. 357 § 20, 1977)


9.16.070 Telephone misuse.

A. Every person who with intent to harass, intimidate, torment or embarrass any other person, makes a telephone call to such other person:

1. Using any lewd, lascivious, profane, indecent or obscene words or language, or suggesting the commission of any lewd or lascivious act; or

2. Anonymously or repeatedly or at an extremely inconvenient hour, whether or not conversation ensues; or

3. Threatening to inflict injury on the person or property of the person called or any member of his or her family; or

4. Without purpose of legitimate communication, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

B. No person shall knowingly permit any telephone under his control to be used for any purpose prohibited in subsection A of this section. (Ord. 357 § 22, 1977)


Chapter 9.20 OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY

Sections:

9.20.010    Unlawful use of motor vehicle.

9.20.020    Defacing identification marks.

9.20.030    Causing fire or explosion.

9.20.040    Damaging property of others.

9.20.050    Petit larceny.

9.20.060    Property damage.

9.20.070    Shoplifting.

9.20.080    Trespass and criminal trespass.


9.20.010 Unlawful use of motor vehicle.

No person, with intent to commit a crime against or in respect to a person or property therein, shall enter or remain in a motor vehicle without the permission of the owner thereof. (Ord. 357 § 11(5), 1977)


9.20.020 Defacing identification marks.

A. No person shall obscure or deface the manufacturer’s serial number or any other distinguishing identification number or mark upon any vehicle, machine, engine, apparatus, appliance or other device with intent to render the same unidentifiable.

B. No person shall possess a vehicle, machine, engine, apparatus, appliance or other device held for sale knowing the serial number or other distinguishing identification number or mark thereon has been obscured or defaced. (Ord. 357 § 11(6), 1977)


9.20.030 Causing fire or explosion.

No person shall knowingly cause a fire or explosion, whether on his property or that of another, which fire or explosion recklessly places a building or other structure, or any vehicle, railway, car, aircraft, watercraft or any hay, grain, crop or timber, whether cut or standing, in danger of destruction or damage. (Ord. 357 § 11(8), 1977)


9.20.040 Damaging property of others.

No person shall knowingly and maliciously case physical damage to the property of another. (Ord. 357 § 11(10), 1977)


9.20.050 Petit larceny.

A. No person shall, with intent to defraud, make, draw, utter or deliver to another person any check or draft on a bank or other depository for the payment of money in an amount which does not exceed $250.00, knowing at the time of such making, drawing, uttering or delivery, that he has not sufficient funds in, or credit with, the bank or other depository, to pay the check or draft in full upon its presentation. The word “credit” as used in this section shall be construed to mean an arrangement or understanding with the bank or other depository for the payment of such check or draft, and the making, drawing, uttering or delivery of such check or draft to another person without such funds or credit to meet the same shall be prima facie evidence of an intent to defraud.

B. No person shall knowingly receive, retain, possess, conceal or dispose of stolen property knowing it has been stolen, or withhold or appropriate the same, to the use of any person other than the true owner or person entitled thereto.

C. No person shall wrongfully obtain or exert unauthorized control over the property or services of another or the value thereof, with intent to deprive him of such property or services, or by the color or aid of deception obtain control over the property or services of another or the value thereof, with intent to deprive him of such property or services, or appropriate lost or misdelivered property or services of another or the value thereof, with intent to deprive him of such property or services, when the value of such property or services does not exceed $250.00. (Ord. 357 § 15, 1977)


9.20.060 Property damage.

A. It is unlawful for any person with intent to injure, defraud or deface to:

1. Break or deface the seal of any gas, electric or water meter.

2. Obstruct, alter, injure or prevent the action of any meter or other instrument used to measure or register the quantity of gas, electricity or water supplied to a consumer thereof.

3. Make any connection by means of wire, main, cable, pipe or otherwise with any wire, main, cable or pipe used for the delivery of gas, electricity, water or television to a consumer thereof, in such a manner as to take gas, electricity, water or television service without its passage through the meter or other instrument provided for registering the amount or quantity consumed, or use any gas, electricity, water or television so obtained.

4. Make any connection or reconnection with such wire, main, pipe or cable, or turn on or off, or in any manner interfere with any valve, stopcock or other appliances connected therewith.

5. Prevent by the erection of any device or construction or by any other means, free access to any meter or other instrument for registering the amount of gas, electricity or water consumed or interfere with, obstruct or prevent, by any means, the reading or inspection of such meter or instrument, by the person, company or corporation owning the same.

B. It is unlawful for any person to wilfully or maliciously remove, damage, deface or destroy any property or property rights within the city, or any property or property right of the city or of any other person wheresoever situated including but not limited to the following:

1. A highway or private way laid out by authority of law, or a bridge span upon such public or private road, or wilfully or maliciously cause to be placed thereon any substance or thing dangerous to any person or animal traveling thereon or which might injure or puncture the tire of any vehicle traveling thereon.

2. A tree, rock, post or other monument erected or marked for the purpose of designating a point on the boundary of the city, or of any property owned by the city, or any tract, lot or parcel of land or any mark or inscription thereon.

3. A mile sign, mile board or guidepost erected on any streets or at any intersection, or any inscription thereon.

4. A telegraph, telephone or electric transmission line or television cable or any part thereof, or any appurtenance thereto, or apparatus connected with the operation thereof.

5. A pipe or main for conducting gas, water or oil or any works erected for the storage or otherwise used for the purpose of supplying the gas, water or oil to consumers.

6. A main or pipe for conducting water or any works erected along the pipe or main through or upon any of the lands through which the city owns a right-of-way for the purpose of conducting water for the inhabitants of the city.

7. A sewer or main, or pipe or drain connected therewith or forming a part thereof.

8. Any engine, hose, truck, hose cart, ladder or ladder truck, extinguisher or other apparatus used by the district fire department, or any rope, wire or bell, signal, instrument or apparatus for the communication or alarms of fire or police calls.

9. A monument erected in any cemetery, street, park or other public place.

10. A legal notice or other legal paper posted in compliance with the requirements of any statute of this state or the ordinances of the city or under the direction of any order of court.

11. Any trees, shrubbery, flowers, buildings, parts of buildings, vehicles, flowers or other property, whether real or personal, belonging to the city or any other person.

C. It is unlawful for any person to break, mutilate or deface or destroy any property belonging to the city or any other person by writing names, advertising matter, signs, words, letters or figures or drawing any pictures upon any sidewalks, or upon or within any building in the city.

D. It is unlawful to open, remove from its normal place of repose or in any other manner interfere with the operation of any coin or currency receptacle, with intent to unlawfully remove money therefrom.

E. It is unlawful for any person being the owner of, or having the care or control of any dog, horse, mule, cow or other animal, to knowingly permit the same to enter upon or do injury to any improved public park or parking strip in the city, or upon private premises, to the injury or annoyance of the owner or occupant thereof. (Ord. 357 § 17, 1977)


9.20.070 Shoplifting.

A. A person who wilfully takes possession of any goods, wares or merchandise of a value not to exceed $250.00 offered for sale by any wholesale or retail store or other mercantile establishment without the consent of the seller, with the intention of converting such goods, wares or merchandise to his own use without having paid the purchase price is guilty of the misdemeanor of shoplifting.

B. Every person, unless in a usual shopping area en route to a checkstand or place of payment, who is found with any merchandise, goods, wares or chattels in his or her possession and having had the opportunity to pay for the same and having failed to do so shall be deemed to have given prima facie evidence of an intention to take and steal the same. (Ord. 357 § 21, 1977)


9.20.080 Trespass and criminal trespass.

A. It is unlawful for any person to go upon the land of another with intent to annoy or vex the owner or occupant thereof, or to commit any unlawful act, or to wilfully go or remain upon any land after having been warned by the owner thereof not to trespass thereon.

B. Every person not privileged or licensed to do so, who enters or remains in any building or occupied structure or separately secured or occupied portion thereof, including but not limited to publicly owned or occupied buildings, structures or portions thereof shall be guilty of criminal trespass.

C. Every person not privileged or licensed to do so, who enters or remains in any public or private place or on any public or private premises as to which notice against trespass thereon is given by the owner or some other authorized person, through actual communication to the actor, or posting in a manner prescribed by law or reasonably likely to come to the attention of intruders or fencing or enclosure manifestly designed to exclude intruders, shall be guilty of criminal trespass.

D. Every person not licensed or privileged to remain who defies an order to leave public or private premises or public or private places communicated to him by the owner of the place or premises or by some other authorized person shall be guilty of criminal trespass.

E. A person is guilty of criminal trespass if he knowingly enters or remains unlawfully in a building or on real property adjacent thereto or upon real property which is fenced or otherwise enclosed in a manner designed to exclude intruders, or knowingly enters or remains unlawfully in or upon the premises of another. (Ord. 357 § 23, 1977)


Chapter 9.24 OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE

Sections:

9.24.010    Disorderly conduct.

9.24.020    Unlawful assembly.

9.24.030    Smoking.


9.24.010 Disorderly conduct.

A. Whenever in this section general terms follow a specific enumeration, such general terms shall not be limited to words, acts or things similar or like to those comprised in the specific enumeration, but shall be liberally construed for the purpose of preserving the public safety and peace.

B. The following persons are declared to be disorderly persons:

1. Any person fighting or quarreling or encouraging others to fight in any public place in the city.

2. Any person who, by noisy, riotous or tumultuous conduct, disturbs the quiet and peace of the city or any meeting or assemblage therein.

3. Any person who wilfully annoys, molests, bothers, insults or offers an affront to another person.

4. Any person who wilfully breaks, impairs, injures or defaces any building, fence, awning, window, sign, sign board, trees, shrub or other thing of value, being the property of another.

5. Any person who intentionally obstructs vehicular or pedestrian traffic without lawful authority.

6. Any person who removes, interferes with, carries away or destroys the property of another, or who tears down, destroys or mutilates any notice or handbill lawfully posted in the city.

7. Any person who intentionally disrupts any lawful assembly or meeting of persons without lawful authority.

8. Any person who looks into the windows of another without a lawful right to do so.

9. Any person who creates or participates in any noise, disturbance or any other demonstration calculated or intended to frighten or intimidate or disturb any person.

C. It is unlawful to be a disorderly person as provided in subsection B of this section. A violation of any of the provisions of subsection B shall be a separate and distinct offense and shall be prosecuted as such. (Ord. 357 § 6, 1977)


9.24.020 Unlawful assembly.

It is unlawful for any two or more persons to assemble together to do any unlawful act or, being assembled, to mutually agree to do an unlawful act with force and violence against the property of the city or the personal property of another, or against the peace or to the terror of others. (Ord. 357 § 11(13), 1977)


9.24.030 Smoking.

No person shall light a pipe, cigar or cigarette in, or shall enter with a lighted pipe, cigar or cigarette, any building on which is posted in a conspicuous place over or near each principal entrance a notice in plain, legible characters stating that no smoking is allowed in such building. (Ord. 357 § 11(1), 1977)


Chapter 9.28 OFFENSES AGAINST DECENCY

Sections:

9.28.010    Lewd conduct.

9.28.020    Prostitution.


9.28.010 Lewd conduct.

A. Definitions.

1. “Lewd conduct” is defined as:

a. An exposure of one’s genitals, female breasts or other intimate parts of a person; or

b. The touching, caressing or fondling of the sexual or other intimate parts of another; or

c. Sexual intercourse; or

d. Masturbation.

2. “Public places” is defined as an area generally visible to public view and shall include streets, sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots, automobiles (whether moving or not), buildings open to the general public, including those in which food or drink is served or entertainment provided, and the doorways and entrances to buildings or dwellings and the ground enclosing them.

3. “Person” includes any human being.

B. The commission or performance by any person of any lewd conduct or act as defined in this section in a public place shall be, and is, prohibited.

C. The owner, occupant, operator, manager or employee of a public place as defined in this chapter shall be, and he or she is, prohibited from permitting lewd conduct in or about such public place. (Ord. 357 § 10, 1977)


9.28.020 Prostitution.

A. No person shall engage or agree or offer to engage in sexual conduct with another person in return for a fee. The sex of the two parties or prospective parties to the sexual conduct engaged in, contemplated or solicited is immaterial.

B. No person having possession or control of a building, apartment, automobile or other premises shall allow the same to be used for the purposes of prostitution. (Ord. 357 § 18, 1977)


Chapter 9.32 OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST MINORS

Sections:

9.32.010    Delinquency.

9.32.020    Runaways.

9.32.030    Leaving minors unattended.

9.32.040    Intoxicating liquor – Unlawful for minors to purchase.


9.32.010 Delinquency.

It is unlawful in all cases where any minor is delinquent for the parent, legal guardian or person having custody of such minor, or any other person, by any act, to encourage, cause or contribute to the delinquency of such minor. (Ord. 357 § 9(2), 1977)


9.32.020 Runaways.

It is unlawful for any person to aid or abet any juvenile running away from home, or to furnish such juvenile a place to stay without first notifying the child’s parents or guardian of his whereabouts, or notifying the appropriate juvenile authority. (Ord. 357 § 9(3), 1977)


9.32.030 Leaving minors unattended.

No person having the care and custody, whether temporary or permanent, of minor children under the age of 12 years, may leave such minor child unattended. (Ord. 357 § 11(2), 1977)


9.32.040 Intoxicating liquor – Unlawful for minors to purchase.

A. In this chapter the term “intoxicating liquors” includes the four varieties of liquor commonly known as alcohol, spirits, wine and beer, and all fermented, spirituous, vinous or malt liquor, or combinations thereof, and mixed liquor, a part of which is fermented, spirituous, vinous or malt liquor, or otherwise intoxicating; and every liquid or solid or semisolid or other substance, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and all drinks or drinkable liquids and all preparations or mixtures capable of human consumption, and any liquid, semisolid, solid or other substance which contains more than one percent of alcohol by weight, which substances shall be conclusively deemed to be intoxicating.

B. Except in the case of liquor given to a person under the age of 21 years by his parent, guardian, physician or dentist for medicinal purposes, no person shall give or otherwise supply liquor to any person under the age of 21 years or permit any person under that age to consume liquor on his premises or on any premises under his control, and it shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to purchase or attempt to purchase, consume or possess liquor as defined in this section. (Ord. 195, 1963)


Chapter 9.36 WEAPONS

Sections:

9.36.010    Weapons and dangerous exhibitions.

9.36.020    Disposal of forfeited firearms.

9.36.030    Exemption from state law.


9.36.010 Weapons and dangerous exhibitions.

A. It is unlawful for any person to carry, exhibit, display or draw any firearm, dagger, sword, knife or other cutting or stabbing instrument, club or weapon apparently capable of producing bodily harm, in a manner, under circumstances, at a time that either manifests an intent to intimidate another or that warrants alarm for the safety of other persons, unless otherwise authorized by law.

B. It is unlawful for any person to manufacture, sell, dispose of or have in his possession any instrument or weapon of the kind usually known as a sling shot, sand club, metal knuckles or spring blade knife or any knife other than an ordinary pocket knife; or to carry furtively or with intent to conceal any dagger, dirk, pistol or other dangerous weapon; or to use any contrivance or device for suppressing the noise of any firearm unless otherwise authorized by law.

C. It is unlawful for any person to aim any gun, pistol, revolver or other firearm, whether loaded or not, at or towards any human being, or to wilfully discharge any firearm, air gun or other weapon, or throw any deadly missile in a public place, or in any place where any person might be endangered thereby, although no injury results, unless otherwise authorized by law.

D. It is unlawful for any person to carry any firearm or other dangerous weapon upon any premises within the city limits of the city where alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed; provided that, law enforcement officers in uniform, or on police related business, shall be exempt from the provisions of this subsection.

E. No proprietor, lessee or occupant of any place of amusement, or any plat of ground or building shall allow it to be used for the exhibition of skill in throwing any sharp instrument or in shooting any bow, gun, pistol or firearm of any description, at or toward any human being.

F. No person in the city, except police officers and other persons who are authorized by law or who have obtained proper authority to do so from the chief of police of the city, shall carry or wear in any manner concealed upon his person, any dirk, dagger, Bowie knife, sword, cane, gun, pistol, revolver, sling shot, metal knuckles or other dangerous weapons or other instruments which may be used to inflict injury upon the person of another.

G. No person in the city, except authorized law enforcement officers engaged in the lawful discharge of their duty, and persons practicing target shooting in a duly licensed shooting gallery or shooting range, shall fire off or discharge any gun, pistol or firearm of any kind within the city limits, or shoot an arrow or other projectile from a cross bow, bow or other similar device used for archery, except at a duly authorized archery range, within the city limits, unless otherwise authorized by law.

H. It is unlawful for any person to carry, transport or convey, or have in his possession or under his control in any motor driven or horse-drawn vehicle or in any vehicle propelled by man, any shotgun, rifle or handgun for which no permit has been issued to the person, containing shells or cartridges therein. (Ord. 2011-015 § 1; Ord. 97-012 § 3; Ord. 396 § 1, 1980; Ord. 357 § 24, 1977)


9.36.020 Disposal of forfeited firearms.

A. Except as provided in subsections B and C, all firearms that come into the possession of the Sequim police department after June 30, 1993, that are judicially forfeited under RCW 9.41.098 and are no longer needed for evidence or forfeited due to failure to make a claim under RCW 63.32.010, may be disposed of by the Sequim police department in its discretion as follows:

1. Retained for agency use;

2. Traded to commercial gun sellers;

3. Auctioned to commercial gun sellers;

4. Destroyed.

B. Antique Firearms Exempted. All firearms that are “antiques” as defined by RCW 9.41.150, or recognized as curios, relics, and firearms of particular historical significance by the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms (or any successor agency) shall not be retained for agency use or destroyed.

C. All firearms that are illegal to possess, as defined in subsection D, shall be destroyed, and shall not be retained, traded or auctioned. If firearms otherwise illegal to possess may be rendered legal to possess by removal or alteration of component parts, the Sequim police department may, in its discretion, effect such removal or alteration, and may thereafter dispose of the firearm under subsection A.

D. “Firearms that are illegal to possess” means firearms that are illegal to possess as defined by Chapter 9.41 RCW. (Ord. 93-020 §§ 1 – 4)


9.36.030 Exemption from state law.

The city shall be exempt from the prohibitions set forth in RCW 9.41.050(4) and subsection 4 of Section 405 of Chapter 7 of the Washington Laws, 1994 First Special Session, as allowed by subsection 405(6) of said law. (Ord. 94-018 § 1)


Chapter 9.40 CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES AND INTOXICATING BEVERAGES

Sections:

9.40.010    Controlled substances.


9.40.010 Controlled substances.

It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to have in his or her possession any form of marijuana, except as authorized by state law. (Ord. 2015-012 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 490 § 1, 1986; Ord. 357 § 5, 1977)


Chapter 9.42 KEG SALE OF MALT LIQUOR

Sections:

9.42.010    Purpose.

9.42.020    Definitions.

9.42.030    Sale of malt liquor.

9.42.040    Purchaser’s duty.

9.42.050    Declaration and receipt.

9.42.060    Penalty.


9.42.010 Purpose.

It is the purpose of this chapter to establish keg registration requirements for the sale and distribution of malt liquor within the city, to conform to ordinances recently adopted by Clallam County and the city of Port Angeles, and thus contribute to uniform control and enforcement within the community. (Ord. 521 § 1, 1987)


9.42.020 Definitions.

The following definitions shall be applicable to the provisions of this chapter: “Malt liquor” includes, but is not limited to, beer, strong beer, ale, stout and porter. (Ord. 521 § 1, 1987)


9.42.030 Sale of malt liquor.

Any person who sells or offers for sale the contents of kegs or any other container containing four gallons or more of malt liquor, or leases kegs or other containers which hold four gallons or more of malt liquor, to consumers who are not licensed under Chapter 66.24 RCW as amended as of or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall:

A. Require the purchaser to sign a triplicate receipt for the keg or container or the contents thereof and provide the following:

1. Two pieces of identification, one of which is a motor vehicle operator’s license or a Washington State identification card;

2. The particular address where the keg or container will be physically located or consumed;

3. A sworn statement, under penalty of perjury, that:

a. The purchaser is of legal age to purchase, possess, or use malt liquor;

b. The purchaser will not allow any person under the age of 21 years to consume the beverage except as provided by statute;

c. The purchaser will not remove or obliterate, or allow to be removed or obliterated, the identification number label affixed to the container or keg;

d. The purchaser will maintain a copy of the declaration and receipt next to or adjacent to the keg or container, in no event a distance greater than five feet, visible without physical barrier from such keg, during such time the keg or other container is in the purchaser’s possession or control;

B. Record the identification number of the keg or container in the following manner for the purpose of tracing the item if the contents are consumed in violation of this chapter:

1. Affix to each keg or container a numbered label, hereafter referred to as the identification number;

2. Record the serial number of the keg or container and the identification number on the receipt;

C. Retain the original copy of the receipt for a period of 90 days, subject to inspection by the police department, provide a second copy of the receipt to the purchaser, and the third copy of the receipt to the police department within seven days of the date of purchase;

D. Notify the police department immediately in the event a keg or container purchase exceeds 16 gallons or more of malt liquor to one purchaser. The seller will provide a purchaser’s name, address and driver’s license number to the police department. (Ord. 521 § 1, 1987)


9.42.040 Purchaser’s duty.

Any person who purchases the contents of kegs or other containers containing four gallons or more of malt liquor, or purchases or leases a keg or container which holds four or more gallons of malt liquor shall:

A. Be of legal age to purchase, possess or use malt liquor;

B. Not allow any person under the age of 21 years to consume the beverage except as provided by statute;

C. Not remove, obliterate or allow to be removed or obliterated, the numbered label affixed to the container;

D. Not remove, keep or store keg or its contents except for transporting to and from the retailer, at any place other than that particular address declared on the receipt and declaration;

E. Maintain a copy of the declaration and receipt next to or adjacent to the keg or other container, in no event a distance greater than five feet and visible without physical barrier from such keg during the time that the keg or other container is in the purchaser’s possession and/or control. (Ord. 521 § 1, 1987)


9.42.050 Declaration and receipt.

The form of the declaration and receipt required in this chapter shall be substantially in, but not necessarily limited to, the following form:

RECEIPT FOR SALE OF MALT LIQUOR IN KEGS OR CONTAINERS TO UNLICENSED PERSONS

(Print all information EXCEPT signatures)

Licensed Premises     ______________

Address ____________ City     _______

Date of Sale _____ Invoice No.     ____

Keg Identification Number(s)     _______

Brand __________ Keg Capacity     ___

No. of Kegs ____ Total Gallons     _____

Name of Purchaser     ______________

Address     _______________________

Address or location where keg will be located     ________________________

Motor Vehicle Operator’s License Number     _______________________

Washington State Identification Card     ______________________________

Other Identification     _______________

I declare under penalty of perjury the information provided in this receipt is true and correct and that:

1. I am over the legal age to purchase, posses or use malt liquor, and

2. That I will not allow anyone under the age of twenty-one (21) to consume any intoxicating liquor except as provided by STATUTE.

3. That I will not remove or obliterate the identification sticker attached to this container and

4. THAT A COPY OF THIS FORM WILL BE DISPLAYED WITHIN FIVE (5) FEET OF THIS CONTAINER (KEG).

VIOLATION OF ANY OF THE ABOVE IS A CRIME AS DEFINED BY WASHINGTON STATE LAW AND/OR COUNTY OR CITY ORDINANCE AND IS PUNISHABLE BY A FINE OF NOT MORE THAN $500.00, OR IMPRISONMENT NOT TO EXCEED SIX (6) MONTHS OR BY A COMBINATION OF BOTH. ANY PERSON WHO SIGNS THIS RECEIPT WITH KNOWLEDGE THAT ANY INFORMATION ON IT IS FALSE COMMITS PERJURY.

__ PORT ANGELES

__ SEQUIM

__ FORKS

__ COUNTY

______________________________Signature of Purchaser

______________________________Signature of Seller

WHITE-LAW ENFORCEMENT COPY CANARY-VENDOR’S COPY BUFF-CUSTOMER’S COPY

(Ord. 521 § 1, 1987)


9.42.060 Penalty.

The violation of any provision of this chapter is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both. (Ord. 521 § 1, 1987)


Chapter 9.44 MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES

Sections:

9.44.010    Posting of handbills.

9.44.020    Business licenses required.

9.44.030    Leaving poisons exposed.

9.44.040    Refrigeration equipment.

9.44.050    Possession of tools with intent to use in commission of crime.

9.44.060    Failure to obey court order.

9.44.070    Failure to appear.


9.44.010 Posting of handbills.

A. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to:

1. Post or attach any handbill, circular, advertising matter or other papers of any kind for advertising or other purposes on any post, fence, tree, building or other structure in the city except upon billboards or other structures erected for the purpose.

2. Throw, deposit, scatter or place any handbills, circulars, papers or other advertising matter upon the streets, alleys or other public places in the city.

3. Throw, deposit, scatter or place any handbills, circulars, papers or other advertising matter upon the walks, yards, porches or vestibules of any private dwelling in the city; provided, however, that newspapers and sealed and addressed envelopes shall not be considered with the prohibitions of this section.

4. Throw, place or deposit any handbill, circulars, papers or any other advertising matter in or upon automobiles without the owner’s consent.

B. Subsection A of this section shall not apply to any candidate for political office, their agents, representatives, volunteers or employees engaged in the distribution of materials and information relative to qualifications for election, or to any person distributing information relative to ballot issues preceding election thereon, or public hearings.

C. No person shall use the streets or sidewalks of the city for the purpose of painting or impressing thereon any pictures, sign, mark, letter or words for advertising purposes, or for any other purpose, provided the provisions of this subsection shall not apply to the officials of the city in painting or impressing markings for traffic control upon the streets or sidewalks of the city. (Ord. 357 § 16, 1977)


9.44.020 Business licenses required.

No person shall carry on or conduct any business, trade or occupation within the city limits of the city, for which a license is required, without the license fee having been paid therefor, and no person shall use or permit the use of any license for any person other than that for which it is issued, or by any other person, place, vehicle or business. (Ord. 357 § 11(11), 1977)


9.44.030 Leaving poisons exposed.

No person shall lay out or expose any kind of poison, or leave exposed any poisoned food or drink for man, animal or fowl, or any substance or fluid whatever, whereon or wherein there is or shall be deposited or mingled, any kind of poison or poisonous substance or fluid whatsoever, on the premises of another, or any unenclosed place, or aid and abet any person so doing. (Ord. 357 § 11(12), 1977)


9.44.040 Refrigeration equipment.

A. No person shall discard or abandon or leave in any place accessible to children any refrigerator, icebox or deep freeze locker having a capacity of one and one-half cubic feet or more, which is no longer in use, and which has not had the door removed or a portion of the latch mechanism removed to prevent latching or locking of the door.

B. No person shall knowingly permit such an unused refrigerator, icebox or deep freeze locker to remain on the premises under his control without having the door removed or a portion of the latch removed to prevent latching or locking of the door.

C. Any person who keeps or stores refrigerators, iceboxes or deep freeze lockers for the purpose of selling or offering them for sale shall not be guilty of a violation of this section if he takes reasonable precautions to effectively secure the door of any refrigerator, icebox, or deep freeze locker held for purpose of sale so as to prevent entrance of children small enough to fit into such articles. (Ord. 357 § 19, 1977)


9.44.050 Possession of tools with intent to use in commission of crime.

No person shall make or mend or cause to be made or mended, or have in his possession in the day or nighttime, any engine, machine, tool, false key, pick lock, bit, nippers, or implement adapted, designed or commonly used for the commission of burglary, larceny or other crime, under circumstances evincing an intent to use or employ, or allow the same to be used or employed in the commission of a crime, or knowing that the same is intended to be so used. The possession thereof except by a mechanic, artificer or tradesman at and in his established shop or place of business, open to public view, shall be prima facie evidence that such possession was had with intent to use or employ or allow the same to be used or employed in the commission of a crime. (Ord. 357 § 11(3), 1977)


9.44.060 Failure to obey court order.

No person, firm or corporation shall fail or refuse to obey a lawful order of the municipal court. (Ord. 357 § 11(4), 1977)


9.44.070 Failure to appear.

A. Any person having been released by court order or admitted to bail with the requirement of a subsequent personal appearance before the Sequim Municipal Court, and who knowingly fails to appear as required, is guilty of the charge of failure to appear.

B. Any person ordered to pay a fine as the result of a finding of guilt, upon any charge or infraction when levied in the Sequim municipal court, who shall fail to pay such fine is guilty of a failure to appear.

C. Any person, having been released on personal recognizance with the requirement of a subsequent personal appearance before the Sequim municipal court, who wilfully fails to appear when so required by the court, shall be guilty of a failure to appear. Unless otherwise shown, failure to appear when required shall be presumed to be wilful.

D. The penalty for a failure to appear shall be a fine of not more than $1,000, or by imprisonment for not more than 180 days, or both. The fine imposed under this section shall not exceed the maximum fine for the original crime or infraction charge, or, if there has been no charge, the offense for which the person was arrested. (Ord. 634 § 1, 1992)


Chapter 9.50 VIOLATION – PENALTY

Sections:

9.50.010    Use of state law penalty.


9.50.010 Use of state law penalty.

The punishment for violation of any criminal ordinance of the city shall be the same as the punishment provided in state law for the same crime in state law. (Ord. 94-016 § 1; Ord. 357 § 26a, 1977)


Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC

Chapters:

10.04    Model Traffic Ordinance

10.08    Speed Limits

10.09    Compression Braking

10.10    Regulations for Port of Port Angeles within the City of Sequim

10.12    Stopping, Standing and Parking

10.13    Abandoned Vehicles

10.14    Commercial Vehicle Parking Restrictions

10.16    Arterials

10.20    Repealed

10.21    Human-Powered Vehicles

10.23    Motorized Foot Scooters

10.24    Repealed

10.28    Repealed


Chapter 10.04 MODEL TRAFFIC ORDINANCE

Sections:

10.04.010    Adoption by reference.

10.04.020    Automatic amendment.

10.04.030    Repealed.

10.04.040    Repealed.

10.04.050    Repealed.

10.04.060    Penalties.


10.04.010 Adoption by reference.

The “Washington Model Traffic Ordinance,” Chapter 308-330 WAC, is adopted by reference as the traffic ordinance of the city as if set forth in full. Copies of the text of the MTO and applicable statutes shall be filed as required by RCW 35.21.180. (Ord. 94-015 § 1)


10.04.020 Automatic amendment.

The addition of any new section to or amendment or repeal of any section in the MTO is deemed to amend this chapter without the requirement of any further action by the city. (Ord. 94-015 § 2)


10.04.030 Disposition of traffic fines and forfeitures.

Repealed by Ord. 94-015. (Ord. 394 § 4, 1980)


10.04.040 Official misconduct.

Repealed by Ord. 94-015. (Ord. 394 § 5, 1980)


10.04.050 Filing of ordinance.

Repealed by Ord. 94-015. (Ord. 394 § 6, 1980)


10.04.060 Penalties.

Failure to perform any act required or the performance of any act prohibited by this chapter is designated as a traffic infraction and shall not be classified as a criminal offense, except for an offense listed at RCW 46.63.020, which listed offenses shall be punished in accordance with the punishment set forth for each offense as provided in the Revised Code of Washington. (Ord. 496 § 2, 1986; Ord. 394 § 3, 1980)


Chapter 10.08 SPEED LIMITS

Sections:

10.08.010    Speed limit designated.

10.08.020    Speed limit reductions.

10.08.030    Collections.


10.08.010 Speed limit designated.

A. It is the purpose of this section to establish speed limits within the city limits of the city.

B. It is unlawful to operate a motor vehicle within the city at speeds in excess of 25 miles per hour, pursuant to RCW 46.61.400(2)(a) except as otherwise decreased or increased herein or in the resolution authorized hereby and as speed limits may be posted in accordance with law. This section shall not be applicable to any portions of State Highway 101 which may be within Sequim city limits.

C. Speed limits are increased or decreased at such times or places as designated in a resolution adopted by the city council. Any altered limit established as herein authorized shall be effective when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected. Such maximum speed limit may be declared to be effective at all times or at such times as are indicated upon such signs; and differing limits may be established for different times of day, different types of vehicles, varying weather conditions, and other factors bearing on safe speeds, which shall be effective when posted upon appropriate fixed or variable signs.

D. Violation of this section shall constitute a traffic infraction and shall be punishable in accordance with the punishments allowed for infractions as set forth in the Revised Code of Washington and adopted district court rules. (Ord. 2007-007; Ord. 99-012 § 1; Ord. 467 §§ 1, 2, 3, 6, 1985)


10.08.020 Speed limit reductions.

No person shall drive a vehicle on any street or alley within the city of Sequim at a speed greater than posted or at any speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the potential hazards then existing. In every event the speed shall be so controlled as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person, vehicle, or other conveyance on or entering alleys or access areas in compliance with state motor vehicle laws and the duty of all persons to use due care and caution. For purposes of this chapter, “alley” is defined in SMC 17.08.010 and RCW 46.04.020 and 47.04.010(1). (Ord. 2007-007; Ord. 99-012 § 1)


10.08.030 Collections.

For all such penalties not under the jurisdiction of Sequim municipal court as administered by Clallam County district court, the chief of police or his designee(s) shall administer the collection of fees established pursuant to this chapter that are not paid within 30 days by referring those violations for collection to a collection agency. The chief of police is authorized to enter into agreements with collection agencies to carry out the purpose of this section. Such agency as selected shall collect the original violation fee, plus the late fee for the city of Sequim, plus a collection fee not to exceed 33 percent. Reports on collection of unpaid parking fines and penalties shall be included in the departmental activity report. (Ord. 2007-007; Ord. 99-012 § 1. Formerly 10.08.040)


Chapter 10.09 COMPRESSION BRAKING

Sections:

10.09.010    Definitions.

10.09.020    Compression braking prohibited.

10.09.030    Penalty.

10.09.040    Posting.


10.09.010 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases are defined as follows:

A. “Compression braking” means any motor vehicle brake that is operated by the compression of the engine of the motor vehicle or any unit or part thereof. In addition, “compression braking” includes the process of downshifting and releasing the clutch to utilize the motor vehicle’s engine to slow in order to meet proper speed restrictions.

B. “Motor vehicle” means automobiles, tractors, trucks, buses, and transportation equipment of all kinds and sizes, or any combination of the foregoing. (Ord. 2020-001 § 1)


10.09.020 Compression braking prohibited.

No person may use a compression braking system within the city of Sequim. Such prohibition does not apply if an emergency condition exists requiring the use of compression braking for the protection of persons and/or property. Emergency vehicles are exempt from this chapter. (Ord. 2020-001 § 1)


10.09.030 Penalty.

Violation of this chapter is a traffic infraction with a maximum penalty of $250.00 per violation. (Ord. 2020-001 § 1)


10.09.040 Posting.

The city engineer or designee is authorized and directed to post appropriate signs consistent with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2020-001 § 1)


Chapter 10.10 REGULATIONS FOR PORT OF PORT ANGELES WITHIN THE CITY OF SEQUIM

Sections:

10.10.010    Traffic regulations.

10.10.020    Parking regulations.

10.10.030    Violations.

10.10.040    Discretionary authority – Chief of police.

10.10.050    Administration.

10.10.060    Collections.


10.10.010 Traffic regulations.

A. No person shall drive a vehicle on any Port of Port Angeles roadway or access area at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual or potential hazards then existing. In every event the speed shall be so controlled as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person, vehicle or other conveyance on or entering roadways or access areas in compliance with state motor vehicle laws and the duty of all persons to use due care and caution.

B. No person shall drive a vehicle on Port of Port Angeles roadways or access areas at a speed in excess of maximum limits clearly posted by the executive director of the Port of Port Angeles.

C. Any speed limits authorized and established hereunder shall be effective when signs giving notice thereof are erected. (Ord. 98-001 § 1)


10.10.020 Parking regulations.

A. The executive director of the Port of Port Angeles shall designate areas in which parking is allowed, freely or by authorization, or not allowed, by appropriate markings on the ground and/or signs posted on or about the areas, clearly giving notice thereof.

B. No parking or stopping of vehicles shall be allowed in roadways or areas designated for access, except in the areas designated for loading and/or unloading freight, boats and/or passengers.



C. Vehicle parking without a permit shall be allowed in all designated parking areas unless clearly marked as restricted parking areas. Restricted areas shall include, but are not limited to, areas marked “Permit Parking Only,” “Port of Port Angeles Vehicles Only,” “Load-Unload Only,” “Disabled Parking Only,” or such other areas as the executive director of the Port of Port Angeles may determine.

D. Vehicles authorized to park in restricted areas are as follows:

1. Port of Port Angeles Vehicles. Port-owned vehicles with insignias;

2. Load/Unload Only. Trucks, licensed commercial vehicles, and attended vehicles loading and/or unloading freight, boats, and/or passengers, for a reasonable period of time necessary to accomplish the loading and/or unloading, but in no event over 15 minutes;

3. Permit Parking Only. Vehicles which clearly display parking permits obtained from an employee of the Port authorized to issue such permits. Such permits shall be as follows:

a. Permanent numbered parking permits clearly attached to the front window or bumper;

b. Temporary parking permits clearly displayed face upwards on the dash board or other area of the car thereabouts;

4. Disabled Parking Only. Vehicles which clearly display, attached to the back window, windshield or bumper, disabled parking permits issued by a state, county, city, or other local government, or an employee of the Port authorized to issue disabled parking permits;

5. Other Restricted Parking. The executive director of the Port of Port Angeles may designate other restrictions on parking, including but not limited to the following: employee parking only, rental car parking only, no overnight camping, and attached boat trailers only.

E. The executive director of the Port of Port Angeles shall determine procedures for issuing parking permits, including types and forms of permits, fees for obtaining permits, employees authorized to issue permits, locations for the issuance of permits, or any other rules reasonably necessary to issue permits in a fair and reasonably efficient manner. (Ord. 98-001 § 1)


10.10.030 Violations.

Violation of any Port of Port Angeles traffic or parking regulation adopted and executed according to and under the authority of this chapter shall be civil traffic or parking infractions punishable to the same extent and under the same procedures as other similar civil traffic and parking ordinances, codes, and statutes of the city of Sequim, including but not limited to the provisions of this title. (Ord. 98-001 § 1)


10.10.040 Discretionary authority – Chief of police.

A. Whenever it is determined that a parking ticket has been improperly issued, the chief of police or his designee may void such ticket.

B. Whenever it is determined that the registered owner of a vehicle has not received actual notice of a parking violation, the chief of police or his designee may extend the time period for payment such that the registered owner has an opportunity to pay the original penalty within 48 hours. (Ord. 98-001 § 1)


10.10.050 Administration.

The chief of police or his designee(s) shall administer the collection of fees established pursuant to this chapter through a parking violations bureau as authorized by the district court judge for Clallam County, with which the city has contracted for filing violations of the Sequim Municipal Code. (Ord. 98-001 § 1)


10.10.060 Collections.

The chief of police or his designee(s) shall administer the collection of fees established pursuant to this chapter that are not paid within 30 days by referring those parking violations for collection to a collection agency. The chief of police is authorized to enter into agreements with collection agencies to carry out the purpose of this section. Such agency as selected shall collect the original violation fee, plus the late fee for the city of Sequim, plus a collection fee not to exceed 33 percent. Reports on collection of unpaid parking fines and penalties shall be included in the departmental activity reports. (Ord. 98-001 § 1)


Chapter 10.12 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING

Sections:

10.12.005    Purpose and applicability.

10.12.010    Definitions.

10.12.015    Non-vehicle use of streets.

10.12.017    Recreational vehicles, boats and trailers.

10.12.020    Parking improperly.

10.12.030    No parking on certain streets and alleys.

10.12.035    Purpose – Exercise of police power.

10.12.036    Designation of limited time, restricted and handicap zones.

10.12.040    Parking time limited on streets and alleys.

10.12.050    Miscellaneous regulations.

10.12.055    Parking and loading space dimensions.

10.12.060    Registered owner’s responsibility.

10.12.070    Sign posting required.

10.12.080    Chief of police authority.

10.12.090    Chapter supplemental to state law.

10.12.100    Penalties.

10.12.110    Discretionary authority – Chief of police.

10.12.120    Administration.

10.12.130    Collections.


10.12.005 Purpose and applicability.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide for safe parking and/or loading and unloading of vehicles on public streets and alleys and on private streets, lanes and alleys to which the regulations contained in this chapter are specifically applied as a condition of development or council action. It is intended that this chapter be complementary to the regulations for off-street parking found in Chapter 10.14 SMC, Commercial Vehicle Parking Restrictions, and Chapter 18.48 SMC, Off-Street Parking. (Ord. 2005-012; Ord. 2003-017 § 2)


10.12.010 Definitions.

The following definitions are applicable to the provisions of this chapter:

A. “Improperly park” means the parking of a vehicle, including parking in areas where parking is permitted, in such a manner as to obstruct the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians; or the parking of a vehicle in an area where parking places are designated by lines or marks in such a manner that the vehicle is across any such line or mark, or is not within the area so designated by such lines or markings; or the parking of a vehicle in a designated or undesignated parking space on the side of the street with the vehicle facing oncoming traffic; or the parking of a vehicle in a “loading zone” for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers, merchandise or equipment; or the parking of a vehicle in a “back in only” zone in any manner other than with the front of the vehicle facing the street; or the parking of a vehicle in a parking area restricted for the parking for taxis, buses or handicapped parking, when the parked vehicle is not in compliance with the posted restriction.

B. “Vehicle” includes every device capable of being moved upon a public highway and in, upon, or by which any persons or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, excepting devices moved by human or animal power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.

C. “Non-vehicle” is any object which is not a vehicle. “Vehicle” is described above in SMC 10.12.010(B). (Ord. 2003-017 § 2; Ord. 98-001 § 1; Ord. 384 § 1, 1979)


10.12.015 Non-vehicle use of streets.

No non-vehicle shall be allowed to stand or park on any city street, sidewalk, alley or within any right-of-way within the city limits without a permit. A limited duration permit may be obtained from the chief of police or his or her designee. The city shall set charges for this permit by resolution. Conditions may be required on the face of the permit providing for safety marking, lighting, hours of use and safety provisions. (Ord. 2003-017 § 2)


10.12.017 Recreational vehicles, boats and trailers.

Recreational vehicles, boats and/or boat trailers and other trailers shall not be parked on public streets or in city parking lots for longer than 24 hours without a permit issued pursuant to SMC 10.14.040(C). (Ord. 2005-012)


10.12.020 Parking improperly.

No person shall improperly park a vehicle or non-vehicle in the city at any time. (Ord. 2003-017 § 2; Ord. 98-001 § 1; Ord. 384 § 2, 1979)


10.12.030 No parking on certain streets and alleys.

No person shall park a vehicle within a district or on or along any of the streets, alleys or parts of streets or alleys where such district or streets or alleys are posted as “no parking” areas and zones. (Ord. 98-001 § 1; Ord. 384 § 3, 1979)


10.12.035 Purpose – Exercise of police power.

This chapter is an exercise of the police power of the city of Sequim and is necessary for the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare through the regulation and control of stopping, standing and parking in the city of Sequim on city streets and parking lots. (Ord. 2003-017 § 2; Ord. 98-001 § 1)


10.12.036 Designation of limited time, restricted and handicap zones.

A. The director of public works, after consultation with the chief of police, is hereby authorized and required to establish limited time and/or restricted parking zones on city streets and parking lots in accordance with the purposes set out in SMC 10.12.035. He shall further designate the number of such zones and any applicable time limits. Such zones shall be defined and marked in accordance with the requirements of RCW 47.36.060. Upon designation, a description and listing of such zones shall be filed with the city clerk. Unless otherwise posted, no vehicles shall be parked on city property including parking lots, streets, alleys and rights-of-way for longer than 14 days in residential areas or for longer than 24 hours in the town center sub-area as identified in SMC 18.48.130 without a properly issued permit. In the town center sub-area, permits may be issued for resident vehicle parking in excess of 24 hours for vehicles registered to owners whose title shows a registered address within the town center sub-area.

B. Handicap Parking Zones.

1. Handicap parking zones shall be located and designated as required by Chapter 70.92 RCW.

2. It is a traffic infraction for any person to park a vehicle in a handicap parking zone without a special license plate, or placard, as provided for in RCW 46.16.381. A person charged with a violation hereof shall not be determined to have committed an infraction if he or she produces in court or prior to the court appearance the special license plate or placard required herein or demonstrates he or she was entitled to the same at the time of being ticketed.

3. Any unauthorized use of the special license plate or placard provided for in RCW 46.16.381 is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 2005-012; Ord. 98-001 § 1)


10.12.040 Parking time limited on streets and alleys.

A. When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for a period of time longer than that specified during the hours between which the limit is in effect on any day except Sundays and public holidays.

B. Recreational vehicles, boats and/or boat trailers and other trailers shall not be parked on public streets, including alleys and rights-of-way, or in city parking lots longer than 24 hours without a permit issued pursuant to SMC 10.14.040(C). On-street or alley parking within commercial zones shall not be permitted for longer than 12 hours (for commercial vehicles, see SMC 10.14.040). (Ord. 2005-012; Ord. 98-001 § 1; Ord. 384 § 4, 1979)


10.12.050 Miscellaneous regulations.

No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places:

A. On a sidewalk;

B. In front of a public or private driveway or on any parking strip;

C. Within an intersection;

D. Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;

E. On a crosswalk;

F. Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;

G. Within 30 feet of the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic control signal;

H. Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station;

I. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;

J. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street (“double parking”);

K. Upon any bridge or other elevated structure or within a tunnel;

L. At any place where official signs prohibit stopping, standing or parking;

M. On a designated bicycle lane;

N. On a trail or shared-use path constructed primarily for and open to bicyclists and pedestrians. (Ord. 2012-008 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 98-001 § 1; Ord. 384 § 5, 1979)


10.12.055 Parking and loading space dimensions.

The dimensions of various on-street parking and loading spaces, including handicap accessible spaces, shall be as found in the adopted city engineer standards. In the absence of a city engineer standard the dimensions found in Chapter 18.48 SMC, Off-Street Parking, shall be used. (Ord. 2003-017 § 2)


10.12.060 Registered owner’s responsibility.

In addition to the driver of the vehicle violating the provisions of this chapter, every person in whose name the vehicle is registered or licensed shall be responsible for that vehicle’s compliance with this chapter and shall further be liable for fines imposed for all parking violations under this chapter. (Ord. 98-001 § 1; Ord. 384 § 7, 1979)


10.12.070 Sign posting required.

Whenever any parking time limit is imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets or alleys or whenever certain methods of parking are prescribed under SMC 10.12.010, 10.12.020, 10.12.030 and 10.12.050, it shall be the duty of the chief of police to have erected appropriate signs giving notice thereof and no such regulation shall be effective unless the signs are erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense. (Ord. 98-001 § 1; Ord. 384 § 8, 1979)


10.12.080 Chief of police authority.

The city council, at a regular meeting, may by majority vote of those present direct the chief of police on the establishment and location of the parking regulations within the city limits as the council may from time to time determine to be in the interests of the general public and welfare of the citizens of the city. (Ord. 98-001 § 1; Ord. 384 § 9, 1979)


10.12.090 Chapter supplemental to state law.

The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be in addition to and supplemental to the regulations and statutes of the state, where the regulations are not inconsistent with this chapter. (Ord. 98-001 § 1; Ord. 384 § 10, 1979)


10.12.100 Penalties.

It is a civil infraction for any person to permit or allow any vehicle to be parked in violation of this chapter or to improperly park a vehicle as designated in SMC 10.12.010 and 10.12.020. The penalty for violation of this chapter as designated in SMC 10.12.010, 10.12.020, 10.12.030 and 10.12.050 shall be as established by resolution for each such violation and the penalty for violation of SMC 10.12.040 shall be as established by resolution for each such violation and the vehicle shall be issued a parking violation in the form prescribed by the chief of police. Fines shall be paid to the city police department. The above penalties as established by resolution shall apply only if the penalty is paid within 15 days from the issuance of the notice of violation. Payment shall be deemed made if the penalty is delivered to the police department, placed in the United States mail with proper postage affixed and addressed to the Sequim Police Department, 609 W. Washington No. 16, Sequim, WA 98382-3291. The penalty for violation of handicap zone (SMC 10.12.036(B)) shall be as established by resolution for each violation. The penalty for violation of limited time or restricted zone (SMC 10.12.036(A)) shall be as established by resolution for each violation. (Ord. 2005-029 § 2; Ord. 98-001 § 1; Ord. 384 § 6, 1979)


10.12.110 Discretionary authority – Chief of police.

A. Whenever it is determined that a parking ticket has been improperly issued, the chief of police or his designee may void such ticket.

B. Whenever it is determined that the registered owner of a vehicle has not received actual notice of a parking violation, the chief of police or his designee may extend the time period for payment such that the registered owner has an opportunity to pay the original penalty within 48 hours. (Ord. 98-001 § 1)


10.12.120 Administration.

The chief of police or his designee(s) shall administer the collection of fees established pursuant to this chapter through a parking violations bureau as authorized by the district court judge for Clallam County, with which the city has contracted for filing violations of the Sequim Municipal Code. (Ord. 98-001 § 1)


10.12.130 Collections.

The chief of police or his designee(s) shall administer the collection of fees established pursuant to this chapter that are not paid within 30 days by referring those parking violations for collection to a collection agency. The chief of police is authorized to enter into agreements with collection agencies to carry out the purpose of this section. Such agency as selected shall collect the original violation fee, plus the late fee for the city of Sequim, plus a collection fee not to exceed 33 percent. Reports on collection of unpaid parking fines and penalties shall be included in the departmental activity reports. (Ord. 98-001 § 1)


Chapter 10.13 ABANDONED VEHICLES

Sections:

10.13.010    Legislative findings adopted.

10.13.020    Findings.

10.13.030    Definitions.

10.13.040    Written form of authorization to impound.

10.13.050    Adoption by reference.

10.13.060    Redemption of impounded vehicles.

10.13.070    Contract for towing and storage.


10.13.010 Legislative findings adopted.

The city adopts the legislative findings of Washington Laws of 1998, Chapter 203, Section 1. (Ord. 2005-008 § 1)


10.13.020 Findings.

The city council finds that parking on the public rights-of-way should be regulated to promote traffic safety, enhance the smooth flow of traffic, and, in certain areas of high demand for parking, such as business districts, to fairly allocate parking spaces among the public by limiting parking time.

Further, the city council finds that parking of vehicles in the public rights-of-way for long periods of time deprives residential and other property owners and residents of fairly allocated parking spaces.

Further, the city council finds that certain vehicles are abandoned and create hazards and obstructions and aesthetic damage to the surrounding properties, and in addition are likely to encourage abandonment of other items of a similar nature in the area. (Ord. 2005-008 § 2)


10.13.030 Definitions.

The definitions set forth in this section apply throughout this chapter.

A.1. “Abandoned vehicle” means a vehicle that a registered tow truck operator or the city has impounded and held in the operator’s or the city’s possession for 120 consecutive hours. “Abandoned vehicle” also includes a vehicle left on blocks, jacks, ramps or otherwise elevated above the ground in an unstable manner and unattended and also includes any of the following on city property or rights-of-way if three or more of the following are true:

a. Vehicle license expired in excess of 30 days;

b. The owner or person listed on the vehicle’s registration does not live in the city;

c. The vehicle is apparently inoperative;

d. A complaint of the vehicle’s abandonment has been received from a city resident;

e. The vehicle has not been moved within the last 30 days;

f. The vehicle is not parked within two blocks of the registered owner’s address;

g. The vehicle is being used as a storage container and is apparently inoperable;

h. One or more flat tires;

i. Broken windshield or rear window;

j. Extensive body damage;

k. Partially dismantled;

l. Wrecked or in a condition that would inhibit or prevent use.

2. Vehicles that appear to be abandoned but are not a hazard may be impounded after 72 hours’ written notice properly posted on the vehicle. The “Notice of Intent to Tow” shall be affixed on a conspicuous place on the vehicle and shall contain the following:

a. A description of the vehicle;

b. The location of the vehicle;

c. The time and date the notice was issued and posted;

d. The time and date after which the vehicle may be towed if not moved;

e. The citing official’s name and identifying number;

f. The address and phone number of the Sequim police department.

3. Any vehicle that is left unattended on public property or on a public street may be impounded immediately and without prior notice if it is in such condition as to pose a threat to the health or safety of the public. These conditions include but are not limited to:

a. Blocking or obstructing a roadway or a driveway;

b. Blocking or obstructing the view of oncoming traffic or of a traffic control device;

c. Blocking a fire hydrant or obstructing the mobility of an emergency vehicle;

d. A vehicle that is leaking hazardous materials, including fuel;

e. A vehicle that constitutes an attractive nuisance.

4. Any vehicle that is unattended that is a hazard, is in violation of public parking limits, or is parked in violation of the terms of a tow notice may be impounded.

B. “Abandoned vehicle report” means the document prescribed by the state that the towing operator forwards to the department after a vehicle has become abandoned.

C. “Impound” means to take and hold a vehicle in legal custody. There are two types of impounds, public and private.

1. “Public impound” means that the vehicle has been impounded at the direction of a law enforcement officer or at the direction of a public official having jurisdiction over the public property upon which the vehicle is located.

2. “Private impound” means that the vehicle has been impounded at the direction of a person having control or possession of the private property upon which the vehicle is located.

D. “Residential property” means property that has no more than four living units located on it.

E. “Unauthorized vehicle” means a vehicle that is subject to impoundment after being left unattended in one of the following public or private locations for the indicated period of time, and is subject to removal as set forth below.

1. On Public Locations.

a. Constituting an accident or traffic hazard as defined in RCW 46.55.113: time – immediately.

b. On a highway and tagged as described in RCW 46.55.085: time – 24 hours.

c. In a publicly owned or controlled parking facility, properly posted under RCW 46.55.070: time – immediately.

2. On Private Locations.

a. On residential property: time – immediately.

b. On private nonresidential property, properly posted under RCW 46.55.070: time – immediately.

c. On private nonresidential property not posted: time – 24 hours.

3. Vehicles parked on publicly owned or controlled property including the right-of-way of any public street not provided for above which have been parked one month or more at the same location. (Ord. 2005-008 § 3)


10.13.040 Written form of authorization to impound.

There is hereby established as the official written form of authorization to impound, pursuant to RCW 46.55.240(1)(b), the state form known as the Uniform or Universal Washington State Tow/Impound Form. (Ord. 2005-008 § 4)


10.13.050 Adoption by reference.

The city of Sequim adopts by reference all the required provisions of RCW 46.55.240. (Ord. 2005-008 § 5)


10.13.060 Redemption of impounded vehicles.

Vehicles impounded by the city shall be redeemed only under the following circumstances:

A. Only the registered owner, a person authorized by the registered owner, or one who has purchased the vehicle from the registered owner, who produces proof of ownership or authorization and signs a receipt therefor, may redeem an impounded vehicle. A person redeeming a vehicle impounded pursuant to this chapter must, prior to redemption, establish that he or she has a valid driver’s license and is in compliance with all provisions of this chapter.

B. Any person so redeeming a vehicle impounded by the city shall pay the towing contractor for costs of impoundment, removal, towing and storage, and any required administrative fees prior to redeeming such vehicle. Such towing contractor shall accept payment as provided in RCW 46.55.120 as now or hereafter amended.

C. Any person seeking to redeem a vehicle impounded for parking in a public right-of-way longer than allowed has a right to a hearing to contest the validity of an impoundment or the amount of removal, towing, storage and/or administrative fees. Such request for hearing must be in writing in a form approved by the chief of police and signed by such person, and is received by the chief of police within 10 days (including Saturdays, Sundays and holidays) of the latter of the date the notice was mailed to such person pursuant to this chapter or the date the notice was given to such person by the registered tow truck operator pursuant to RCW 46.55.120(2)(a). Such hearing shall be provided as follows:

1. If all of the requirements to redeem the vehicle have been satisfied, and in the event that the person seeking to redeem an impounded vehicle pays the costs of impoundment, towing and storage and administrative fees, the impounded vehicle shall be released to such person immediately and a hearing as provided for in this chapter shall be held within 90 days of the written request for hearing.

2. If not all of the requirements to redeem the vehicle have been satisfied, and in the event that the person seeking to redeem an impounded vehicle does not pay the cost of impoundment, towing and storage and administrative fees, the impounded vehicle shall not be released until after the hearing provided for. Such person shall have a right to a hearing within two business days (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays) of the written request to the court for a hearing.

D. Any person seeking a hearing who has failed to request such a hearing within the time specified in this chapter may petition the chief of police for an extension to file a request for a hearing. Such extension shall only be granted upon the demonstration of good cause as to the reasons that the request for hearing could not be timely filed. For the purposes of this section, “good cause” shall be defined as one or more of the following circumstances beyond the control of the person seeking the hearing that prevented such person from filing a timely request for a hearing within the time specified in this chapter as now or hereafter amended. In the event such extension is granted, the person receiving such extension shall be granted a hearing in accordance with this chapter if and only if a hearing request is filed within the extended period of time. If no proper request for a hearing is filed within the time required, the right to a hearing is waived and the associated costs of impoundment and administrative fee and storage are deemed to be proper and the city shall not be liable to the owner for removal, towing, or storage or administrative charges arising from the impoundment.

E. In the event the impoundment is found to be proper pursuant to a hearing or because of waiver of a hearing, the court shall enter an order so stating. In the event that removal, towing, storage and administrative costs and fees have not been paid, the order shall also provide that the impounded vehicle shall be released only after payment to the city of any costs of impoundment, storage, towing and administrative fees, and that such amounts shall be paid within 30 days of the date of the decision in the form of a written order; after which date, if no appeal has been filed and if the costs have not been paid, the vehicle may be disposed of as provided by law.

F. If the impoundment is found to be improper, the court shall enter an order so stating and order the immediate release of the vehicle. If the costs of impoundment, storage and administrative fee have already been paid, the court shall enter judgment against the city in favor of the person who has paid the cost of impoundment in the amount paid.

G. The court in any proceeding shall have the authority to determine if the correct fees have been charged and to adjust the fees if the correct fees have not been charged, and order appropriate judgments favoring the party who prevails. (Ord. 2005-008 § 6)


10.13.070 Contract for towing and storage.

The city is authorized to contract with a licensed tow truck operator as provided by Chapter 46.55 RCW for removal of improperly parked vehicles, unauthorized vehicles, and abandoned vehicles, and the contract shall provide specifically for the amount of an administrative fee, the method of calculation of a towing fee, and the method of calculation of a storage fee and the amounts thereof. The contract shall also provide that the registered tow truck operator and storer shall have all appropriate liens as provided for in RCW 46.55.140 and all of the remedies including sale at public auction for accumulated storage charges pursuant to RCW 46.55.130 or other provisions of law. Redemption rights and sale of unredeemed property are also governed by RCW 46.55.120 and other applicable portions of law. (Ord. 2005-008 § 7)


Chapter 10.14 COMMERCIAL VEHICLE PARKING RESTRICTIONS

Sections:

10.14.005    Purpose and applicability.

10.14.010    Definitions.

10.14.020    Exclusions.

10.14.030    Off-street parking.

10.14.040    Street parking.

10.14.050    Disabled vehicles.

10.14.060    Appeal.

10.14.070    Restricted parking signs.

10.14.080    Penalties.

10.14.090    Discretionary authority – Chief of police.

10.14.100    Administration.

10.14.110    Collections.


10.14.005 Purpose and applicability.

It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to provide regulations for the safe parking of commercial vehicles on public streets and alleys and on private streets, lanes and alleys to which the regulations contained in this chapter are specifically applied as a condition of development or council action. It is intended that this chapter be complementary to the regulations for off-street parking found in Chapter 18.48 SMC, Off-Street Parking, and the restrictions on abandoned vehicles in Chapter 10.13 SMC. (Ord. 2005-013; Ord. 2003-017 § 3)


10.14.010 Definitions.

A. For the purpose of this chapter “commercial or industrial vehicle” means any vehicle the principal use of which is the transport of commodities, merchandise, produce, freight, and any vehicle used primarily in construction, industry or farming, including, but not limited to, bulldozers, backhoes, tractors, trucks, or trucks fitted with cranes, air compressors, welders, tanks or similar equipment. “Commercial or industrial vehicle” also includes nonmotorized dumpsters, storage units, tool lockers and any other structure.

B. For the purposes of this chapter “temporary” means not more than 24 hours.

C. “Parking” means locating a vehicle subject to this chapter adjacent to the curb or street surface on a public right-of-way or upon private property. (Ord. 2005-013; Ord. 98-001 § 1; Ord. 594 § 1, 1991)


10.14.020 Exclusions.

The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to vehicles which are being temporarily loaded or unloaded or parked no longer than the duration of the construction permit issued by the city on private construction sites. (Ord. 2003-017 § 3; Ord. 98-001 § 1; Ord. 594 § 2, 1991)


10.14.030 Off-street parking.

Refer to Chapter 18.48 SMC for regulations on off-street parking of commercial vehicles. (Ord. 2003-017 § 3; Ord. 98-001 § 1; Ord. 594 § 3, 1991)


10.14.040 Street parking.

A. Commercial vehicles (as defined in SMC 10.14.010(A)) shall only be parked in designated spaces designed for the size of the vehicle. The definition of “street” includes alleys, sidewalks and the entire city right-of-way where prohibitions on street parking exist.

B. Commercial vehicles shall only be parked on streets and alleys in commercial zoning districts.

C. No person shall park or store any commercial vehicle on any street, roadway, or in any alley within the city limits for a period in excess of two hours within any 24-hour period unless he/she has first obtained a permit from the chief of police or his or her designee. No charge shall be levied for this permit. The police chief may deny the requested permit if he or she finds that the parking requested would create a safety risk, or is not reasonably necessary due to alternate available parking. See also SMC 10.12.015. (Ord. 2005-013; Ord. 2003-017 § 3; Ord. 98-001 § 1; Ord. 594 § 4, 1991)


10.14.050 Disabled vehicles.

No person shall park or store a disabled vehicle of any description or any part or parts thereof in any alley or upon any street or roadway within the city limits for more than 12 hours, unless he/she has first obtained a permit from the police department. Such permits may be granted for periods of up to 96 hours if, in the judgment of the police chief or his or her designee, such is required as an emergency measure. There shall be no charge for the permit. (Ord. 2003-017 § 3; Ord. 98-001 § 1; Ord. 594 § 5, 1991)


10.14.060 Appeal.

Any appeal of the police decision shall be made directly to the city council in writing within 10 days of the decision of the chief of police or his or her designee. (Ord. 98-001 § 1; Ord. 594 § 6, 1991)


10.14.070 Restricted parking signs.

Restricted parking signs specifying acceptable commercial and/or industrial licensed gross vehicles (GVW) shall be posted at the city limits for the purpose of enforcing this chapter. (Ord. 98-001 § 1; Ord. 594 § 7, 1991)


10.14.080 Penalties.

Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 and/or imprisonment for not more than 90 days. (Ord. 98-001 § 1; Ord. 594 § 8, 1991)


10.14.090 Discretionary authority – Chief of police.

A. Whenever it is determined that a parking ticket has been improperly issued, the chief of police or his designee may void such ticket.

B. Whenever it is determined that the registered owner of a vehicle has not received actual notice of a parking violation, the chief of police or his designee may extend the time period for payment such that the registered owner has an opportunity to pay the original penalty within 48 hours.

C. The police chief or his or her designee may deny any requested permit. (Ord. 2003-017 § 3; Ord. 98-001 § 1)


10.14.100 Administration.

The chief of police or his designee(s) shall administer the collection of fees established pursuant to this chapter through a parking violations bureau as authorized by the district court judge for Clallam County, with which the city has contracted for filing violations of the Sequim Municipal Code. (Ord. 98-001 § 1)


10.14.110 Collections.

The chief of police or his designee(s) shall administer the collection of fees established pursuant to this chapter that are not paid within 30 days by referring those parking violations for collection to a collection agency. The chief of police is authorized to enter into agreements with collection agencies to carry out the purpose of this section. Such agency as selected shall collect the original violation fee, plus the late fee for the city of Sequim, plus a collection fee not to exceed 33 percent. Reports on collection of unpaid parking fines and penalties shall be included in the departmental activity reports. (Ord. 98-001 § 1)


Chapter 10.16 ARTERIALS

Sections:

10.16.010    Arterial streets designated.


10.16.010 Arterial streets designated.

The following streets or portions thereof which lie within the city limits of the city shall be and are designated as major arterial streets of the city:

A. SR 101 (Washington Street): city limit to city limit.

B. Extension of Brown Avenue from Old Olympic Highway to SR 101.

C. Sequim Avenue from Old Olympic Highway to Miller Road.

D. Third Avenue from Fir Street to Happy Valley Road.

E. Fifth Avenue from Old Olympic Highway to McCurdy Road.

F. Seventh Avenue from Hendrickson Road to Happy Valley Road.

G. Hammond Street from Fifth Avenue (east) to SR 101.

H. Fir Street from Ninth Avenue to Rhodefer Road.

I. Hendrickson Road from west city limits to north extension of Blake Avenue.

J. Prairie Street from Ninth Avenue to west city limits.

K. West Sequim Bay Road from SR 101 to east city limits.

L. Whitefeather Way from SR 101 to West Sequim Bay Road.

M.  Priest Road from SR 101 to north city limits. (Ord. 95-008 § 3)


Chapter 10.20 BICYCLES


(Repealed by Ord. 2017-010)


Chapter 10.20 BICYCLES


(Repealed by Ord. 2017-010)


Chapter 10.21 HUMAN-POWERED VEHICLES

Sections:

10.21.010    Definitions.

10.21.020    Traffic.

10.21.030    Negligent operation.

10.21.040    Unattended or parked wheeled vehicles.

10.21.050    Prohibited areas.

10.21.060    Penalties.


10.21.010 Definitions.

The following words and phrases when used shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the following meanings ascribed to them:

A. “Skateboard” means a foot board mounted upon four or more wheels, usually propelled by human power.

B. “In-line skates” means a device having wheels which are in line with one another and which are attached to a pair of shoes, usually propelled by human power.

C. “Roller skates” means a pair of shoes mounted upon wheels and are most often propelled by the user in an upright, standing position or kneeling.

D. “Coaster,” commonly referred to as a scooter, means a foot board mounted on two or more wheels, controlled by an upright steering handle, usually propelled by human power.

E. “Bicycle” means a human-powered, wheeled vehicle as defined in SMC 10.20.010, and, for purposes of this chapter, is expanded to include similar vehicles with one to four wheels.

F. “Wheeled device” shall include the above-noted devices or any other device intended to be ridden on or in, which is pushed, pulled, pedaled or relies on human power for mobility.

G. “Pedestrian-friendly zone” is described as follows:

That area bordered on the south by the north edge of the roadway of Bell Street between Third Avenue on the west and the east sidewalk of Sunnyside Avenue. Both sidewalks of Sunnyside between Washington Street and Maple Street. The entire section of Washington Street, including sidewalks from the west side of Third Avenue to the east side of Sunnyside Avenue.

The entire section, including sidewalks from the west side of Second Avenue to the east sidewalk of Sequim Avenue and from Washington Street to the north edge of the east/west alley between Cedar Street and Spruce Street to include the parking lots and common areas in and around the City Hall, Transit Center and Community Center.

H. “Hearing board” is the chief of police or his designee who shall act as the hearing officer to hear appeals from a violator who wishes to contest a penalty. (Ord. 2005-020; Ord. 2001-011; Ord. 99-025 § 1; Ord. 98-014)


10.21.020 Traffic.

Any person operating a bicycle, skateboard, roller skates, coaster or other human-powered wheeled device shall, in addition to observing other applicable provisions of state and local laws, obey the instructions of official traffic control signals, signs and other control devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. (Ord. 2005-020; Ord. 98-014)


10.21.030 Negligent operation.

A. No bicycle, skateboard, roller skates, coaster or other wheeled device shall be ridden in a negligent manner anywhere within the city limits of Sequim, but shall be operated with reasonable regard for the safety of the operator and other persons. For the purpose of this chapter, “negligent manner” means the operation of these devices in such a manner as to be a danger to or to endanger any person or property, as well as any other additional definitions enumerated in this chapter.

B. Whenever riding a bicycle, skateboard, roller skates, coaster or other wheeled device within the city of Sequim, such person shall yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians. Failure to do so shall constitute negligent operation.

C. Whenever riding a bicycle, skateboard, roller skates, coaster or other wheeled device within the city of Sequim, no such rider shall attach the device or themselves to any moving vehicle upon any roadway or sidewalk. Doing so shall constitute negligent operation.

D. Nothing in this chapter shall apply to a person pushing or pulling a wheeled device to transport infants or consumable goods, wheelchairs or other wheeled devices allowing a person to be ambulatory within the city of Sequim, unless said wheeled device is being operated in a willful and negligent manner.

E. Nothing in this chapter shall apply to a police officer who may be riding a wheeled device as defined in the course and scope of their duties. (Ord. 2005-020; Ord. 98-014)


10.21.040 Unattended or parked wheeled vehicles.

A. No person shall park a bicycle in other than a bicycle rack. If no bicycle rack is available, the person shall leave the bicycle so that it does not obstruct a roadway, sidewalk, driveway, or building.

B. No person shall park a bicycle in violation of a motor vehicle parking provision.

C. No person shall park a bicycle secured to a publicly owned object when doing so would impede pedestrian or vehicle traffic or restrict or prevent the use of such object by any individual or is otherwise prohibited by law.

D. No person shall park a bicycle on private property without consent of the owner or person in charge. Consent shall be implied on private commercial property unless bicycle parking is expressly prohibited.

E. No person shall park a bicycle on a stand or other public property for more than 24 hours.

F. No person shall leave or park a skateboard, roller skates, coaster or other wheeled device on any public sidewalk, walkway, path, porch or other areas when doing so would constitute a hazard. (Ord. 2005-020; Ord. 98-014)


10.21.050 Prohibited areas.

A. It is unlawful for any person to operate or ride upon any skateboard, roller skates, or other wheeled device upon any street, alley, sidewalk or publicly owned parking lot in the pedestrian-friendly zone, as defined, in the city of Sequim, except for subsection B of this section. It shall further be unlawful to operate any of the enumerated devices on any sidewalk, alley, street or parking area which is privately owned and open to the public when proper signs prohibiting said activity are posted.

B. The riding of bicycles shall be allowed on streets and alleys within the pedestrian-friendly zone.

C. No one shall operate a bicycle, tricycle or other form of peddle cycle, except a two-wheeled bicycle, gas or electric toys in the skate park, including ramps, slalom course(s) or other appurtenances designed for skate park use. Roller skates, roller blades, two-wheeled bicycles and scooters are allowed to use the skate park; provided, that those devices are equipped with wheels which are of a pliable material similar to those used on two-wheeled non-cleated or knobbed bicycle tires and skateboards and which will not damage the surfaces of the skate park.

D. No one shall operate a bicycle, skateboard, roller skates or other wheeled device on any basketball or tennis facilities located within any park within the city of Sequim. (Ord. 2005-020; Ord. 2001-011; Ord. 99-025 § 2; Ord. 98-014)


10.21.060 Penalties.

A. A violation of any of the sections in this chapter is a civil infraction. A fine of $25.00 may be assessed for each violation upon the issuance of a civil infraction citation. The issuance of a civil infraction may, but need not be, issued at the time of the violation, but may be issued within 10 working days of the original violation, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays.

B. In addition to the above fine, any person found to be riding a device as specified in this chapter may be subject to the impoundment of the device as evidence at the time of violation, until such time as the case is concluded. If the violator is a minor, the device being held as evidence will only be released to a parent or legal guardian and only at the conclusion of the case.

C. In an effort to ensure against repeated violations of the chapter, any person(s) who has violated the provisions of this chapter and who has received one or more penalties as outlined in subsections A and B of this section on three or more occasions within a six-month period shall be issued a civil infraction citation with a fine assessment of $25.00 and may have the device that they were riding impounded as evidence as specified above for the fourth and each subsequent violation.

D. A person charged with a violation of this chapter who has been issued a notice of civil infraction with a fine of $25.00 attached shall have the right to appeal the matter to the police department within 15 working days, requesting a hearing of the matter. Said matter shall be heard no later than 30 calendar days from the date of the appeal. A person requesting an appeal shall post bond in the amount indicated for the violation, which shall be refunded if the hearing officer finds in his/her favor. If the appellant is found to be in violation by the hearing officer, he/she may appeal the matter to the Clallam County district court. If the district court rules in favor of the city, the appellant may be required to pay associated court costs in addition to the $25.00 fine. In the event the offender is a juvenile, the parents of the juvenile must file an appeal and be present at the hearing. (Ord. 2005-020; Ord. 98-014)


Chapter 10.23 MOTORIZED FOOT SCOOTERS

Sections:

10.23.010    Definitions.

10.23.020    Operation of motorized foot scooters.

10.23.030    Parent responsibility.

10.23.040    Violation – Enforcement authority and penalties.

10.23.050    Seizure and forfeiture.


10.23.010 Definitions.

“Motorized foot scooter” means a device with no more than two 10-inch or smaller diameter wheels that has handlebars, is designed to be stood or sat upon by the operator, and is powered by an internal combustion engine or electric motor that is capable of propelling the device with or without human propulsion.

This chapter shall not apply to any disabled person using a wheelchair conveyance as defined in RCW 46.04.710, or to power wheelchairs as defined by RCW 46.04.415, or to strollers used to transport small children, or city equipment. (Ord. 2004-017 § 1)


10.23.020 Operation of motorized foot scooters.

A. Motorized foot scooters shall not be operated on public roadways with a speed limit of greater than 25 miles per hour.

B. Operators of motorized foot scooters shall adhere to all rules of the road applicable to motorized vehicles.

C. Motorized foot scooters shall not be operated on city-owned property, city parks, upon designated walkways, pathways, sidewalks, the Olympic Discovery Trail, the pedestrian-friendly zone as described in SMC 10.21.010 or any other place where motorized vehicles are expressly prohibited and/or prohibited by posted signs.

D. Motorized foot scooters shall not be operated anytime during one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise. At no times shall a passenger be allowed to ride on a motorized foot scooter.

E. Motorized foot scooters shall not be operated in a negligent manner upon any roadway or city right-of-way within the city of Sequim. For the purpose of this section, “to operate in a negligent manner” means to operate a motorized foot scooter in such a manner as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property or to obstruct, hinder or impede the lawful course of travel of any motor vehicle or the lawful use by any pedestrian of public streets, sidewalks, alley, parking areas, trails or public parks within the city of Sequim.

F. Motorized foot scooters shall be equipped so that the drive motor is engaged through a switch, lever, or other mechanism that, when released, will cause the drive motor to disengage or cease to function.

G. Operation of a motorized foot scooter without a muffling device in good working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise, or operation with a modified muffling device, is unlawful and a violation of this chapter.

H. Helmet Required – Passengers and Towing Prohibited. Any person operating a motorized foot scooter upon any public area in the city of Sequim shall wear an approved helmet designed for safety that meets or exceeds the following standards, and shall have either the neck or chin strap of the helmet fastened securely while the motorized foot scooter is in motion. No person shall transport another person on or in tow of a motorized foot scooter upon any public area in the jurisdiction of the city of Sequim. A parent or guardian is responsible for requiring that a child under the age of 18 years wears an approved helmet while operating a motorized foot scooter in any public area in the city of Sequim, and has the neck or chin strap of the helmet fastened securely.

1. Standards for Helmets. “Helmet” means a head covering that meets or exceeds safety standards adopted by Standard Z-90.4 set by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), or the Snell Foundation, or such subsequent nationally recognized standard for bicycle helmet performance as the city council may adopt. (Ord. 2004-017 § 1)


10.23.030 Parent responsibility.

It is unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having control or custody of a minor child to allow said minor to operate a motorized foot scooter in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2004-017 § 1)


10.23.040 Violation – Enforcement authority and penalties.

The city of Sequim police department personnel shall be responsible for enforcing the provisions of this chapter. Upon determining a violation of this chapter has occurred, law enforcement officers may, at their discretion, issue a civil infraction in the following amounts to any adult person, minor 16 years old or older, including a parent or guardian of a minor under 16 who is violating or permitting the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. In no case shall the amount exceed $250.00 for any one incident where more than one person is charged with a violation arising out of that incident. In addition to issuing an infraction, law enforcement officers may impound the motorized foot scooter in accordance with SMC 10.23.050, and may sell or destroy seized property upon order of the court in accordance with SMC 10.23.050.

The following monetary penalty shall apply for each offense: $50.00.

Payment of civil fines at the Sequim police department within 24 hours of the issuance of the notice of violation (not including weekends and legal holidays) shall reduce the amount of the fine owing by 50 percent. (Ord. 2004-017 § 1)


10.23.050 Seizure and forfeiture.

All motorized foot scooters operated in violation of this chapter are subject to seizure and forfeiture in the following manner:

A. Any person found to be riding a device in violation of this chapter as specified in this chapter may be subject to the impoundment of the device as evidence at the time of violation, until such time as the case is concluded. If the violator is a minor, the device being held as evidence will only be released to a parent or legal guardian and only at the conclusion of the case.

B. A person charged with a violation of this chapter who has been issued a notice of civil infraction attached shall have the right to appeal the matter to the police department within 15 working days, requesting a hearing of the matter. Said matter shall be heard no later than 30 calendar days from the date of the appeal. A person requesting an appeal shall post bond in the amount indicated for the violation, which shall be refunded if the hearing officer finds in his/her favor. If the appellant is found to be in violation by the hearing officer, he/she may appeal the matter to the Clallam County district court. If the district court rules in favor of the city, the appellant may be required to pay associated court costs in addition to the monetary fine. In the event the offender is a juvenile, the parents of the juvenile must file an appeal and be present at the hearing. (Ord. 2004-017 § 1)


Chapter 10.24 RAILROAD TRAINS

(Repealed by Ord. 99-003)


Chapter 10.28 HOSPITAL ZONE

(Repealed by Ord. 99-003)            


Title 11 (Reserved)


Title 12 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES

Chapters:

12.02    Streets

12.04    Sidewalk Use

12.08    Sidewalk Construction

12.10    Rights-of-Way

12.12    Ditch Culverts

12.16    Work Obstructing Public Places

12.20    Naming of Streets

12.22    Street Address Designation Policies

12.24    Parks, Playgrounds and Public Places

12.25    Protection and Preservation of Public Trees in Parks and Rights-of-Way

12.28    Mapped Streets

12.30    Developer Reimbursement Collection Agreements


Chapter 12.02 STREETS

Sections:

12.02.010    Street standards.


12.02.010 Street standards.

All streets shall conform to the street standards and design in Chapter 17.32 SMC as now existing or as hereafter amended. (Ord. 2009-037 § 1)


Chapter 12.04 SIDEWALK USE

Sections:

12.04.010    Purpose.

12.04.020    Definitions.

12.04.030    Right to erect.

12.04.040    Duty to use proper care and caution.

12.04.050    Duty to repair and maintain.

12.04.060    Removal.

12.04.070    Insurance.

12.04.080    Approval of plans.

12.04.090    Annual inspection.

12.04.100    City’s right to remove or repair.

12.04.110    Notice.

12.04.120    Penalties.


12.04.010 Purpose.

The purpose of the ordinance codified in this chapter is to allow owners of abutting property sidewalks in the city to erect and maintain western-type store fronts which call for pillar-supported coverings over sidewalks, and to allow the pillars to be attached to the sidewalks. (Ord. 304 § 1, 1974)


12.04.020 Definitions.

The following terms when used in this chapter shall be construed to mean as follows:

A. “Abutting property” means all property having a frontage on the sides or margins of any sidewalk.

B. “Owner” means the plural as well as the singular and includes any partnership, association, group or corporation other than a public body.

C. “Sidewalk” means a walk for pedestrian use outside the building lot line of any property owner and constructed for use by the general public.

D. “Structure” means any covering, roof or other extension of a building which projects over and covers the sidewalk. (Ord. 304 § 2, 1974)


12.04.030 Right to erect.

Every owner of property abutting the sidewalks of the city in the areas of the city zoned BL shall have the right to erect and maintain structures over the abutting sidewalks. Such structures may have pillars attached to the sidewalks. The structures shall be self-supporting and shall not be dependent upon any attached pillars. Fire stops shall be incorporated therein as required by the city building inspector. (Ord. 304 § 3, 1974)


12.04.040 Duty to use proper care and caution.

Every owner who erects a structure as defined in this chapter shall use proper care and caution in the construction and maintenance of it all in accordance with the state and city ordinances relating to buildings. (Ord. 304 § 4, 1974)


12.04.050 Duty to repair and maintain.

Structures shall be repaired and maintained at the owner’s expense. (Ord. 304 § 5, 1974)


12.04.060 Removal.

Every owner of property abutting the sidewalks of the city which has such a structure attached shall have the option to completely and permanently remove the structure at the owner’s expense. (Ord. 304 § 6, 1974)


12.04.070 Insurance.

A. Every owner of property abutting the sidewalks of the city which has such a structure attached shall at all times, commencing with the date upon which construction begins, carry the following types of insurance with an insurance carrier or carriers acceptable to the city, and policies approved by the city.

B. Public liability insurance covering death or bodily injuries with limits of not less than $100,000 per person and $250,000 for any one accident or disaster, and property damage coverage with limits of not less than $50,000, which insurance shall name the city as an additional insured. (Ord. 304 § 7, 1974)


12.04.080 Approval of plans.

Before construction of such structure commences or before alterations of it are made, plans for construction or alterations must first be submitted to and be approved by the city building inspector. (Ord. 304 § 8, 1974)


12.04.090 Annual inspection.

The structures are subject to annual inspection by the city building inspector. Should it be determined that a structure is or has become a public nuisance or in any manner endangers the public use of the sidewalks, then the owner of the property abutting the sidewalks to which such structure is attached shall correct the situation upon 60 days’ notice, such notice to be given as provided in SMC 12.04.110, by repair, reconstruction, removal or such other action as shall be determined by the city building inspector. (Ord. 304 § 9, 1974)


12.04.100 City’s right to remove or repair.

The city shall, upon 30 days’ notice, such notice to be given as provided in SMC 12.04.110, have the right to repair, reconstruct or remove such structure if any abutting property owner fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter. The cost to the city of such repairs, reconstruction or removal, including the engineer’s expenses, shall be charged to the abutting property owner. If the property owner fails or refuses to pay the costs incurred by the city or in the event the owner cannot be found, the city may file a lien therefor against the property within 90 days. (Ord. 304 § 10, 1974)


12.04.110 Notice.

Any notice required by this chapter shall be given by mailing a copy of the notice to the owner as shown upon the records of the county treasurer and at the address shown thereon; and if no owner and address is shown on such record, a copy of the notice shall be posted upon the property, and shall also be published in one issue of the Sequim newspaper. Proof of such mailing, posting and publication shall be made by affidavit filed with the city clerk. The notice shall include a description of the property involved and in connection with SMC 12.04.090 it shall include the nature of the hazardous condition and the action required by the city building inspector and in connection with SMC 12.04.100 it shall include a description of the violations of this chapter. (Ord. 304 § 11, 1974)


12.04.120 Penalties.

Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, in addition to the costs required in SMC 12.04.100, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine in a sum not to exceed $300.00 or by imprisonment in the city jail for a period not to exceed 90 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 304 § 12, 1974)


Chapter 12.08 SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION

Sections:

12.08.010    Purpose.

12.08.020    Definitions.

12.08.030    Plans and specifications – Permits – Performance bond.

12.08.040    Sidewalks to be constructed in platted areas prior to acceptance.

12.08.050    Driveway entrances required.

12.08.060    Minimum standards.

12.08.070    Vertical and wedge curbs and gutters.

12.08.080    Driveway standards.

12.08.090    Base preparation.

12.08.100    Violation – Penalty.


12.08.010 Purpose.

The uncontrolled construction, maintenance and repair of sidewalks, driveways, curbs and gutters has created such hazards to the health, safety and welfare of the people of the city that it is necessary for the city, in exercise of its police power, to establish regulations governing the same. (Ord. 2005-019; Ord. 279 § 1, 1973)


12.08.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the words defined in this section shall have the following meanings:

A. “Person” means the plural as well as the singular and includes any partnership, association, group or corporation.

B. “Sidewalk” includes any and all structures or forms of street improvement included in the space between the street margin and the roadway but shall not include trails, paths or pathways. 

C. “Trail, path or pathway” includes recreational walkways, which may be a component of parks or open spaces. 

D. “Street or road” shall have the same definition as found in SMC 17.08.020(T). (Ord. 2009-037 § 2; Ord. 2005-019; Ord. 279 § 2, 1973)


12.08.030 Plans and specifications – Permits – Performance bond.

No sidewalk, driveway, curb or gutter within the city shall hereafter be constructed, altered or repaired by any person without a written permit first being obtained from the office of the city clerk. Plans and specifications for the construction, alteration or repair of sidewalks, driveways, curbs and gutters shall first be submitted to the city for approval. Such plans and specifications shall contain the layout with dimensions, existing ground elevation and proposed finished grade elevation for the work intended. When requested by the city the request for permit must be accompanied by a performance bond or certified check, payable to the city, in an amount that is not less than the estimated construction cost. (Ord. 2005-019; Ord. 279 § 4, 1973)


12.08.040 Sidewalks to be constructed in platted areas prior to acceptance.

Sidewalks, curbs and gutters shall be constructed in all areas to be platted or replatted prior to the acceptance by the city of the platted or replatted areas. All public sidewalks, curbs and gutters shall be constructed of concrete. (Ord. 2005-019; Ord. 279 § 5, 1973)


12.08.050 Driveway entrances required.

Where it becomes necessary for access across any sidewalk, whether existing or proposed, with any vehicle, a driveway shall be constructed. Driveway aprons, where they cross public sidewalks constructed of concrete, shall be constructed of concrete. Where no public sidewalks have been constructed, driveway aprons may be constructed of asphalt. (Ord. 2005-019; Ord. 279 § 6, 1973)


12.08.060 Minimum standards.

All sidewalks in the areas designated by the city as “commercial” or “mixed use” shall be a minimum of eight feet wide from back of curb or landscape strip. All sidewalks in residential areas shall be a minimum of six feet wide from back of curb or landscape strip. All sidewalks shall be constructed with a minimum four-inch thickness. Driveway entrance sidewalks shall be a minimum six-inch thickness and as identified in the City of Sequim Streets and Utilities Development Regulations Detail SQM-R8. (Ord. 2006-019 § 1; Ord. 2005-019; Ord. 279 § 7, 1973)


12.08.070 Vertical and wedge curbs and gutters.

All vertical and wedge curbs and gutters shall be combined concrete curb and gutters as specified and approved by the city engineer. Appropriate application for vertical and wedge curbs shall be in conformance with the street profiles identified as Detail SQM-R1A, R1B, R2A, R2B and R2C in the City of Sequim Streets and Utilities Development Regulations. Design standards are identified in Detail SQM-R5 and SQM-R6. (Ord. 2006-019 § 1; Ord. 2005-019; Ord. 279 § 8, 1973)


12.08.080 Driveway standards.

All driveways on public property shall be cement concrete driveways as specified and approved by the city engineer as set forth in SMC 12.08.050. The width of driveways shall be a minimum of nine feet and a maximum of 30 feet. Existing curbs and sidewalks over which a driveway is to be placed shall be neatly cut and removed. Driveways on private property shall be constructed of concrete or asphalt. (Ord. 2005-019; Ord. 279 § 9, 1973)


12.08.090 Base preparation.

All structural materials hereinafter used in repairing or construction of sidewalks shall be placed upon a carefully prepared base meeting American Public Works Association (APWA) standards or Washington State Department of Transportation standards (WSDOT). Concrete shall be American Public Works Association Class 5 (1-1/2) or 5 (3/4). (Ord. 2005-019; Ord. 279 § 10, 1973)


12.08.100 Violation – Penalty.

Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine in a sum that is not more than $300.00. (Ord. 2005-019; Ord. 279 § 11, 1973)


Chapter 12.10 RIGHTS-OF-WAY

Sections:

12.10.010    Findings and purpose.

12.10.020    City property.


12.10.010 Findings and purpose.

The city council finds that it is in the public interest to establish standards for use of the rights-of-way and/or easements for service providers and other owners and operators of utility systems, in a manner which:

A. Provides terms, conditions and cost under which service providers and other operators of utility systems may use valuable public property to serve the public.

B. Protects the public interest in the use of the limited physical capacity of the public rights-of-way and/or easements.

C. Protects the public and the city from any harm resulting from such private use of rights-of-way and/or easements and preserves and improves the aesthetics of the community.

D. Protects and carries out the regulatory authority of the city and recovers costs. (Ord. 2006-002 § 1)


12.10.020 City property.

The city council finds that the city’s rights-of-way, other city property, and utility facilities such as water conduits, sewer conduits, poles and other conduits within the city constitute valuable public property:

A. That can be partially occupied by private companies and other entities for facilities used in the delivery, conveyance, and transmission of telecommunications, utility and public services rendered for profit, to the enhancement of the health, welfare, and general economic well being of the city and its citizens.

B. That are a unique resource so that proper management by the city is necessary, to maximize the efficiency and minimize the costs to the taxpayers of the foregoing uses and to minimize the inconvenience and negative effects, including degradation, upon the public from such facilities’ construction, emplacement, relocation, and maintenance in the rights-of-way.

C. Encourage proper development while preserving aesthetic and other community values and preventing proliferation of aboveground facilities and damaged rights-of-way and/or easements.

D. Recover the city’s current and ongoing costs of granting and regulating access to and use of the public rights-of-way and/or easements from the persons and businesses seeking such access and causing such costs.

E. Fees, insurance, warranties, repair and construction and excavation requirements shall include the following:

1. Repair of Damages. A franchisee, its successors and assigns shall promptly repair any damage of every type and nature to city property or city improvements caused by the failure or workmanship of the franchisee’s work during the life of a franchise. Patches in the public right-of-way must be restored or maintained by franchisee to the satisfaction of the city engineer until the area is repaved.

2. Public Ways and Property – Telecommunications, Cable – Municipal Authorization to Use Right-of-Way – Conditions of Occupancy or Use of the Right-of-Way. The following requirements apply as minimum conditions of installing, locating, using, maintaining, abandoning or removing facilities in the right-of-way or other permitted areas, whether by a service provider or any other user. They are a basis of negotiation of any franchise or master permit. Service providers or other users must accept the requirements, so long as any use or occupancy continues, regardless of whether a master or use permit or franchise has been issued, revoked or expired:

a. Users must comply with all applicable federal and state laws relating to operations in the city of Sequim, including safety laws and standards, as well as local ordinances, this chapter, and the policies and standards of the city, construction codes, regulations, and orders of the public works department, compliance all being further subject to audit or verification by the city at the users’ expense.

b. Users must obtain all permits required by the city for the installation, maintenance, repair, or removal of facilities in the right-of-way and pay all permit and filing fees, costs, charges and penalties within 30 days of billing or as otherwise specified by the public works department.

c. Users must always act in good faith and fair dealings with the public and must provide safe, reliable service to the public. Users must cooperate with the city to ensure their facilities are installed, maintained, repaired, and removed within the right-of-way or other permitted areas in compliance with the purposes of this chapter and in such a manner and at such points so as not to inconvenience the public use or to adversely affect the public health, safety, and welfare.

d. Users must provide information and plans the city requires to enable the city to comply with and enforce this chapter, including provision of advance planning information pursuant to the procedures established by the public works department. Users must keep the public works department fully informed of any changes to information required to be supplied with any master permit or franchise or any use permit.

e. Users must provide advance notice of long and short range needs for access to the right-of-way or other permitted areas as may be ordered by the public works department, and otherwise, as much as reasonable in order to facilitate the scheduling and coordination of work in the right-of-way or other permitted areas.

f. Users must obtain the written approval of the facility or structure owner, if they do not own it, prior to attaching to or otherwise using a facility or structure in the right-of-way or other permitted areas, and construct, install, operate, and maintain their facilities at their sole expense and liability except as otherwise provided by law or agreement. (Cross-reference: RCW 35.99.030(6).)

g. The city must not be exposed to any loss, liability or expense because of another’s use or occupancy of the right-of-way or other permitted areas. Users must fully indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents and employees, from all loss or liability in connection with their use or occupancy of such areas. Operations in or near the right-of-way or other permitted areas should be conducted to minimize or avoid hazard to the public or interfere with the priority of municipal infrastructure needs. Users must further pay for loss or damage to municipal assets or injury to municipal personnel. If the city nonetheless is exposed to risk or loss, users must protect and defend the city to the maximum extent permitted by law. Minimum insurance requirements pending any use or occupancy of the right-of-way or other permitted area are $500,000 per occurrence and $1,000,000 aggregate, with the city of Sequim as an additional named insured or as otherwise ordered by the administering officer with the advice of the risk manager.

h. The city is not responsible for construction or maintenance of any facilities placed and has no duty to modify the right-of-way or other permitted areas to accommodate such facilities. All areas utilized must be accepted “as is,” without express or implied assurances of suitability of any area for facilities placed. Users must assume all risk of facility placement and occupancy, including risks now or hereafter arising because of lack of municipal resources to maintain the municipal infrastructure or any component in current or better condition. Users must waive any claim against the city for loss or liability arising from acts or omissions of other users, occupants or the public, because of unstable earth or roadbed, changes in groundwater conditions or other natural or artificial conditions rendering the right-of-way or other permitted areas unsuitable for use for facilities placed or any other problem. This does not affect the applicability of Chapter 19.122 RCW, Washington State’s underground utilities statute.

i. There is no warranty of any municipal title or interest to confer permission to use or access any area. Permission is in the nature of a quitclaim authorization, subject to any other underlying interests as may be established. The city further reserves the right to vacate or abandon any permitted area at no cost or liability to the city. Municipal infrastructure needs have first priority in all cases except and only so far as shown to be otherwise required by a preemptive right.

j. There is no duty or liability of the city to any third-party tenant in or on a user’s facilities in the right-of-way or other permitted areas, or to any direct or indirect customers or third-party beneficiaries of a user. The city disclaims any such duty or responsibility. Users must accept sole responsibly for claims of their direct or indirect third-party tenants, customers or third-party beneficiaries.

k. Nothing in this chapter limits or restricts any requirement, duty or obligation heretofore arising to the benefit of the city as a result of any municipal contract, permit, or franchise, but such provisions are supplemental and in addition to this chapter. The provisions of this chapter are supplemental and in addition to other applicable municipal ordinances, standards, and requirements. Nothing in this chapter impairs any obligation of contract in violation of the Constitution of the State of Washington or the United States. (Cross-reference: RCW 35.99.080(c).)

l. Any damage or disturbance to the right-of-way or other permitted or surrounding areas must be promptly restored. A patch must be thereafter maintained by the responsible party as determined by the administering officer until the area is repaved. The public works department may require the responsible party to repave an entire lane within a cut or disturbed location, or greater area, if deemed affected. Common trenching and coordination of access needs by the user is required to avoid unnecessary cuts or damage to the right-of-way or other permitted areas. In addition, all patching and or paving shall be warranted against defects or failure for a period of two years from the date of completion of the work.

m. Access may be limited by the administering officer at a location, considering the purpose of this chapter, where there is inadequate space or other special limitations in an area. Minimum underground horizontal separation is five feet from city water facilities and 10 feet from above-ground city water facilities, subject to the public works department’s review and further determination.

n. Any assignment of use or occupancy privileges requires consent of the city in the manner originally granted. This does not apply to minor stock transfers. No capital stock may ever be issued based on any permission to use or occupy the right-of-way or other permitted areas or the value thereof. In any condemnation proceeding brought by the city, no grantee of any permission, permit or franchise under this chapter or otherwise shall ever be entitled to receive any return thereon, or its value.

o. Fees for all such services shall be set by resolution by the city council. (Ord. 2006-002 § 2)


Chapter 12.12 DITCH CULVERTS

Sections:

12.12.010    Ditch culverts subject to regulations.

12.12.020    Application to construct – Standards.

12.12.030    Costs.

12.12.040    Street commissioner duties.


12.12.010 Ditch culverts subject to regulations.

All irrigation ditches crossing the public streets or alleys of the city, and known as ditch culverts, must conform to the regulations prescribed in this chapter, except that irrigation ditches now in use and which are now running across streets or alleys are exempted from the regulations of this chapter until such time as such crossing ditches are required to be altered or repaired to prevent flooding the street or damage to property. (Ord. 32 § 1, 1915)


12.12.020 Application to construct – Standards.

A. Irrigation ditch companies, or their officers or stockholders desiring to have an irrigation ditch run across a public street or alley must make application to the city street commissioner to construct a ditch culvert, and such culvert must be constructed under the supervision of the commissioner. The ditch culvert must be of a size to be agreed upon between the applicant constructing it and the commissioner, subject to this chapter.

B. Ditches must be constructed of either corrugated iron or concrete, or three-inch plank, and the construction work is to be done in such a way as to leave no ridge or hummock or other obstruction in the street or alley so as to interfere with vehicle or other street traffic. Whenever it is necessary to prevent street flooding or damage to property, siphons must be provided with such culverts. (Ord. 32 § 2, 1915)


12.12.030 Costs.

A. All of the cost of construction of irrigation ditch culverts must be borne and paid for by the applicant or by the irrigation ditch company or other person desiring the work done.

B. Street crossings above such ditch culverts will be constructed and maintained at the expense of the city, but all ditch culverts must be maintained and kept in good repair at the expense of the irrigation ditch companies or owners of the ditch culvert. (Ord. 32 § 3, 1915)


12.12.040 Street commissioner duties.

It is the duty of the street commissioner whenever any irrigation ditch crossing or culvert is defective and needs repairs and alterations so as to prevent flooding of the streets or any damage to property, to notify the president, or secretary or trustee, or any officer of the irrigation ditch company with whose main ditch the ditch culvert connects in any way, to proceed to make the needed repairs to the defective culvert or crossing within three days from the receipt of such notice. In case the ditch company fails or refuses to make the needed repairs as notified to do, then the street commissioner is authorized to proceed and repair the defective culvert or crossing at the expense of the ditch company, and if the expense is not paid for by the ditch company, a suit shall be instituted by the city against such delinquent ditch company in any court of competent jurisdiction, to collect the total expense of such repairs with costs. (Ord. 32 § 4, 1915)


Chapter 12.16 WORK OBSTRUCTING PUBLIC PLACES

Sections:

12.16.010    Permit required.

12.16.020    Application.

12.16.030    Fees.


12.16.010 Permit required.

All persons, corporations and/or utilities desiring to perform work obstructing or making installations that cause disturbance, disruption or damage to city streets, alleys, rights-of-way, bridges, parking lots, parks or other public places within the city are required to obtain a permit from the city supervisor or his designated representative before proceeding therewith. (Ord. 357 § 25(1), 1977)


12.16.020 Application.

The city’s mayor or his designated representative is authorized and directed to require applications for the performance of work obstructing or making installations on city streets, alleys, rights-of-way, bridges, parking lots, parks or other public places upon such forms and regulations as are or hereafter shall be approved by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 357 § 25(2), 1977)


12.16.030 Fees.

The city council is authorized to adopt fee schedules, forms and regulations, by resolution, to carry into effect the intent of this chapter. (Ord. 357 § 25(3), 1977)


Chapter 12.20 NAMING OF STREETS

Sections:

12.20.010    Streets and avenues.

12.20.020    Name of street or avenue to run from boundary to boundary.


12.20.010 Streets and avenues.

All public highways running north and south through the city from boundary to boundary of the corporate city limits, exclusive of alleys, shall be designated avenues, and all highways running east and west from boundary to boundary of the corporate city limits, exclusive of alleys, shall be designated streets. All alleys shall be called alleys and shall be given such further names as the council may see fit hereafter to name them. (Ord. 36 § 1, 1915)


12.20.020 Name of street or avenue to run from boundary to boundary.

For the purpose of uniformity and convenience to the public in naming the avenues and streets, it is provided that the streets and avenues shall bear but one name clear through from boundary to boundary and when any such street or plat or addition to the city hereafter, the street or avenue name now established shall likewise be extended along with the street or avenue. (Ord. 36 § 2, 1915)


Chapter 12.22 STREET ADDRESS DESIGNATION POLICIES

Sections:

12.22.010    Purpose.

12.22.020    Baseline streets designated.

12.22.030    Assignment of address – Even or odd.

12.22.040    Assignment of address – Rate per block.

12.22.050    Assignment of address – Directional indicators.

12.22.060    Assignment of address – Proration of distances.

12.22.070    Assignment of address – Curved streets.

12.22.080    Assignment of address – Driveway as reference.

12.22.090    Assignment of address – Cul-de-sacs.

12.22.100    Assignment of address – Multi-unit buildings.

12.22.110    Assignment of address – Mobile home/RV parks.

12.22.120    Multi-unit addresses – Floor plans/maps.


12.22.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to describe the current addressing system in use inside the center of Sequim, and to provide for consistent extension to areas presently addressed in an inconsistent way. This system will be applied within the Sequim Address Grid Boundary. (Ord. 93-005 § 1)


12.22.020 Baseline streets designated.

The baseline for north-south streets shall be an east-west line passing through Washington Street at Sequim Avenue. The baseline for east-west streets shall be a north-south line passing through Sequim Avenue at Washington Street. These baselines will begin the 100 block in each direction. (Ord. 93-005 § 1)


12.22.030 Assignment of address – Even or odd.

Even numbers shall be on the north and east sides of the street, odd numbers on the south and west side of the street. (Ord. 93-005 § 1)


12.22.040 Assignment of address – Rate per block.

Addresses shall increase at a rate of 100 per block away from the above baselines. Permanent blocks are defined on the official city map, and will not change with future street construction. Numbers shall be assigned within each block with sufficient spacing to allow for additional development. (Ord. 93-005 § 1)


12.22.050 Assignment of address – Directional indicators.

Each address will include a directional indicator of north, south, east or west preceding the street name to identify the direction of increasing numbers. (Ord. 93-005 § 1)


12.22.060 Assignment of address – Proration of distances.

Unless preexisting patterns dictate otherwise, addresses will be proportionally prorated within each block based on the location of the front entrance to the building. The 1000 block of North Sequim Avenue will be stretched to allow address numbers to catch up to the mileage-based rural addresses within one-tenth of a mile north of the grid boundary. (Ord. 93-005 § 1)


12.22.070 Assignment of address – Curved streets.

A street which curves or angles will be addressed either as an east-west street or as a north-south street, whichever fits best. Blocks on such streets will be stretched as necessary to follow the mapped grid, corresponding to the nearest blocks on the adjacent streets. On such streets, address numbers within each block will be calculated relative to the distance along the street rather than to the position on the map grid. (Ord. 93-005 § 1)


12.22.080 Assignment of address – Driveway as reference.

If the building location is such that the driveway would be a more functional reference point for addressing, the address may instead be based on the intersection of the driveway and the street. (Ord. 93-005 § 1)


12.22.090 Assignment of address – Cul-de-sacs.

Lots on cul-de-sacs which are less than 200 feet deep may be assigned numbers off the street from which the cul-de-sac originates. In this case, the cul-de-sac shall not be assigned a street name. (Ord. 93-005 § 1)


12.22.100 Assignment of address – Multi-unit buildings.

Each unit of a duplex shall be assigned a separate numbered address. Each building with three or more units shall be assigned a numbered address, and each unit shall be assigned a unit number or letter. Units may be designated as “apartment,” “unit,” “suite,” or other appropriate designator. (Ord. 93-005 § 1)


12.22.110 Assignment of address – Mobile home/RV parks.

Private thoroughfares within the complex may be named, with each site addressed in the normal way. As an alternative, the complex may be addressed at its entrance with each unit assigned a unit number or letter. (Ord. 93-005 § 1)


12.22.120 Multi-unit addresses – Floor plans/maps.

The owner of a multi-unit address site must supply a floor plan or map locating each unit adequately for guiding emergency response. (Ord. 93-005 § 1)


Chapter 12.24 PARKS, PLAYGROUNDS AND PUBLIC PLACES

Sections:

12.24.010    Parks, playgrounds and public ways.


12.24.010 Parks, playgrounds and public ways.

A. No person, firm or corporation shall use, place or erect any placard, notice, sign or device of any kind for advertising in any park, or erect a structure of any kind in any park; provided, however, the city supervisor, or his designated representative, may permit the erection of temporary directional signs, decorations, advertising signs or temporary stands and buildings on occasions of group or public meetings, or for purposes of organized athletic events.

B. No person shall, without the written permission of the city public works supervisor or his designated representative, cut, injure, deface, remove or disturb any tree, shrub, plant, building, fence, bench or other structure, apparatus or property in a public park or a public place, or injure, misuse or remove any device placed to protect such tree, shrub, plant, building, fence, bench or other structure, apparatus or property.

C. No person shall enter upon any portion of lawn or ground within a public park or a public place when notified by a sign placed in such a park or public place, or by a police officer, not to enter upon such lawn or ground.

D. No person shall throw or deposit any refuse or litter, garbage, yard trimmings or other waste materials in any park or public place, except in designated receptacles.

E. No person shall make or kindle any fire in a public place or in a public park except at places designated for such purpose.

F. No person shall remain in a public park or public place after the posted closing time.

G. No person shall allow or permit any animal to run at large in any public park or public place or to enter any lake, pond, fountain or stream therein.

H. No person shall use or discharge any firearm, air gun, BB gun, slingshot or any bow and arrow in a public park, or use or discharge any such weapon in a public place, unless otherwise authorized as a part of an organized recreation program of the park and recreation department of the city, or other public agency.

I. No person shall molest, catch, injure or kill or throw any stone or missile of any kind at, or strike with any stick or weapon, any animal or bird in a public park or public place.

J. No person shall solicit or ask for the payment or gift of money or sell, offer or solicit for sale, any goods, services or merchandise in a public park or public place without the prior written permission of the mayor or his designated representative.

K. 1. No person shall use or operate any loudspeaker or mechanical means of amplifying sound in any public park or public place within the city limits of the city unless a permit has been issued by the office of the mayor or his designated representative. The mayor or his designee shall evaluate the propriety of granting the permit based upon the following criteria:

a. The time of day requested for the permit;

b. The day of the week requested for the permit;

c. The location of the premises for which the permit is requested and its proximity to commercial or residential areas which may be impacted by the noise generated;

d. The number of persons anticipated to be present;

e. The nature of the amplifying device and anticipated decibel level;

f. The necessary city services anticipated (police, fire, utilities) and their availability on the date and time requested. A fee may be charged to defray the city’s anticipated costs, which fee shall be discretionary with the mayor or his designee.

2. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the mayor or his or her designee may appeal the decision to the city council at their next regularly scheduled meeting.

L. No person shall conduct any circus, carnival or similar exhibition in any public place except as a part of an organized recreation program of the parks and recreation department.

M. No person shall ride or drive any bicycle, cart or motor vehicle or other wheeled vehicle or machine, except a baby carriage or invalid’s chair, over or through any public park or public place, or upon or along any sidewalk in the city, except along and upon public roads, streets or other designated areas therein or to operate any vehicle at a speed in excess of the posted speed limit.

N. No person shall practice or play golf, baseball or other games of like character in any public park or public place except at places designated for such purposes.

O. No person shall, without the written permission of the mayor or his designated representative, place or hereafter maintain upon the ground in a public park or public place any stone, cement or other substance which shall impede the free entrance of water and air to the roots of any tree planted in such public park or public place without leaving an open space of ground outside the trunk of the tree not less than four square feet.

P. No person, firm or corporation shall prevent, delay or interfere with the employees of the city in the planting, pruning, spraying or removing of trees, plants or shrubs in a public park or a public place. (Ord. 2011-015 § 2; Ord. 490 § 2, 1986; Ord. 357 § 14, 1977)


Chapter 12.25 PROTECTION AND PRESERVATION OF PUBLIC TREES IN PARKS AND RIGHTS-OF-WAY

Sections:

12.25.010    Purpose.

12.25.020    Definitions.

12.25.030    Tree planting.

12.25.040    Tree pruning and maintenance.

12.25.050    Tree removal.

12.25.060    Landmark trees.

12.25.070    Trees on private property overhanging public rights-of-way.

12.25.080    Damage to city trees.

12.25.090    Penalties.


12.25.010 Purpose.

The purpose of these regulations is to encourage responsible management of public tree resources within the city of Sequim in a fashion consistent with the goals and policies of the parks and recreation master plan. Trees growing on public property provide benefits to the greater public at large and the purpose of this chapter is to provide for the maintenance and enhancement of city street and park trees, and to provide for the preservation of landmark trees, to secure the benefits conferred by a prudently managed urban forest. Proper protection, planting, and maintenance is required to promote tree health and aesthetics, foster species diversity, and to preserve the public tree canopy. Therefore, the purposes of this chapter are:

A. Encourage the planting of new trees and the maintenance of existing trees for all the benefits they provide to the community.

B. Maintain public trees in a healthy and nonhazardous condition through good arboricultural practices.

C. Manage trees and vegetation on public property in a manner that represents the best interests of the public.

D. Encourage a diversity of appropriate species of trees.

E. Remove and replace trees in a timely manner so they do not cause damage to city infrastructure such as streets, sidewalks, sewer and water pipes, conduit, and other subsurface elements.

F. Improve the quality of air and water, reduce storm water runoff and help prevent soil erosion.

G. Increase the aesthetic quality of a community and the sense of community pride.

H. The city recognizes the importance of trees to the ambiance of a city, the environment and property values. (Ord. 2016-018 § 1 (Exh. A))


12.25.020 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter certain words and terms are defined as follows:

A. Appropriate Tree. An appropriate tree is a tree suited at maturity for the space which it occupies without creating a hazard to public health and safety.

B. “City” means the city of Sequim.

C. “City tree” or “public tree” means a tree, shrub, bush, and/or other woody plant on land in public rights-of-way of all streets, avenues or ways within the city, within parks, upon the grounds of city buildings and facilities, or otherwise located upon public property within the city.

D. “Climbing spurs” means sharp, pointed devices affixed to the climber’s leg used to assist in climbing trees (also known as gaffs, hooks, spurs, spikes, climbers).

E. “Crown reduction pruning” means the reduction of the top, sides, or individual limbs by the means of removal of the leader or longest portion of a limb to a lateral no less than one-third of the total diameter of the original limb removing no more than one-quarter of the leaf surface.

F. Hazard Tree. A hazard tree is any tree with a combination of structural defect and/or disease (which makes it subject to a high probability of failure) and a proximity to persons or property which makes it an imminent threat.

G. “Landmark tree” means a tree designated by the city council as significant because of association with historic figures or events, rarity or extraordinary aesthetic value.

H. “Park tree” means trees growing on property owned in fee-simple by the city of Sequim.

I. “Specimen tree value” means an objective evaluation process used to determine the public value of a tree. The evaluation looks at the size, condition, and location of a public tree to determine whether a tree has a significant public value.

J. “Street tree” means trees growing within the city’s rights-of-way.

K. “Topping” means cutting a branch or stem back to a stub or lateral branch not sufficiently large enough to assume the terminal role (also known as heading, stubbing, lopping).

L. “Vegetation management plan” means a plan identifying how vegetation is to be managed on city-owned property.

M. “Urban forester” means the city of Sequim’s designated urban forester, either a designated city employee within the parks department, or a certified arborist contracted by the city. (Ord. 2016-018 § 1 (Exh. A))


12.25.030 Tree planting.

A. Tree Planting on City of Sequim Property. Private parties may plant trees on property owned by the city with written permission. To obtain permission the applicant(s) shall:

1. Submit a written request to the city a minimum of 30 days prior to the scheduled planting.

2. Prepare a tree planting plan identifying the species, size, and location of trees to be planted. The proposed species and locations of trees must not create sight distance issues and be consistent with current and potential future uses of the property as determined by city staff review.

3. Comply with the standards for planting, as required per public works standards and policy.

4. Have underground utilities located and obtain approval from any utilities located within 15 feet prior to planting. (Ord. 2016-018 § 1 (Exh. A))


12.25.040 Tree pruning and maintenance.

A. Pruning Street Trees. Private parties may have street trees pruned with written permission from the city. To obtain permission the applicant(s) shall:

1. Submit a written request to the city a minimum of 30 days prior to pruning;

2. Identify the trees to be pruned and describe the specific work to be performed;

3. Pay for all costs associated with the proposed pruning; and

4. Comply with the pruning standards as required per public works standards and policy.

B. Public Tree Care. The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds.

The city tree board may recommend removal or cause or order to be removed, any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, water lines, or other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest.

C. Topping and climbing trees with spurs is prohibited. Topping of park and street trees is prohibited. Climbing spurs may be used to climb a park or street tree only if it is to be removed.

D. Insect and Disease Abatement. The city may prune, spray, or otherwise maintain park and street trees in order to control infestations of insects or disease or to maintain public safety. Private parties may with written permission hire a certified pest controller to spray street trees adjacent to their property. (Ord. 2016-018 § 1 (Exh. A))


12.25.050 Tree removal.

A. Hazard Trees – City’s Authority to Remove. The city may remove any park or street tree determined to be a hazard by the urban forester.

B. Park or Street Tree Removal Process. No city trees shall be cut down, killed, or removed for any reason without complying with the following procedure:

1. File an application with the urban forester;

2. Receive approval from the city for removal. (Ord. 2016-018 § 1 (Exh. A))


12.25.060 Landmark trees.

A. The director of public works or his/her designee shall maintain a register of trees designated as landmark trees because of association with historic figures or events, rarity or extraordinary aesthetic value.

B. The director of public works or his/her designee shall nominate city trees for designation as landmark trees, and prepare a report for the city tree board, who will make a recommendation to the city council to review such nominations.

C. City council shall designate landmark trees by resolution containing sufficiently specific identification of the tree or trees so designated.

D. After designation of a city tree as a landmark tree, it shall not be removed unless city council makes at least one of the following findings:

1. The tree is dead or diseased and poses a danger to public safety.

2. After consideration of potential alterations to the project to preserve the tree, there is no feasible alternative to accomplishing a public project without removal of the tree.

3. The tree is causing damage to city streets, rights-of-way or buildings or facilities that cannot be corrected without removal of the tree.

4. There are other facts city council deems of greater public value to justify removal of the tree. (Ord. 2016-018 § 1 (Exh. A))


12.25.070 Trees on private property overhanging public rights-of-way.

Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the city shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of eight feet above the surface of the street or sidewalk. Such owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. (Ord. 2016-018 § 1 (Exh. A))


12.25.080 Damage to city trees.

Any person negligently damaging or deforming a city tree shall be liable to the city for the cost of replacement of the tree, including the cost of nursery stock in close as size to the damaged or deformed tree as is feasible and the city’s costs for soil preparation, planting and actual or estimated costs of establishment. (Ord. 2016-018 § 1 (Exh. A))


12.25.090 Penalties.

A. As an additional concurrent penalty, it shall be a civil infraction for a person, firm, or corporation to cut down, prune, kill, or otherwise damage any park or street tree without lawful authority. Each tree cut, pruned or damaged shall be a separate infraction. A person, firm, or corporation found to have committed a civil infraction shall be assessed a monetary penalty as follows:

1. First offense: Class 1 ($250.00), not including statutory assessments.

2. Second offense: It shall be a gross misdemeanor for any person, firm, or corporation to knowingly cut down, prune, kill, or otherwise damage any park or street tree without lawful authority. The penalty for such violation shall be a fine not to exceed $1,000, and/or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days or both such fine and imprisonment. Each tree cut, pruned or damaged shall constitute a separate offense. In the event of continuing violation or failure to comply, the second and subsequent days shall constitute a gross misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $5,000 and/or imprisonment for not more than 365 days or both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 2016-018 § 1 (Exh. A))


Chapter 12.28 MAPPED STREETS

Sections:

12.28.010    Purpose and authority.

12.28.020    Short title.

12.28.030    Definitions.

12.28.040    Enforcement and administration.

12.28.050    Procedure.

12.28.060    Official street map – Establishment.

12.28.070    Official street map – Additions and changes.

12.28.080    Regulation of buildings in bed of mapped streets.

12.28.090    Municipal improvements in streets.

12.28.100    Violation.


12.28.010 Purpose and authority.

In accordance with the Laws of Washington, 1935, as provided for in RCW 35.63.080 through 35.63.110, the city council of the city enacts the ordinance codified in this chapter for the following purposes:

A. To provide for adoption and enforcement of coordinated plans as part of a comprehensive plan for the advantageous development of the municipality.

B. To lessen traffic congestion and accidents.

C. To prevent overcrowding of land.

D. To avoid undue concentration and population.

E. To promote harmonious and coordinated development.

F. To facilitate the adequate provision of transportation.

G. To establish official street maps for the whole or any portion of the municipality and to regulate and restrict the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair or use of buildings and structures or land.

H. To integrate, to the police power of the city, the authority expressed in Chapters 35.63, 35.78, 58.12 and 58.16 RCW, and to secure continuity between planning and land development. (Ord. 364 § 1, 1978)


12.28.020 Short title.

The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the mapped street ordinance of the city. (Ord. 364 § 13, 1978)


12.28.030 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:

A. “City council” means the chief legislative body of the city.

B. “Commission” means the city planning commission of the city.

C. “Official street map” means certain maps so designated showing location, size and dimension, together with reports relating thereto, of land areas deemed to be necessary for future public use for street purposes.

D. “Plot plan” means scale drawings, showing the actual dimensions of the building sites and showing the size, use and location of existing and proposed buildings to be erected thereon.

E. “Street” or “streets” relates to and includes streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, lanes, alleys and other traffic ways. (Ord. 364 § 2, 1978)


12.28.040 Enforcement and administration.

It is the duty of the city building department to interpret, administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter; to issue permits for the use of land, erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration and repair of any building and/or structure or parts thereof. (Ord. 364 § 3, 1978)


12.28.050 Procedure.

Any person, firm or corporation proposing to erect, construct, reconstruct, alter, repair or use any location, site, parcel of land, buildings and/or structures shall make application to the building inspector for a building permit. Each such application shall include a plot plan of the land. (Ord. 364 § 4, 1978)


12.28.060 Official street map – Establishment.

A. After the commission duly adopts a comprehensive plan which includes a major street plan, and shall have certified a copy of the comprehensive plan to the city council of the municipality, the city council may establish an official street map of the municipality showing the location of the streets of the whole or any part or parts of the municipality theretofore existing and established by law as public streets, or anticipated as future public streets.

B. The official street map may also show the location of the lines of streets on plats of subdivisions. The official map may also show the location of lines of private streets on plats of subdivisions which, previous to the establishment of the official map shall have been approved under and in accordance with the provision of earlier laws and ordinances. The city council shall certify the official street map which shall be filed and recorded in the office of the county auditor of Clallam County. (Ord. 364 § 5, 1978)


12.28.070 Official street map – Additions and changes.

A. In the event that the official street map established under SMC 12.28.060 does not include the entire municipality, the city council may add to the official map by placing thereon, from time to time, the lines of streets which are planned new streets, or street extensions, widenings, narrowings or vacations; provided, however, that before taking any such action, the city council shall hold a public hearing thereon, notice of the time and place of which shall be given not less than 10 days prior to the time fixed for public hearing by one publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality and by posting notice of the hearing in the city hall.

B. The placing of any street or street line upon the official map shall not in and of itself constitute or be deemed to constitute the opening or establishment of any street or the taking or acceptance of any land for street purposes. (Ord. 364 § 6, 1978)




12.28.080 Regulation of buildings in bed of mapped streets.

A. No permit shall be issued for any building or structure or part thereof on any land located between the mapped lines of any street as shown on the official map, except as specified in this section.

B. The city council shall have the power, upon an appeal filed with it by the owner of any such land, to authorize the granting of a permit for a building or structure or part thereof within any such mapped-street location in any case in which the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the city council that:

1. There are special circumstances applicable to the property in question or to the intended use, such as shape, topography, location or surroundings that do not apply generally to other properties or classes of use in the same vicinity and zone.

2. That a variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right or use possessed by other property in the same vicinity and zone but which because of special circumstances would be denied to the property in question.

3. That the granting of a variance to the ordinance codified in this chapter will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the vicinity and zone in which the subject property is located. The city council shall deny the appeal unless all of the above conditions are found to exist.

C. The city council, under this section, shall have the power to specify the exact location, ground area, height and other details and conditions of extent and character, and also the duration, of the building, structure or part thereof to be permitted, and may require that the owner file a waiver of claims of damage for the removal of any structures that may be in the restricted area when the street is improved. (Ord. 364 § 7, 1978)


12.28.090 Municipal improvements in streets.

Except in streets existing and established by law as public streets at the date of the establishment of the official street map, no public water facilities, sewer or other public utilities or improvements shall be constructed in any street not placed upon the official street map. (Ord. 364 § 8, 1978)


12.28.100 Violation.

A. This chapter is for the benefit of life, health, welfare, safety and convenience of the inhabitants of the city. It is made a misdemeanor to violate any of the provisions of this chapter or any amendment hereto. Such violation shall be punished as authorized for cities of the third class by the statutes of the state, for the commission of a misdemeanor pursuant to ordinances promulgated therefor. Each day’s violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.

B. In the event the city chooses to exercise its eminent domain powers and acquire real property located within the lines of mapped streets, no person or property owner shall be entitled to compensation which is attributable to any building or portion thereof constructed in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 364 § 9, 1978)


Chapter 12.30 DEVELOPER REIMBURSEMENT COLLECTION AGREEMENTS

Sections:

12.30.010    Developer reimbursement collection agreements.


12.30.010 Developer reimbursement collection agreements.

All agreements under this title shall conform to Chapter 13.98 SMC. (Ord. 2010-009 § 1)


Title 13 PUBLIC SERVICES

Chapters:

Division I. Water System

13.04    Administration and Enforcement

13.08    Definitions

13.12    Application for Service

13.16    Water Service Regulations

13.20    Water System Regulations

13.24    Water Meters

Division II. Sewer System

13.28    General Provisions

13.32    Definitions and Standards

13.36    Administration and Enforcement

13.40    Sewer Connection Required

13.44    Sewer Connection Permits

13.48    Public Sewer Use Regulations

13.52    Sewer Maintenance Regulations

13.56    Repair and Construction Regulations

13.60    Side Sewer Regulations

13.64    Storm Drainage

Division III. Rates and Charges for Water and Sewer Service

13.68    General Provisions

13.72    Installation and Connection Fees

13.76    Fees for Connection to Mains

13.80    Sewer Rates and Charges

13.84    Water Rates and Charges

13.92    Water Shut-Off, Reconnection (Turn-On) and Water Standby Charges

13.96    Enforcement

Division IV. Utility Extensions

13.98    Developer Reimbursement Collection Agreements

13.100    Utility Extensions

13.102    Service Extension Review Process (SERP)

Division V. Stormwater Management

13.104    Stormwater Management

13.108    Stormwater Maintenance

Division VI. Reclaimed Water

13.112    Reclaimed Water

Division VII. Cross Connections

13.120    Cross Connections


Chapter 13.04 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT

Sections:

13.04.010    General provisions.


13.04.010 General provisions.

A. The city has the authority to decide any question which may arise and which is not fully covered by any of the provisions of this title, and its decision in such cases is final.

B. The city reserves the right to amend or to add to these rules and regulations, or to change water rates as experience may show to be necessary or expedient.

C. Any person violating any of the provisions of this title is subject to enforcement pursuant to Chapter 1.13 SMC – Code Enforcement.

D. Any ordinance, or parts of ordinances, repealed by any ordinance codified in this title which are reenacted in form or substance in this title, may not be construed as new enactments, but as continuances and amendments of such ordinances, or parts of ordinances.

E. All rights of action under existing ordinances which this title in any way supersedes or repeals, whether action has been commenced thereon or not, will proceed without being in any manner affected by the passage of ordinances codified in this title. (Ord. 2019-013 (Exh. B); Ord. 164 § 15, 1953)


Chapter 13.08 DEFINITIONS

Sections:

13.08.010    Definitions.


13.08.010 Definitions.

As used in this title, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this chapter:

A. “Availability” means the city currently has the capacity to serve the connected unit.

B. “City of Sequim” means, in context, either the city or the official governing body of the city, including the city manager and city council exercising control and operation of the municipal water or sewer system.

C. “Standby rate” means a rate charged by the city for water and for sewer availability when city water is shut off but not disconnected. A standby rate is not available for sewer-only rate class customers.

D. “Water superintendent” means the official appointed by the city to superintend the construction, maintenance and operation of the municipal water system.

E. “Water collector” means the person or persons designated by the city to collect water rates. The word “person” wherever used in this title shall be held to mean and include natural persons of either sex and also associations, copartnerships and corporations, whether acting for or by themselves, or through or by a servant, agent or employee; the singular number shall be held and construed to include the plural and the masculine pronoun to include the feminine. (Ord. 2011-007 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 164 § 1, 1953)


Chapter 13.12 APPLICATION FOR SERVICE

Sections:

13.12.010    Application.

13.12.020    Request for disconnection (removal of meter, discontinuation of service).


13.12.010 Application.

A. The city will require prospective customers to sign an application for water service. The application must be made in writing on a standard form at the office of the water department. The application shall set forth:

1. The signature of the applicant;

2. The owner of the premises to be served;

3. The location of the premises;

4. The address of the party paying the bills;

5. The size of the service pipe required;

6. The purpose for which the water is to be used.

B. The application is merely a written request for service and does not in itself bind the city to serve.

C. The city reserves the right to serve water upon any premises regardless of classification through either metered or flat rate service. (Ord. 2016-001 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 164 § 2, 1953)


13.12.020 Request for disconnection (removal of meter, discontinuation of service).

A. Any request for disconnection of service shall be accepted only from the owner of the premises and shall set forth:

1. The signature of the applicant certifying under oath (RCW 9A.72.085), that they are the owner of the property being served.

2. A certification that the owner is aware that any future reconnection shall require payment of the difference between general facility charges paid upon the previous connection and the new general facility charges in effect at the time of reconnection (c.f. Chapter 13.72 SMC).

3. The location of the premises with legal description and parcel number;

4. The address of the party paying the bills.

B. The disconnection fee shall be paid.

C.  A fee for recording the application and certification with the Clallam County auditor shall be paid. (Ord. 2016-001 § 1 (Exh. A))


Chapter 13.16 WATER SERVICE REGULATIONS

Sections:

13.16.010    Acceptance of application – Contract.

13.16.020    Additional contracts.

13.16.030    Rates, rules and regulations subject to change.

13.16.040    Notice of vacation of premises.

13.16.050    Water to be used only for stated purposes.

13.16.060    Right of city to make special contracts.


13.16.010 Acceptance of application – Contract.

In case the premises of the applicant for water service are connected as a result of his application being accepted, the application given in writing shall be considered as a contract in which the applicant agrees to abide by such rates, rules and regulations as are in effect at the time of signing the application or as may be adopted thereafter by the city, and to pay all bills promptly. (Ord. 164 § 3, 1953)


13.16.020 Additional contracts.

When a customer’s requirements for water are unusual or large or necessitate special or reserve equipment or special consideration, the city may require a contract for an extended period and may also require the person or customer to furnish security satisfactory to the city to protect the city against loss and to guarantee the performance of the provisions of the contract. (Ord. 164 § 3, 1953)


13.16.030 Rates, rules and regulations subject to change.

Except for special contracts, which specify the length of time to which the contract rate shall be extended, all rates, rules and regulations are subject to change or modification by the city without notice. (Ord. 164 § 3, 1953)


13.16.040 Notice of vacation of premises.

Each customer about to vacate any premises supplied with water service by the city shall give notice of his intended removal at least two days prior thereto, specifying the date and hour service is desired to be discontinued; otherwise he will be responsible for all water supplied to the premises until the city water department shall have notice of such removal. No remission of rates will be made for a period of less than 20 days from the date such notice is given. (Ord. 164 § 3, 1953)


13.16.050 Water to be used only for stated purposes.

No person supplied water from the city mains shall be entitled to use it for any other purpose than stated in the application, or supply in any way other persons or premises. (Ord. 164 § 3, 1953)


13.16.060 Right of city to make special contracts.

The city reserves the right to make special contracts, the provisions and conditions of which may be different from or have exceptions to the regular published schedules. Such special contracts shall be in writing and signed by the proper customer and the city. (Ord. 164 § 3, 1953)


Chapter 13.20 WATER SYSTEM REGULATIONS

Sections:

13.20.010    Interference with system.	 

13.20.020    Tampering – Owners to install valves.

13.20.030    Use of fire hydrants.

13.20.040    Access to premises for inspection.

13.20.050    Responsibility and service preference.


13.20.010 Interference with system.

It is a violation of these rules and regulations for any person or persons to attach to or detach from any water main or service pipe or water connections through which water is supplied by the city, or to interfere in any manner with such pipe or connection without first obtaining the written consent of the water superintendent. (Ord. 164 § 5, 1953)


13.20.020 Tampering – Owners to install valves.

It is a violation of these rules and regulations for any person to use or tamper with any valve, curb stop, etc., which is the property of the city for the purpose of turning water on or off, and the city shall hold any person responsible for the cost of repairing any damage to any of the city’s property caused by such usage or tampering. The city shall require every property owner to install his own valve in his own pipe for the control of service to his premises. (Ord. 164 § 5, 1953)


13.20.030 Use of fire hydrants.

It is a violation of these rules and regulations for any person or persons to cut, alter, change, remove, disconnect or connect with or in any manner interfere, meddle or tamper with any fire hydrant owned or used by the city; provided that, the provisions of this section shall not apply to the city fire department, and/or the city street department. Other departments of the city may be allowed to connect to the fire hydrants but before doing so must obtain a written permit therefor from the water superintendent and must use a spanner or regulation wrench in connection therewith. (Ord. 164 § 5, 1953)


13.20.040 Access to premises for inspection.

Employees of the city shall have access to all parts of any building or premises served by water or sewer utilities of the city for the purpose of inspecting the condition of the pipes and fixtures in the manner in which the utilities are being used. Entry onto private premises shall occur in accordance with the following: (i) by consent of the owner or occupier of the premises; or (ii) pursuant to a warrant issued by a magistrate of the courts of the state. Warrantless and/or nonconsensual entrance may be made only in exigent circumstances, as the circumstances are defined pursuant to case law of the state, which exigent circumstances shall include, but shall not be necessarily limited to, situations where there is smoke or fire coming from or upon the premises; where there is perceived hazard to persons or properties which may be eliminated with prompt and speedy inspection and/or repair of the utility services involved; and where the conduct of the owners and/or occupiers of the premises are such as to manifest an immediate danger to persons or properties or the utilities of the city, unless inspection and remedial measures are immediately taken. (Ord. 489 § 2, 1986; Ord. 164 § 5, 1953)


13.20.050 Responsibility and service preference.

A. The city shall not be liable for any loss or damage of any nature whatsoever caused by any defect in the customer’s line, plumbing or equipment, and the city may, without further notice, discontinue service to any customer when a defective condition of plumbing or equipment upon the premises of the customer results, or is likely to result, in interference with proper service or is likely to cause contamination of the water. The city does not assume the duty of inspecting the customer’s line, plumbing or equipment, and shall not be responsible therefor, and will not be liable for the failure of the customer to receive service on account of defective plumbing or apparatus on the customer’s premises, or for excessive consumption.

B. The city will not permit any physical connection between a private water supply and the city’s distribution system or supply line.

C. The city will exercise reasonable diligence and care to furnish and deliver a continuous and sufficient supply of pure water to the customer, and to avoid any shortage or interruption of delivery of the same. The city will not be liable for high or low pressure conditions, chemical or bacteriological conditions, interruption or shortage or insufficiency of supply, or any loss or damage occasioned thereby. The use of water upon the premises of the customer is at the risk of the customer, and the responsibility of the city shall cease at the point of delivery of water. Unless otherwise specified in agreement, the point of delivery shall be the point where the city’s service line attaches the customer’s line.

D. The city, whenever it shall find it necessary for the purpose of making repairs or improvements to its system, shall have the right to suspend temporarily the delivery of water, but, in all such cases, a reasonable notice thereof as circumstances will permit shall be given to the customers, and the making of such repairs and improvements will be prosecuted as rapidly as may be practicable, and if practicable, at such time as will cause the least inconvenience to the customers.

E. In case of shortage of supply, the city reserves the right to give preference in the manner of furnishing service to customers, as in the judgment of its representatives shall be for the best interests of the city, from the standpoint of public convenience and necessity. (Ord. 164 § 7, 1953)


Chapter 13.24 WATER METERS

Sections:

13.24.010    Reading of meters.


13.24.010 Reading of meters.

Water meters for the city may be read bimonthly, and the bills rendered for water consumption will be based on consumption to the nearest 100 cubic feet. (Ord. 303 § 1, 1974)


Chapter 13.28 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

13.28.010    Purpose.

13.28.020    Intent.

13.28.030    Severability.

13.28.040    Minimum standards.


13.28.010 Purpose.

Whereas it is a necessary sanitary measure in order to protect the health and welfare of the people of the city, that all premises where there is a sewerage disposal be connected with the sewerage disposal system, the ordinance codified in this division shall so far as it affects public health and sanitation be and is declared to be an exercise of the police power of the city. (Ord. 116 § 11, 1936)


13.28.020 Intent.

The ordinance codified in this division is declared to be an exercise of the police power of the state and of the city to promote the public health, safety and welfare, and its provisions shall be liberally construed for the accomplishment of that purpose. (Ord. 270 § 1, 1973)


13.28.030 Severability.

If any section of this division is adjudged to be invalid, such adjudication shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions. (Ord. 270 § 39, 1973)


13.28.040 Minimum standards.

The requirements of this division are declared to be minimum standards and shall not be construed to prevent the enforcement of more stringent standards imposed by other ordinances, or by or under the authority of state law. (Ord. 270 § 40, 1973)


Chapter 13.32 DEFINITIONS AND STANDARDS

Sections:

13.32.010    Definitions.

13.32.020    Standards.


13.32.010 Definitions.

Words and phrases used in this section, unless the same are contrary or inconsistent with the context, shall mean as follows:

1. “City engineer” includes the consulting engineer acting as city engineer and his employees or the utility superintendent of the city or the employees of that department, authorized to have jurisdiction in the area under consideration.

2. “Comprehensive plan” means plans which are large in scope and intended to provide for the ultimate development of the drainage basins served by the sewers, as determined by the city engineer at the time the plan was proposed.

3. “Cover” means the depth of material between the top of the sewer pipe or drain and the finished grade immediately above it.

4. “Director” means the director of the county public health department or his employees.

5. “Downspout” means a pipe which conducts water from a roof of a building.

6. “Footing drain” means an open joint or perforated pipe located near the foundation of a building, intended to intercept and carry underground storm or drainage water.

7. “Garbage” means putrescible waste from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.

8. “Properly shredded garbage” means garbage that has been shredded to such a degree that it will be carried or suspended freely under flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle larger than three-eighths of an inch in any dimension.

9. “Industrial waste” means a liquid, solid or gaseous substance, or combination thereof, resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing, food processing, business, trade or research, including the development, recovering or processing of natural resources and including garbage, but distinguished from sanitary sewage or storm drainage.

10. “Licensed side sewer contractor” means a person approved by the city engineer and licensed by the city to do work incidental to the construction or repair of side sewers.

11. “Natural outlet” means a watercourse, pond, lake, sound, stream, river, ditch or other body of surface water.

12. “pH” means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.

13. “Permit card” means a card issued in conjunction with a permit, or a carbon copy of the permit which shall be posted on the premises of the work being accomplished.

14. “Person” means any individual, company, partnership, corporation, association, society or group and the singular term shall include the plural.

15. “Inside planting strip” means that portion of the street area lying between a public sidewalk location and the property line or street margin.

16. “Outside planting strip” means that portion of the street area lying between a public sidewalk location and the curb location.

17. “Sanitary plumbing outlet” means a plumbing outlet from a structure which carries the wastewater from sanitary facilities and plumbing fixtures, and which does not intentionally carry stormwater or unpolluted water.

18. “Storm plumbing outlet” means a plumbing outlet from a building or structure which carries surface water or unpolluted water.

19. “Pretreatment” means the treatment of effluent from a sanitary plumbing outlet or of industrial waste prior to its introduction into a storm drain, sanitary sewer or natural outlet, to the extent required by the city engineer.

20. “Public place,” “public area” or “street area” means any space dedicated to or acquired by the city for the use of the general public.

21. “Public sewer system” means the sanitary sewer facilities owned and maintained by the city.

22. “Sewage treatment plant” means an arrangement of devices, structures and equipment for treating wastewater.

23. “Sewage” means waste discharged from sanitary plumbing outlets of buildings and other polluted water.

24. Repealed by Ord. 2017-002.

25. “Sanitary sewer” means a sewer which carries wastewater and does not intentionally carry stormwater or unpolluted water.

26. “Side sewer” means a sanitary sewer pipe leading from a plumbing outlet, drain or other facilities to the public sewer system.

27. “Storm drain” means a public or private drain which carries storm drainage or drainage from storm plumbing outlets.

28. “Sidewalk” means the walkway in a public area lying parallel to or generally parallel to the roadway. If the walkway is not yet paved, then all measurements shall be based upon a location and elevation determined by the city engineer.

29. “Suspended solids” means solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by filtering the liquid, and includes matter which, upon dilution with water or sewage, results in the formation of suspended solids.

30. “Unpolluted water” means water in its natural state, or water which, after use for any purpose, is not substantially changed as to chemical or biochemical qualities. The director or the city engineer may determine which water is unpolluted water.

31. “Wastewater” is a comprehensive term including industrial waste, storm drainage and sewage.

32. “Watercourse” means a channel in which a natural flow of water occurs or has occurred either continuously or intermittently. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 270 § 2, 1973)


13.32.020 Standards.

Measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and waste to which reference is made in this division shall be determined in accordance with the standards prescribed by the latest revision of “Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage.” (Ord. 270 § 32, 1973)


Chapter 13.36 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT

Sections:

13.36.010    Office of sewer inspector created – Duties.

13.36.020    Inspection of work.

13.36.030    Filling of trenches.

13.36.040    Right of entry for inspection and observation.

13.36.050    Promulgation of additional rules and regulations.

13.36.060    Posting notice of violating condition.

13.36.070    Unlawful removal of notices.

13.36.080    Violators liable for city expenses.

13.36.090    Violation – Penalty.


13.36.010 Office of sewer inspector created – Duties.

There is created the office of sewer inspector and this office shall be held by the water superintendent of the city. The sewer inspector shall have control, management and supervision of the sewerage and refuse disposal system under the direction of the council. (Ord. 2001-014 § 2; Ord. 119 § 1, 1937; Ord. 116 § 2, 1937)


13.36.020 Inspection of work.

A. Any person performing any work pursuant to the provisions of this division shall notify the city engineer when the work will be ready for inspection, and shall specify in such notification the location of the premises by address and the file number of the permit.

B. On any call for inspection 48 hours’ notice plus Saturday, Sunday and holidays may be required by the city engineer.

C. If the city engineer finds the work performed or materials used not in accordance with this division and rules and regulations and the city “Standard Plans and Specifications” for side sewer construction, he shall notify the person doing the work and the owner or occupant of the premises by posting a notice on or near the permit card. Such posted notice shall be all the notice that is required to be given of the defects in the work or the materials found in such inspection.

D. The inspection shall include a test conducted by the contractor and witnessed by the city engineer, to determine that the side sewer is of tight construction and does not allow infiltration or exfiltration of water. Specifications for such a test shall be included in the rules and regulations referred to in SMC 13.36.050. If the city engineer finds that the work and materials used are in accord with this section and the side sewer tests satisfactory, he shall approve the same. Upon such approval the trench or sewer within the street area shall be filled or covered in such a manner that no significant settlement shall occur for a period of one year. During the time the filled trench or sewer may be inspected by the city engineer who may order its refilling if at any time he finds that significant settlement has occurred, or that because of defective workmanship or material used, the work is otherwise unsatisfactory.

E. If the permittee is a licensed side sewer contractor, either the contractor or a competent representative shall be on the premises, whenever so directed to meet the inspector. A property owner shall also meet the inspector at a mutually convenient time during regular hours of business when requested. (Ord. 270 § 13, 1973)


13.36.030 Filling of trenches.

No trench shall be filled nor any sewer or drain covered until the work has been inspected and approved by the city engineer, and his approval noted on the card posted on the job site. (Ord. 270 § 14, 1973)


13.36.040 Right of entry for inspection and observation.

The city engineer or other city official or employees of the city, bearing proper credentials and identification, may with the consent of the occupant or with the consent of the owner of unoccupied premises or pursuant to a lawfully issued warrant, enter upon any and all premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing of sewers and sewage waste in accordance with the provisions of the ordinance codified in this division. (Ord. 270 § 34, 1973)


13.36.050 Promulgation of additional rules and regulations.

The city engineer may make rules and regulations and amend the same from time to time, not inconsistent with the provisions of this division, which he shall deem necessary and convenient to carry out the provisions of this division. (Ord. 270 § 35, 1973)


13.36.060 Posting notice of violating condition.

The director of public health or the city engineer is authorized to post notice on private property at or abutting the scene of any violation of this chapter, calling for the terms of this division to be complied with, and the notice may require the work to cease if necessary.

(Ord. 270 § 37, 1973)


13.36.070 Unlawful removal of notices.

It is unlawful for anyone to remove, mutilate, destroy or conceal any notice issued or posted by the director of public health or the city engineer pursuant to the provisions of this division. (Ord. 270 § 38, 1973)


13.36.080 Violators liable for city expenses.

Whoever violates any of the provisions of this division shall, in addition to any penalties provided for such violation, be liable for any expense, loss or damage occasioned thereby to the city. (Ord. 270 § 28, 1973)


13.36.090 Violation – Penalty.

Violation of or failure to comply with the provisions of this division subjects the offender to the penalties and provisions as set forth in Chapter 1.13 SMC – Code Enforcement. (Ord. 2019-013 (Exh. B); Ord. 270 § 36, 1973)


Chapter 13.40 SEWER CONNECTION REQUIRED

Sections:

13.40.010    Connection required.

13.40.020    Notice of requirement to connect.

13.40.030    Extension of time to connect.


13.40.010 Connection required.

A. Except as otherwise provided in SMC 13.40.030 and 13.102.040, the owner or occupant of any lands, premises or habitable structures shall connect plumbing outlets located thereon with the nearest accessible sanitary sewer whenever such a sewer is located within 200 feet of the closest point of the building site or premises to be served, as measured along any public place or any easement granted for sewer purposes. The city engineer shall determine when the sanitary sewer is accessible. This requirement shall be based upon the following conditions:

1. Sanitary plumbing outlets must be connected to a sanitary sewer system.

2. Storm drainage must be managed according to Chapter 13.104 SMC and must not enter the sanitary sewer system.

B. The city engineer may prescribe the manner in which connections shall be made, and require plans to be submitted for his or her approval prior to the issuance of a permit or the installation of any pipe. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2001-015 § 1; Ord. 270 § 3, 1973)


13.40.020 Notice of requirement to connect.

Whenever any land, buildings, or premises are required to be connected with the public sewer system as provided in SMC 13.40.010, the director, upon notice from the city engineer that a connection is accessible, shall serve upon the owner, agent, lessee, or occupant of said lands, buildings, premises or habitable structures, a notice in writing specifying the time within which such connection must be made, which time shall not be more than 60 days from the date of delivery of such notice.

Except as otherwise provided in SMC 13.40.030, if such owner, agent, lessee or occupant shall fail, neglect or refuse to connect said land, buildings, premises, or habitable structures to the public sewer system within the time specified, the director shall notify the city engineer, whereupon the city engineer may make such connection and the cost plus 15 percent thereof shall be charged to the owner, agent, lessee, or occupant and a bill showing the amount thereof mailed or delivered to him, or posted upon the premises, whereupon the amount shall immediately be paid to the finance department. (Ord. 2001-015 § 2; Ord. 270 § 4, 1973)


13.40.030 Extension of time to connect.

A. Any person required to connect pursuant to SMC 13.40.010 may request an extension of time to comply with the requirements to connect. Such request must be made in writing to the city manager or his designee within 180 days from the date that the property becomes required to connect, or within 20 days of the date of notice to connect is mailed to responsible party.

B. The city manager, or his designee, shall review all requests for time extensions requested under this chapter and issue a written approval or denial within a reasonable time.

C. Any request denied by the city manager, or his designee, may be appealed to the city council. Such appeal must be in writing and filed with the city clerk within 10 days of the date the city manager denied the request. Appeals shall be heard by the city council at a regular meeting as soon as practicable after receipt of such appeal. The decision of the city council shall be final.

D. Requests for time extensions may be made in cases where newer septic systems have been installed and are working properly, where terrain and/or location of buildings make it impractical to connect, where connection places an unacceptable financial hardship on the responsible party, or other special circumstances claimed by the responsible party. Each request for a time extension shall be evaluated independently as to special circumstances outlined by the responsible party.

E. Owners of existing septic systems will not be required to connect until 10 years from the date of installation of their existing systems or for at least two years from the date of notice of requirement to connect, whichever is greater. (For example, a three-year-old system would be granted an extension of seven years; a nine-year-old system would be granted an extension of two years.)

F. No time extension shall be granted, and/or any approved time extension shall be immediately revoked, when conditions exist that are a violation of any health, building or safety code or rule. When, in the opinion of the city manager or his designee, conditions exist that require immediate remediation to comply with acceptable health or safety conditions, the responsible party shall be notified and shall be required to connect within 20 days of the date of such notice.

G. All extension agreements shall be recorded with the county recorder as a condition of the granting of the extension. Such extensions shall continue in effect for new property owners during the term of the agreement.

H. Nothing in this chapter shall in any way alter any property owner’s obligation to pay latecomer charges pursuant to any latecomer agreement and a waiver or extension of time to hook up shall not extend or alter the latecomer obligation. (Ord. 2001-015 § 3)


Chapter 13.44 SEWER CONNECTION PERMITS

Sections:

13.44.010    Unlawful to connect without permit.

13.44.020    Application for permit.

13.44.030    Work to conform to permit specifications – Posting.

13.44.040    Police authority.

13.44.050    Temporary connection permits.

13.44.060    Validity of permit.

13.44.070    Fees.


13.44.010 Unlawful to connect without permit.	

It is unlawful to make any connection to any public or private sewer system, drain or natural outlet without complying with all of the provisions of the ordinance codified in this division and all other ordinances in relation thereto, and without having a permit to do so from the city engineer. A licensed side sewer contractor or a property owner or his agent shall not break, alter or tamper with any public sewer system or its appurtenances except to make a connection to an existing wye or tee under permit from the city engineer. (Ord. 270 § 6, 1973)


13.44.020 Application for permit.

A. Application for the permit required by this chapter shall be filed with the city engineer stating the following:

1. The name of the property owner;

2. The address of the property to be served;

3. The property owner’s mailing address;

4. The side sewer contractor’s name;

5. The legal description of the property to be served;

6. The dimensions of the buildings to be served, including insets or ells;

7. The location of buildings on the property;

8. The purpose for which the building is to be used;

9. The full course of the proposed side sewer.

B. The city engineer may change or modify the application and designate the manner and place where the side sewer shall connect to the public sewer system, may specify the material, size and grade of the side sewer and determine whether or not a permit shall be granted. The city engineer may require the applicant to furnish plans prepared and stamped by a professional engineer, licensed in the state. The city engineer shall keep such records as he deems necessary of all side sewer permits and inspection reports. (Ord. 270 § 7, 1973)


13.44.030 Work to conform to permit specifications – Posting.

After approval of the application and issuance of the permit, it is unlawful to alter the permit or to do any work other than that provided for in the permit. If the permittee wishes to perform additional work, the city engineer may require that he secure an additional permit. One copy of the permit, or an additional card bearing the permit number, according to directions of the city engineer, shall be posted upon the work site at a place readily and safely accessible to the city engineer, and in a conspicuous place near the work being performed under the permit. (Ord. 270 § 8, 1973)


13.44.040 Police authority.

It is the duty of any police officer and of the director, finding any person breaking ground for the purpose of making connection with a public or private sewer system, to ascertain if such person has a permit therefor and if not to immediately report the fact to the city engineer. (Ord. 270 § 9, 1973)


13.44.050 Temporary connection permits.

The city engineer may, upon receiving an application containing such information as is required by him, issue a permit for a temporary connection to a sanitary sewer or side sewer, and may include as a condition to the issuance of a permit a requirement to connect to another sanitary sewer or side sewer, at some later date. The permit may be revoked by the city engineer at any time upon 60 days’ notice posted upon the premises and directed to the owner or occupant of the premises; and in the event the side sewer or drains are not disconnected or reconstructed as required at the expiration of the 60 days the city engineer may disconnect the same and reconstruct it as he deems necessary, and charge the cost plus 15 percent thereof to the owner or occupant. Such cost plus 15 percent shall be immediately payable to the city treasurer following a written notice of the amount thereof given to the owner or occupant or posted on the premises. Such temporary permit shall be issued only upon the applicant recording with the county auditor an acceptable instrument agreeing to reconstruct the side sewer if required to do so, and to save the city harmless from all damage resulting to the city by reason of such temporary connection or disconnection, and exhibiting to the city engineer the recording number of the instrument. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 270 § 10, 1973)


13.44.060 Validity of permit.

A permit issued under this chapter shall not be valid for a period of more than 90 days unless extended or renewed by the city engineer prior to the date of expiration. (Ord. 270 § 11, 1973)


13.44.070 Fees.

Fees for side sewer permits shall be as prescribed by separate ordinance. (Ord. 270 § 12, 1973)


Chapter 13.48 PUBLIC SEWER USE REGULATIONS

Sections:

13.48.005    Construction – Purpose.

13.48.010    Definitions.

13.48.020    Intent and administration.

13.48.030    Stormwater and unpolluted drainage.

13.48.040    Prohibitions and limitations.

13.48.050    Preliminary treatment facilities.

13.48.060    Industrial pretreatment requirements.

13.48.070    Preliminary treatment facilities.

13.48.080    Fats, oils, and grease (FOG) control facilities.

13.48.090    Authority to inspect.

13.48.100    Compliance standards.

13.48.110    Sewer blockage.

13.48.120    Violation – Unauthorized tampering – Penalty.

13.48.130    Violation – Notification.

13.48.140    Violation – Continuation – Penalty.

13.48.150    Violation – Liability.

13.48.160    Noncompliance – Nuisance.

13.48.170    Criminal prosecution.

13.48.180    Injunctive relief.


13.48.005 Construction – Purpose.

A. This chapter is enacted as an exercise of the city of Sequim’s police power to protect and preserve the public health, safety and welfare; its provisions will be liberally construed to give full effect to the objectives and purposes for which it was enacted.

B. It is the express purpose of this code to provide for and to promote the health, safety and welfare of the general public and not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited.

C. It is the specific intent of this code to place compliance obligations upon the nondomestic customer. Nothing contained in this code is intended to be or will be construed to create or form the basis for liability on the part of the city of Sequim, its utility, officers, employees or agents for any injury or damage resulting from the failure of the nondomestic customer of any private system to comply with the provisions of this code, or by reason or in consequence of any act or omission in connection with the implementation or enforcement of this code by the city of Sequim, its utility, officers, employees or agents.

D. The provisions of this chapter and regulations referenced under this chapter do not necessarily mitigate all impacts to the environment, and additional mitigation may be required to protect the environment. (Ord. 2017-023 § 1 (Exh. A))


13.48.010 Definitions.

The definitions included in Chapter 173-216  WAC, as now enacted and as amended, are adopted and incorporated into this chapter by this reference. In addition, the following definitions are provided to supplement those in Chapter 173-216 WAC:

A

“AKART” means all known, available, and reasonable methods of prevention, control, and treatment. AKART represents the most current methodology that can be reasonably required for preventing, controlling, or abating the pollutants associated with a discharge. AKART applies to all industrial and commercial users of the water reclamation facility. Best management practices are a subset of the AKART requirement.

“Applicable pretreatment standards” means, for any specified pollutant, Sequim prohibitive standards, Sequim specific pretreatment standard (local limits), state of Washington pretreatment standards, or EPA’s categorical pretreatment standards, whichever standard is appropriate and most stringent.

B

“Best management practices (BMPs)” means activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices published by federal, state or local authorities to prevent or reduce the pollution of “waters of the United States.” BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage.

“Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD)” means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter amenable to measurement by the methods described in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, latest edition, under standard laboratory procedures for five days at 20 degrees centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/L)).

C

“Categorical pretreatment standard” or “categorical standard” means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC 1317) that apply to a specific category of users and that appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471.

N

“Nondomestic customer” means the property owner or the user of the city’s water reclamation facility (WRF), as determined by context, whose activities conducted on the property are a source of indirect discharge. “Nondomestic customer” excludes any person who contributes, causes, or allows the contribution of wastewater into the city water reclamation facility that is of a similar volume and/or chemical make-up as that of a residential dwelling unit. Discharges from a residential dwelling unit typically include up to 140 gallons per capita per day and up to 300 mg/L of BOD or TSS.

S

“Significant industrial user (SIU)” means:

1. A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or

2. A user who:

a. Discharges an average daily flow of 25,000 gpd or more of process wastewater to the WRF (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater); or

b. Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW; or

c. Is designated as such by the city or Ecology on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the WRF’s operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.

T

“Total suspended solids” means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtering and is able to be measured by the methods described in the current edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater.

W

“Water reclamation facility (WRF)” means that portion of the city’s sanitary sewer system designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste and generate water suitable for reuse or discharge to the environment. For purposes of this chapter, the definition of “water reclamation facility” also includes the city’s sanitary sewer system. (Ord. 2017-023 § 1 (Exh. A))


13.48.020 Intent and administration.

A. Intent. The intent of this chapter is to set forth uniform requirements for nondomestic customers of the city water reclamation facility. It enables the city to comply with Washington State and federal laws that apply to water reclamation facilities with SIUs, but without a discharge permit program. All actions required or authorities granted under this chapter are in accordance with the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.), the Federal Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR Part 403), and Chapter 90.48 RCW, Water Pollution Control. This chapter applies to all nondomestic customers of the water reclamation facility. This chapter:

1. Defines certain prohibited discharges;

2. Sets forth local limits that apply to nondomestic customers and are for use by state agencies in the issuance of state wastewater discharge permits;

3. Authorizes monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities;

4. Establishes administrative review procedures; requires nondomestic customer reporting; and

5. Provides for the recovery of liquidated damages and collection of penalties.

B. Administration. The public works director will administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter, except as provided herein. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the public works director may be delegated by the public works director to other city personnel. (Ord. 2017-023 § 1 (Exh. A))


13.48.030 Stormwater and unpolluted drainage.

A. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage must be discharged to such sewers that are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the public works director or his or her designee. Stormwater and other unpolluted drainage are prohibited from entering sanitary sewers.

B. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged to a storm sewer or natural outlet with prior written approval of the public works director or his or her designee.

C. If a private side sewer has ground water infiltrating into it due to a broken pipe or joint, the property owner will be notified and must apply for a permit and make the necessary repairs in a timely manner as set forth in Chapters 13.56 and 13.60 SMC. (Ord. 2017-023 § 1 (Exh. A))


13.48.040 Prohibitions and limitations.

A. General Prohibitions. No nondomestic customer may introduce or cause to be introduced any pollutant or wastewater that causes pass through or interference with the water reclamation facility. These general prohibitions apply to all water reclamation facility nondomestic customers regardless of whether they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements (40 CFR 403.5(a) and WAC 173-216-060(2)(b)(i)).

B. Specific Prohibitions. No nondomestic customer may introduce or cause to be introduced into the water reclamation facility the following pollutants in any form (solid, liquid, or gaseous):

1. Any pollutant that alone or by interaction may create a fire or explosive hazard in the water reclamation facility, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21 (40 CFR 403.5(b)(1)), or are capable of creating a public nuisance (WAC 173-216-060(2)(b)(ii)). This includes waste streams sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair. At no time may a waste stream cause two successive readings on an explosion meter that exceed five percent, nor any single reading over 10 percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter at any point in the collection system or treatment works.

2. Any pollutant that will cause corrosive structural damage to the water reclamation facility, but in no case discharges with a pH less than 5.5 or more than 11.0, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, or personnel of the water reclamation facility, unless the system is specifically designed to accommodate such discharge and the discharge is authorized by an applicable state wastewater discharge permit (40 CFR 403.5(b)(2) and WAC 173-216-060(2)(b)(iv)).

3. Any solid or viscous substances including fats, oils, and greases in amounts that may cause obstruction to the flow in a water reclamation facility or other interference with the operation of the water reclamation facility (40 CFR 403.5(b)(3) and WAC 173-216-060(2)(b)(iii)).

4. Any discharge of pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, is sufficient to cause interference with the water reclamation facility (40 CFR 403.5(b)(4) and WAC 173-216-060(2)(b)(vi)).

5. Any waste stream having a temperature that will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, or cause worker health or safety problems in the collection system. In no case will wastewater be discharged at a temperature which causes the temperature of the influent to the treatment plant to exceed 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius) unless the system is specifically designed to accommodate such a discharge, and the discharge is authorized by an applicable state wastewater discharge permit (40 CFR 403.5(b)(5) and WAC 173-216-060(2)(b)(v)).

6. Any petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through (40 CFR 403.5(b)(6) and WAC 173-216-060(2)(b)(i)).

7. Any pollutants that result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within any portion of the water reclamation facility/sanitary sewer system in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems (40 CFR 403.5(b)(7) and WAC 173-216-060(b)(ii)).

8. Any trucked or hauled wastes, except at discharge points designated by the city and in compliance with all applicable city requirements and during specified hours (40 CFR 403.5(b)(8)).

9. Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater that, singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair (WAC 173-216-060(2)(b)(ii)).

10. Any of the following discharges unless approved by Ecology and the city under extraordinary circumstances such as the lack of direct discharge alternatives due to combined sewer service or need to augment sewage flows due to septic conditions (WAC 173-216-060(2)(b)(vii)):

a. Noncontact cooling water in significant volumes;

b. Stormwater; or

c. Wastewaters significantly affecting system hydraulic loading, which do not require treatment or would not be afforded a significant degree of treatment by water reclamation facility.

11. Any dangerous or hazardous wastes as defined in Chapter 173-303 WAC, as amended, except as allowed in compliance with that regulation (WAC 173-216-060(1) and 40 CFR Part 261).

12. Any substance that will cause the water reclamation facility to violate its NPDES or other disposal or reuse system permits, or causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the water reclamation facility’s effluent to fail a toxicity test or any other required test.

13. Any substance that may cause the water reclamation facility’s effluent, reclaimed water, or treatment residues, biosolids, grit, screenings or scums to be unsuitable for reclamation, reuse and normal disposal or would interfere with the reclamation process or cause the water reclamation facility to be in noncompliance with biosolids beneficial use or disposal criteria, guidelines, or regulations developed pursuant to the federal, state, or local statutes or regulations applicable to the biosolids management method being used.

14. Any discharge that imparts color which cannot be removed by the water reclamation facility’s treatment process such as may be imparted by some dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, pond water, stormwater, wineries, distilleries, or breweries.

15. Any discharge containing radioactive wastes or isotopes except as specifically approved by the public works director in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations including WAC 246-221-190, Disposal by Release into Sanitary Sewerage Systems; and meeting the concentration limits of WAC 246-221-290, Appendix A, Table I, Column 2; and WAC 246-221-300, Appendix B.

16. Any sludges, solids, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes or from industrial processes.

17. Any biomedical wastes as defined in RCW 70.95K.010(1).

18. Any detergents, surface-active agents, phosphates, or other substances in amounts which may cause excessive foaming in the water reclamation facility.

19. Any incompatible substance such as: grease, animal – including human – guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, kitty litter, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dusts, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastics, gas, tar asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or polishing wastes, or any other organic or inorganic matter greater than one-half inch in any dimension.

20. Any pesticides and/or pesticides regulated by the Federal Insecticide Fungicide Rodenticide Act (FIFRA).

21. Any wastewater that, in the opinion of the public works director, can cause harm to the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment; have an adverse effect on the receiving stream; or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance, unless allowed under a legal and binding agreement by the public works director; however, no waiver may be given to any categorical pretreatment standard.

22. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit.

23. Any garbage.

24. Any waters or wastes having a BOD or containing suspended solids of such character and quality that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the water reclamation facility.

25. Any waters or wastes which contain in excess of 100 milligrams per liter of fat waste, oil, or grease, whether or not emulsified, ether-soluble matter or any substance which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures above 32 degrees Fahrenheit.

26. Wastes containing metals or substances with concentrations or mass totals greater than those listed in SMC 13.48.060, Industrial pretreatment requirements.

C. Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section must not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the water reclamation facility. (Ord. 2017-023 § 1 (Exh. A))


13.48.050 Preliminary treatment facilities.

Pretreatment facilities are required as follows:

A. Any waters or wastes entering the public sanitary sewer system meeting any of the following criteria:

1. A five-day BOD greater than 350 parts per million by weight; or

2. Containing more than 350 parts per million by weight of suspended solids; or

3. Containing any quantity of substances having the characteristics described in SMC 13.48.040; or

4. An average daily flow greater than two percent of the city’s average daily sewage flow is subject to the review and approval of the public works director or his or her designee.

B. Where necessary in the opinion of the public works director or his or her designee, the nondomestic customer must provide, at nondomestic customer’s sole expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to:

1. Reduce the BOD to 350 parts per million and the suspended solids to 350 parts per million by weight; or

2. Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits provided for in SMC 13.48.040; or

3. Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes or any two or all three of the above.

C. Plans and specifications for proposed preliminary treatment facilities must be submitted by the nondomestic customer to the public works director or his or her designee and the Washington State Department of Ecology for approval. No construction of such facilities will be started until these approvals are obtained in writing and the necessary permits are issued through the city of Sequim. Facilities must be designed by a professional engineer registered in the appropriate discipline by Washington State and his/her stamp and signature must appear on the plans and specifications.

D. Nondomestic customers must procure and properly install, operate, and maintain the wastewater facilities which, combined with appropriate practices, are necessary to achieve AKART. Such pretreatment facilities must be designed to achieve compliance with all applicable pretreatment standards and requirements within the time limitations specified by the EPA or Washington State, whichever is more stringent. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures must be submitted to the city and to Ecology for review and approval in accordance with the procedures of Chapter 173-240 WAC and must be provided to the city before construction of the facility. Any review of such plans and operating procedures does not relieve the nondomestic customer from the responsibility to modify its facility as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the city and/or Ecology and to meet discharge limitations under the provisions of this chapter. Such facilities will be provided, operated, and maintained at the nondomestic customer’s expense.

E. Nondomestic customers must comply with approved engineering reports, plans and specifications, and operations and maintenance manuals, and must modify such documents to reflect any proposed modifications of industrial wastewater (pretreatment) facilities. Nondomestic customers must submit proposals to modify pretreatment facilities to Ecology before implementation in accordance with Chapter 173-240 WAC. Nondomestic customers must submit a copy of such revised plans and Ecology’s acceptance to the public works director before implementing changes to approved pretreatment facilities. The public works director may audit the compliance of any nondomestic customer, and require changes in operating procedures the public works director deems necessary to ensure continued compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. (Ord. 2017-023 § 1 (Exh. A))


13.48.060 Industrial pretreatment requirements.

A. Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards. National categorical pretreatment standards as adopted and as amended by the EPA must be met by all nondomestic customers in the regulated industrial categories. These standards, found in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471, as currently enacted and as amended, are incorporated by this reference.

B. State Requirements.

1. State requirements and limitations on discharges to the water reclamation facility under Chapter 90.48 RCW and Chapters 173-201A, 173-216 and 173-240 WAC, as enacted and amended, must be met by all nondomestic customers subject to such standards. If any requirements or limitations under federal law or this chapter are less stringent, the requirements and limitations under the RCW and WAC control. This includes the requirement to meet AKART as whenever applicable and more stringent than the limits of subsection C of this section, Local Limits, and to comply with the requirements of subsection K of this section, Wastewater Discharge Permitting – Requirements for Discharge.

2. Any nondomestic customer determined by the city to qualify as an SIU must file an application for a state waste discharge permit with Ecology in accordance with the requirements of WAC 173-216-070, as enacted or amended. Proof of acceptance of the application and payment of permit fees must be kept at the nondomestic customer’s facilities and produced upon the city’s request. Failure to submit the application to Ecology or rejection of the application by Ecology may be considered sufficient grounds to terminate or refuse to provide sewer service.

C. Local Limits.

1. The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass through and interference. No person may discharge wastewater containing in excess of the following daily maximum allowable discharge concentration limits (maximum average concentration in a calendar day). These limits apply to the total in all states and forms.

	Pollutant	Limit

	Arsenic (As)	0.18 mg/L

	Cadmium (Cd)	0.12 mg/L

	Chromium (Cr)	2.50 mg/L

	Copper (Cu)	1.00 mg/L

	Cyanide (CN-)	1.00 mg/L

	Lead (Pb)	0.30 mg/L

	Mercury (Hg)	0.05 mg/L

	Molybdenum	0.18 mg/L

	Nickel (Ni)	0.93 mg/L

	Selenium (Se)	0.42 mg/L

	Silver (Ag)	0.40 mg/L

	Zinc (Zn)	2.50 mg/L

	Polar FOG	100 mg/L

	Nonpolar FOG	100 mg/L

2. The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the city-owned sewer system or sewer collection system (end of the pipe). All concentrations for metals are for “total” metal unless indicated otherwise. Ecology may impose mass limitations in addition to or in place of the concentration-based limitations above. Where a nondomestic customer is subject to a categorical pretreatment standard and a local limit for a given pollutant, the more stringent limit or applicable pretreatment standard applies.

3. The pollutant limits immediately apply to all nondomestic customers discharging wastewater to the water reclamation facility with the following exceptions:

a. Nondomestic customers discharging under permit prior to the implementation of this chapter are allowed a period up to two years to achieve compliance with the conditions of this chapter under the following conditions:

i. The nondomestic customer submits a schedule of compliance to the public works director and Ecology that will achieve compliance with this chapter within two years of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

ii. The city determines it is in the best interest of the community to authorize the discharge, and the discharge will not adversely impact the water reclamation facility, cause a violation of the city’s NPDES permit, or any other federal, state, or local regulation.

iii. The nondomestic customer is currently providing AKART as determined by Ecology, or the schedule of compliance achieves AKART in the shortest reasonable length of time as an interim step in achieving full compliance.

iv. The city and Ecology approve the compliance schedule in writing.

b. Nondomestic customers that are determined by Ecology to have no potential, alone or in conjunction with other nondomestic customers, to violate any prohibited discharge standard (see SMC 13.48.040, Prohibitions and limitations) may be exempt from compliance with specific pollutant concentration limits. Such determinations must be provided in writing to the public works director. In such cases, these nondomestic customers will be subject only to implementing the more stringent of best management practices established by Ecology or the city. Such nondomestic customers cannot be SIUs or subject to categorical pretreatment standards or requirements. In such cases, the nondomestic customer must be designated as an insignificant industrial user (IIU) by Ecology and must be listed as such in the city’s annual industrial user (IU) survey update.

These exceptions are immediately void if (a) the discharge causes a violation of the city’s NPDES permit, or any other federal, state, or local regulation, (b) compliance with any compliance schedule milestone is not achieved within 30 calendar days of the established date, or (c) any compliance schedule extends beyond two years from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. In such cases, the nondomestic customer is immediately responsible for compliance with the local limits in subsections (C)(1) and (C)(3) of this section.

D. City’s Right of Revision.

1. The city reserves the right to establish more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the water reclamation facility.

2. The city may investigate any occurrence of pass through or interference of which it is made aware. Where pass through or interference has been caused because local limits do not exist for the pollutant, or where the existing limit is not sufficient to protect the water reclamation facility, the city will amend the local limits to establish an appropriately restrictive limit and take such other measures, within its control and power, that are necessary to prevent recurrences.

E. Dilution. No nondomestic customer may ever increase the use of water, combine separate waste streams, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The public works director may request that Ecology impose mass limitations on nondomestic customers which he/she believes may be using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.

F. Deadline for Compliance with Applicable Pretreatment Requirements.

1. Except for existing nondomestic customers who have been granted temporary relief from local limits in accordance with subsection C of this section (Local Limits), existing sources to which one or more categorical pretreatment standards are applicable must comply with all applicable standards within two years of the effective date of the standard unless the pretreatment standard includes a more stringent compliance schedule. If local limits are more restrictive than the EPA’s categorical pretreatment standards, Ecology must establish a final compliance deadline date for any existing nondomestic customer (as defined herein) or any categorical user.

2. New sources and new nondomestic customers as defined herein must comply with applicable pretreatment standards before beginning discharge. Prior to beginning discharge, such nondomestic customers must have all pollution control equipment required to meet applicable pretreatment standards installed and in proper operation.

G. Additional Pretreatment Measures.

1. Whenever deemed necessary, the public works director may require nondomestic customers to comply with such conditions as may be necessary to protect the water reclamation facility and determine the nondomestic customer’s compliance with this chapter. Such measures may include: restricting a discharge during peak flow periods; designating that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers; requiring relocation and/or consolidation of discharge points; and/or separating sewage waste streams from industrial waste streams.

2. Pretreatment devices may also be required pursuant to this section and SMC 13.48.070.

3. Nondomestic customers with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter.

4. The public works director may require a nondomestic customer discharging more than 10,000 gallons per day or 10 percent of the average daily flow in the water reclamation facility, whichever is less, to install and maintain, on its property and at its expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow over a 24-hour period. The facility must have a capacity for at least 50 percent of the daily wastewater discharge volume and be equipped with alarms and a rate of discharge controller. The public works director will direct the control of discharges. The city may require the nondomestic customer to obtain a state wastewater discharge permit solely for flow equalization or to develop a slug discharge control plan (below) approved by Ecology.

H. Accidental Spill/Slug Discharge Control Plans.

1. The public works director may require any nondomestic customer to install, properly operate, and maintain, at nondomestic customer’s own expense, facilities to prevent slug loads or accidental discharges of pollutants to the water reclamation facility. The public works director may require nondomestic customers to produce and/or implement spill plans developed in compliance with applicable OSHA, health, fire, and Ecology regulations applicable to discharges to the water reclamation facility and approved by Ecology. Such plans must be provided to the public works director within 10 calendar days following Ecology’s approval, or upon request, whichever is first.

2. Nondomestic customers must verbally notify the public works director immediately upon the occurrence of a slug load or accidental discharge of substances regulated by this chapter and take immediate actions to correct the situation. Such notification must include, at a minimum, the following information:

a. The location of discharge;

b. The date and time thereof;

c. The type of waste;

d. The waste concentration and volume; and

e. The corrective actions taken and planned. The nondomestic customer must follow up with a written notification to the public works director and Ecology containing the same information within seven calendar days following the discharge.

3. Any nondomestic customer who discharges an accidental discharge or slug load is liable for:

a. Recovery of any resultant expenses, losses, and damages to the water reclamation facility, including any violations of the city’s NPDES permit and any third-party claims against the city or any of its agents;

b. Recovery of any fines or settlements levied upon the city by any government agency or court of competent jurisdiction attributable to the discharge; and

c. Applicable fines and penalties assessed upon the nondomestic customer by the city for noncompliance with this chapter.

I. Septage and Liquid Hauled Wastes.

1. No septage and liquid hauled wastes may be introduced into the water reclamation facility without a valid contract with the city approving such activities. At a minimum, all new or amended contracts must include the following:

a. Maximum term limit of 10 years;

b. Parties must review the terms of the contract every five years or whenever the city is required to update its NPDES permit, whichever occurs first;

c. Nondomestic customers must only discharge at the time, dates, location, and conditions as provided in the contract;

d. Any payment for fees or charges imposed must consider and reflect the risk to the city and the water reclamation facility;

e. Nondomestic customer must provide full documentation of the wastes discharged under the contract upon the public works director’s request;

f. Full description of the amounts, types, and concentrations of the septage and liquid hauled wastes;

g. Discharges must not violate any discharge prohibition, standard or requirement in this chapter, or cause, alone or in conjunction with other discharges, the city to violate its reuse, NPDES permit, or any other applicable discharge; and

h. City may immediately terminate or suspend the contract if the septage or hauled waste is suspected of causing deleterious impacts to the sewer system, workers or water reclamation facility.

J. Requirements to Complete Industrial User Surveys. The public works director will periodically notify new, existing, and potential nondomestic customers of the requirement to complete an industrial user survey form. Upon notification, nondomestic customers must fully and accurately complete the survey form and return the completed form to the public works director within 30 calendar days of receipt. Each nondomestic customer must maintain a copy of the latest completed survey form at their place of business. Failure to fully or accurately complete a survey form or to maintain the latest survey form on the premises where a wastewater discharge is occurring will be a violation of this chapter.

K. Wastewater Discharge Permitting – Requirements for Discharge.

1. No SIU may discharge wastewater to the water reclamation facility without first obtaining a written statement from the public works director that the water reclamation facility has the hydraulic and/or loading capacity to accept the discharge. Each SIU must also comply with the state requirements listed in subsection B of this section, State Requirements, and in particular apply for and receive a state wastewater discharge permit from Ecology authorizing the discharge. The public works director may require proof of application as a condition of new or continued discharge. Obtaining a state wastewater discharge permit does not relieve an SIU of the obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state, and local regulation including the requirement for applying AKART.

2. The public works director may require other nondomestic customers, including liquid waste haulers, to apply for, and obtain, applicable state wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.

3. The public works director may also establish and require, in writing, nondomestic customers to implement those best management practices determined by Ecology to be representative of AKART or to discontinue use of any substance for which an effective substitute is available that will:

a. Lessen the potential for violating this chapter or any water quality standard; or

b. May represent a significant decrease either singly, or in combination with other similar nondomestic customers, in the toxicity of pollutant loadings to the water reclamation facility.

4. The city may require nondomestic customers seeking authorization to discharge to the water reclamation facility to complete a pollution prevention review before submitting their request to discharge to the public works director. The city may also require nondomestic customers who must submit a pollution prevention plan under the State’s Hazardous Waste Reduction Act to provide this plan to the public works director as a condition of initial or continued discharge.

5. Whenever a moratorium has been imposed upon the water reclamation facility preventing the addition of new nondomestic customers, the public works director may require any or all nondomestic customers of the water reclamation facility to develop plans to reduce their discharges through water reuse, recycling, reclamation, or other applicable management practices, and to implement such plans or other measures deemed appropriate by the public works director to preserve the availability of public sewage treatment services.

L. Permit Requirements for Dangerous Waste Constituents. Nondomestic customers discharging a waste stream containing dangerous wastes as defined in Chapter 173-303 WAC, as amended, (listed, characteristic, or criteria wastes) are required to obtain specific authorization to discharge the waste in a state waste discharge permit issued by Ecology.

M. Disclosure of Records. Each nondomestic customer must have available, at the location of discharge, all records and reports required by this chapter, any applicable state and federal regulation, or any permit or order issued thereunder. Each nondomestic customer must make such records available for review by the public works director during business hours, when activities are being conducted at the facility, and at all reasonable times. Failure to comply with this provision is a violation of this chapter.

N. Reports from Unpermitted Nondomestic Customers. All nondomestic customers not obligated to obtain a state wastewater discharge permit from Ecology must provide appropriate reports to the city as the public works director may require. The public works director will determine the schedule and format of such reports, and the pollutant properties, flow rates, and other pertinent information to be reported.

O. Record Keeping.

1. Nondomestic customers subject to this chapter must retain and make readily available for inspection and copying all records of information maintained to comply with this chapter, a state waste discharge permit, or approved operations and maintenance procedures (inspections, lubrication, repair, etc.). Nondomestic customers subject to monitoring requirements must keep records of all required and voluntary monitoring activities.

2. Monitoring records must include: the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling; the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses.

3. These records must remain available for a period of at least three years. This period will be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the nondomestic customer or water reclamation facility, or where the public works director has specifically notified the nondomestic customer in writing that a longer retention period is required.

P. Sampling Requirements for Nondomestic Customers. All nondomestic customers must abide by the sampling, monitoring, and analytical requirements of any applicable order, and any state or federal regulation or permit, including a state waste discharge or NPDES permit. The public works director may require proof of compliance with Ecology’s sampling and monitoring requirements, and the nondomestic customer must provide such proof upon request. Reports containing incomplete information are not compliant with this chapter.

Q. Upset.

1. Nondomestic customers must control production and all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements upon reduction, loss, or failure of its wastewater treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails.

2. A nondomestic customer who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset to an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards must demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs or other relevant evidence, that:

a. An upset occurred; the nondomestic customer can identify the cause(s) of the upset; and it was not due to improperly designed or inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventative maintenance, or careless or improper operation;

b. The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and

c. The nondomestic customer has submitted the following information to Ecology and the public works director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset. If this information is provided orally, the nondomestic customer must submit written reports within five calendar days containing this same information:

i. A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance;

ii. The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and

iii. Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.

3. Nondomestic customers will only have the opportunity for a judicial determination on a claim of upset in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards. In any such enforcement proceeding, the party seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset has the burden of proof. (Ord. 2017-023 § 1 (Exh. A))


13.48.070 Preliminary treatment facilities.

A. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors must be provided when, in the opinion of the public works director, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing grease and oil in excess of the limits in SMC 13.48.060(C), Local Limits, or excessive amounts of sand or other settleable solids. In general, oil water separators will be required to connect to the storm sewer system rather than the sanitary sewer, unless written approval is provided by the public works director. Interceptors are only required for nondomestic customers as defined in this chapter. All interceptors must be of a type and capacity as required under the Uniform Plumbing Code adopted by the city and approved by the public works director and must be located in places easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Each nondomestic customer must maintain, inspect, and clean required interceptors on a schedule that ensures the interceptors will capture the intended pollutants and prevents reintroduction into the storm or sanitary sewer systems. Nondomestic customers bear all expenses related to installation, maintenance, inspections, and repair of interceptors, and the proper disposal of removed materials.

B. Reports and/or maintenance logs must document the date of service, volume pumped, name of the licensed disposal company (or employee completing the work), waste disposal location for each pretreatment device and other information on the form provided by the city. Maintenance records must be kept a minimum of three years at the location of the device and provided to the city upon request. (Ord. 2017-023 § 1 (Exh. A))


13.48.080 Fats, oils, and grease (FOG) control facilities.

A. New Facilities. Grease interceptors designed to meet Uniform Plumbing Code requirements must be installed for all commercial and/or industrial facilities involving food preparation or that will discharge liquid waste as defined in SMC 13.48.040, Prohibitions and limitations.

B. Existing Facilities with Pretreatment Devices. On or after July 1, 2018, all existing commercial and/or industrial establishments involving food preparation or that discharge liquid waste containing polar and nonpolar grease, or any other wastes or ingredients as defined in SMC 13.48.040, are allowed to operate and maintain existing equipment if the equipment is able to maintain discharges of less than 100 ppm FOG. Any commercial and/or industrial facilities that are known to cause grease-related cleaning activities in the sanitary sewer, a grease-related sanitary sewer overflow, or fail to implement and enforce BMPs will be required to install a properly sized and functioning grease interceptor within 90 calendar days from written notification by the city. Any facilities that have existing grease traps that were not previously approved and are known to cause grease-related cleaning activities in the sanitary sewer or lateral must replace the grease trap with a grease interceptor.

C. Existing Facilities without Grease Removal. Any commercial establishment involving food preparation or that discharges any waste as defined in SMC 13.48.040 are required to install a properly sized and functioning pretreatment device grease interceptor within 90 calendar days from the city’s written notification.

D. FOG Control Program. All facilities required to have a FOG control pretreatment device must shall enter into a sewer maintenance agreement with the city and develop and implement a FOG control program. The goal of the FOG control program is to implement reasonable and technically feasible controls of free-ﬂoating FOG. The basic components of the program shall include:

1. A written program documenting management and corporate support for the plan and a commitment to implement planned activities and achieve established goals through the implementation and enforcement of best management practices;

2. A description of the facility type and a summary of the products made and/or service provided;

3. Quantities of fats, oils, and grease brought into the facility; amounts contained in the product; and quantities discharged to the sanitary sewer;

4. A description of current FOG reduction, recycling, and treatment activities;

5. Schematics of the process areas illustrating drains, interceptors, and discharge points connected to the sanitary sewer;

6. Speciﬁc performance goals and implementation schedule.

E. Enzymes, Bacteria and Other Agents. The direct addition into the building plumbing, grease trap, or interceptor of enzymes, chemicals or other agents designed to emulsify the grease compounds is prohibited. Any attempt to modify the trap into a biological reactor by adding bacterial or microbial agents is also prohibited.

F. Inspection. City access to pretreatment devices must be granted in accordance with SMC 13.48.090.

G. Enforcement. In the event a pretreatment device fails a visual or effluent sample analysis inspection, the nondomestic customer will be given written notice of the noncompliant condition and must take immediate steps to bring the device into compliance. The nondomestic customer is solely responsible for all associated costs.

Failure on any nondomestic customer’s part to maintain continued compliance with any requirements set forth in the SMC may result in the initiation of enforcement action. Such enforcement action may include, but is not limited to: a verbal request or warning documented in the inspection form, a warning letter/maintenance letter (via email, fax, USPS, or hand delivery), notice of violation, termination of any city services, or facility closure as outlined in SMC 13.48.120 through 13.48.180.

Both cleaning and maintenance actions when FOG discharge violations are ongoing must be completed in seven calendar days. The business contact must contact the city official for a reinspection. An extension may be granted by the public works director, if corrective actions have been initiated (e.g., an appointment made with a contractor to address a maintenance concern). In the case of an impending backup or current obstruction, the public works director may require the corrective action be taken immediately.

If an obstruction of the sanitary sewer collection system occurs that causes a sanitary sewer backup and/or overflow, and such overflow can be attributed in part or in whole to an accumulation of any material as defined in SMC 13.48.040 in the sanitary sewer main line, the city may take appropriate enforcement actions, as stipulated in this chapter against the generator or contributor of such materials. These actions may include, without limitation, recovery of all costs associated with cleanup activities, fines, civil penalties, or discontinuing sanitary sewer and water service.

Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation, record, report, or other document filed with the city or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this chapter is subject to penalties as set forth in this chapter.

H. Pretreatment devices must be constructed in accordance with SMC 15.04.060 and 15.04.070 and the Sequim Development Specifications and Standard Details.

I. Exemptions. Grease traps will not be accepted as an alternative to grease interceptors except as approved in writing by the public works director. At a minimum, the following conditions must apply:

1. Grease traps must have twice the required grease storage capacity as required in the Uniform Plumbing Code for the applicable flow rate. Grease traps must be sized for 25 gpm/50 lbs., minimally.

2. A single grease trap must not serve more than one building or tenant space.

3. FOG removal devices must not be installed without a permit as required by SMC 15.04.070.

J. Pretreatment devices must be designed by a professional engineer, licensed and authorized to do business in the state of Washington, to accept all grey water from the facility to include: hand-washing sinks, mop sinks, any sink used in beverage or food preparation, dishwasher waste, and any garbage disposals, grinders, or shredders. If the facility is equipped with a hydromechanical grease interceptor (i.e., grease trap), discharge must be pretreated as follows:

1. A dishwasher or sanitizer must have a dedicated trap or solids interceptor to capture large amounts of solids, and allow high temperature waste water to cool before entering the hydromechanical grease interceptor.

The design must demonstrate that the specified grease trap has an adequate flow capacity to handle all of these connections. The minimum grease trap capacity is 25 gpm and 50 lbs. Proposed grease interceptors must conform to the Sequim Development Specifications and Standard Details. (Ord. 2017-023 § 1 (Exh. A))


13.48.090 Authority to inspect.

A. Duly authorized city employees bearing proper credentials and identification will be permitted to enter upon all properties in order to inspect, observe, measure, sample, and test effluents destined for the water reclamation facility. Any such intrusions will be conducted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

B. Inspection. The city may inspect pretreatment devices on both a scheduled and unscheduled, unannounced basis to determine whether the requirements set forth in this chapter are being met. Each establishment using a pretreatment device must allow city representatives, or other authorized employees bearing proper credentials and identification, access at all reasonable times or during normal hours of operation to all parts of the premises for the purpose of inspection, observation, records examination, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of the SMC. The city has the right to set up on any property devices necessary for conducting wastewater sampling inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. All costs for laboratory collection and analysis are the responsibility of the establishment. The city representative may request a business representative be present during the inspection to: open, operate, or assist in inspecting the device as required to prove operating effectiveness. During inspection, the factors set forth in SMC 13.48.100 will be considered the minimum standards to determine compliance. (Ord. 2017-023 § 1 (Exh. A))


13.48.100 Compliance standards.

A. Compliance and Maintenance Schedule. Grease interceptors will be considered out of compliance if the average accumulation of scum, suspended solids, and sludge (measured by depth) in the device totals 25 percent of the total depth. Grease traps will be considered out of compliance if the average accumulation of scum, suspended solids and sludge (measured by depth) in the device totals 15 percent of the total depth. Grease interceptors and traps must be serviced and emptied of accumulated waste content as required to maintain a minimum design capability or effective volume, but not less than once every 180 calendar days. If a facility determines that cleaning every 180 calendar days is unnecessary in order to remain in compliance with city requirements, the facility may make a written request for a variance from the cleaning schedule.

B. Oil water separators (OWS) will be considered out of compliance if the average accumulation of oils, suspended solids and sludge (measured by depth) in the device totals 25 percent of the total depth. OWS must be serviced and emptied of accumulated waste contents as required to maintain a minimum design capability or effective volume, but not less than once every 180 calendar days. If a facility determines that cleaning every 180 calendar days is unnecessary in order to remain in compliance with city requirements, the facility may make a written request for a variance from the cleaning schedule.

C. Operability. The devices and all corresponding parts and pieces must be properly installed and in good working order (e.g., lids must open and work freely, seal must be in good condition, threads on bolts and nuts must work freely and fasten properly). No debris, equipment supplies, or storage units or any other materials may be stacked or placed within a three-foot radius of the device’s access lids or sampling ports.

D. Noncompliance. The following conditions are considered noncompliance:

1. If amounts of FOG in excess of 100 ppm are evident in the effluent tee, or chamber, of the device. This will be determined by visual inspection (identifying a residue, sheen or grease bloom) or by sampling and laboratory testing;

2. Sanitary wastes are introduced into the pretreatment device;

3. Flushing the grease interceptor with large quantities of water in an effort to cause accumulated grease to pass through is prohibited;

4. For OWS, if coalescing plates or filters appear to be plugged or are otherwise not functioning.

E. Disposal.

1. Any facility that has a grease interceptor must utilize a licensed disposal company to clean the device and properly dispose of the waste. Wastes removed from a device must be disposed of at a facility permitted to receive such waste in accordance with all city, county, state and federal regulations. Grease, solids, or liquids removed from pretreatment devices must not be returned to any grease interceptor, private sanitary sewer line, any portion of the sanitary sewer collection system, or any portion of the stormwater system.

2. Any facility that has a grease trap may utilize a licensed disposal company or employee to clean the interceptor and dispose of the waste properly. These disposal methods include:

a. Absorbing liquids with the proper materials.

b. Storing the removed materials in a leak-proof container and disposing of them in accordance with state and local regulations (e.g., in a sanitary landfill).

c. Recycling the removed materials with a licensed disposal or recycling contractor.

3. Any facility that has an OWS must utilize a licensed disposal company to clean the device and dispose of the waste properly by recycling or disposing of the removed materials with a licensed disposal or recycling contractor. (Ord. 2017-023 § 1 (Exh. A))


13.48.110 Sewer blockage.

The nondomestic customer and/or owner is responsible for keeping the side sewer clean and free of obstructions from the building to the sewer main. When a backup occurs in the sewer, the nondomestic customer must first call the city public works department and ask that an operator be sent out to ascertain if the blockage is in the city-owned portion or the privately owned portion of the sewer.

If a nondomestic customer is having backup problems on a regular basis, the nondomestic customer must schedule a video inspection of the side sewer. The nondomestic customer will schedule the work and perform the inspection immediately after first blockage, clean the line, and if needed, install a cleanout at the property line. If the inspection finds misalignment of joints and/or pipe or broken pipe of a private side sewer, the property owner must make repairs to the side sewer in a timely manner. If the work side sewer extends to the city rights-of-way, the property owner must apply for a right-of-way work permit as required under Chapter 12.16 SMC. The property owner must complete construction within 30 calendar days. Upon written request by the property owner, the public works director may extend such time if the delays are attributable to an inability to timely secure a contractor or unsuitable construction conditions.

If a side sewer has no cleanouts for access, the nondomestic customer will install a cleanout to provide access to side sewer line. (Ord. 2017-023 § 1 (Exh. A))


13.48.120 Violation – Unauthorized tampering – Penalty.

No unauthorized person may maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the municipal sewage works. Any person who violates this provision is guilty of a misdemeanor as set forth in SMC 1.12.010. (Ord. 2017-023 § 1 (Exh. A))


13.48.130 Violation – Notification.

Any person found to be violating any provisions of this chapter, except SMC 13.48.120 and 13.48.170, may be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender must, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. (Ord. 2017-023 § 1 (Exh. A))


13.48.140 Violation – Continuation – Penalty.

Any person who continues any violation beyond the time limit provided for in SMC 13.48.130 is guilty of a misdemeanor as set forth in SMC 1.12.010. Each day in which any such violation continues is a separate offense. (Ord. 2017-023 § 1 (Exh. A))


13.48.150 Violation – Liability.

Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the city by reason of such violation. (Ord. 2017-023 § 1 (Exh. A))


13.48.160 Noncompliance – Nuisance.

Compliance with the terms and conditions of this chapter constitutes minimum health, sanitation, and safety provisions. Noncompliance with these terms and conditions constitutes a public nuisance and may be abated as such, in addition to any other criminal, civil, and equitable remedies that may be available. (Ord. 2017-023 § 1 (Exh. A))


13.48.170 Criminal prosecution.

A. A nondomestic customer who knowingly or recklessly introduces any substance into the water reclamation facility that causes personal injury or property damage will, upon conviction, be guilty of a gross misdemeanor as set forth in SMC 1.12.010. Each day a violation occurs constitutes a separate offense. This penalty is in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available to the city at law or in equity.

B. A nondomestic customer will, upon conviction, be guilty of a gross misdemeanor if the nondomestic customer:

1. Knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application or any documentation filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter, state wastewater discharge permit, or order; or

2. Falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this chapter.

Each day a violation occurs constitutes a separate offense. (Ord. 2017-023 § 1 (Exh. A))


13.48.180 Injunctive relief.

If the public works director finds that a nondomestic customer has violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, a state wastewater discharge permit, or order, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may seek an injunction to restrain or compel certain actions. Through the city attorney, the public works director will petition the Clallam County Superior Court for the issuance of a temporary, preliminary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, that achieves nondomestic customer compliance with this chapter, the state wastewater discharge permit, or order. The city may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and equitable relief, including requiring the nondomestic customer to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief will not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a nondomestic customer. Injunctive relief is nonexclusive to other remedies available to the city. (Ord. 2017-023 § 1 (Exh. A))


Chapter 13.52 SEWER MAINTENANCE REGULATIONS

Sections:

13.52.010    Notice of inoperative or inadequate condition.

13.52.020    Use of existing side sewers.

13.52.030    Backwater sewage valves.

13.52.040    Unlawful to plant certain vegetation.


13.52.010 Notice of inoperative or inadequate condition.

Where it is determined by the director or the city engineer that a side sewer, drain, ditch or natural watercourse is obstructed, broken, inoperative or inadequate and is a menace to health, or is liable to cause damage to public or private property, the director shall give notice to the owner, agent or occupant of the property in which such condition exists. If the owner, agent or occupant refuses to reconstruct, relay, reconnect, repair or remove the obstruction of the side sewer, drain, ditch or natural watercourse within the time limit specified in such notice, the director shall so notify the city engineer and the city engineer may perform such work as may be necessary to comply with this section. The cost of such work done by the city engineer shall be charged to the property owner or occupant and shall become immediately payable to the city treasurer upon written notice of such amount being given to the property owner or occupant or posted upon the premises. (Ord. 270 § 17, 1973)


13.52.020 Use of existing side sewers.

Where a new or converted building or new installation replaces an old one, the use of an existing side sewer will be permitted when approved by the city engineer as conforming to all requirements of this division. (Ord. 270 § 19, 1973)


13.52.030 Backwater sewage valves.

A. In any building, structure or premises in which the plumbing outlets or other drainage facilities are too low in elevation as determined by the city engineer to permit gravity flow to the public sewer system, wastewater shall be lifted mechanically and discharged into the public sewer.

B. Whenever a situation exists involving the danger of backups of sewage or drainage from the public sewer system, the city engineer may prescribe a minimum elevation at which the plumbing outlet or side sewer may be discharged to the public sewer system. Wastewater from drains or side sewers below such minimum elevations shall be lifted mechanically to an elevation determined by the city engineer, or if approved by the city engineer, a backwater sewage valve may be installed provided the property owner shall record with the Clallam County auditor an instrument as described in SMC 13.60.060. The effective operation of the backwater sewage valve shall be the responsibility of the owner of the sewer or drain. (Ord. 270 § 20, 1973)


13.52.040 Unlawful to plant certain vegetation.

It is unlawful to plant within 30 feet of any sanitary sewer, side sewer or storm drain any willow, poplar, cottonwood, soft maple, gum tree or any other tree or shrub whose roots are likely to enter and obstruct the flow of the sewers. (Ord. 270 § 33, 1973)


Chapter 13.56 REPAIR AND CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS

Sections:

13.56.010    Trenches and excavations – Safety standards.

13.56.020    City may complete unfinished work.

13.56.030    Owner or contractor liable for city completion costs.


13.56.010 Trenches and excavations – Safety standards.

A. All trenches or excavations within four feet of any public place and all obstructions or encroachments upon a public place shall be barricaded as required for public safety. It is unlawful to fail to maintain the lateral support of any public place while constructing, altering or repairing any side sewer or storm drain. All trenches or excavations shall be covered during hours of inactivity of work on the side sewer or storm drain.

B. Barricades posted upon arterial streets or highways must conform to the standards established by the Washington State Highway Commission, Department of Highways, and/or such addenda to such standards as the city may establish.

C. All work performed under the authority of this section shall be accomplished within the minimum safety standards prescribed by the Washington State Department of Labor and Industries, Division of Safety. Evidence of failure to comply with the requirements of the Department of Labor and Industries shall be sufficient reason for the director or the city engineer to order stoppage of work until the required safety precautions are established on the job. (Ord. 270 § 14, 1973)


13.56.020 City may complete unfinished work.

Work within the limits of any public area shall be prosecuted to completion with due diligence, and if any excavation is left open, whether covered or uncovered, beyond a time reasonably necessary to fill the same, the city engineer may cause the same to be backfilled and the public area restored forthwith. Cost incurred by the city engineer in such work shall be charged to the side sewer contractor in charge of such work and shall be immediately payable to the city treasurer by the contractor upon written notification of the amount thereof given to the contractor or posted at the location. (Ord. 270 § 15, 1973)


13.56.030 Owner or contractor liable for city completion costs.

If any work performed on a side sewer is not completed in accordance with the provisions of this division and the plans and specifications as approved by the city engineer, and if the contractor or person doing the work refuses to properly construct and complete such work, notice of such failure or refusal shall be posted on the premises where the work is being done, and the city engineer may cause the work to be completed and the sewer connected in the proper manner, and the cost of such work and any materials necessary therefor shall be charged to the owner or contractor and be payable by the owner or contractor immediately upon the city engineer giving written notice of the amount thereof or posting a notice thereof on the premises. (Ord. 270 § 16, 1973)


Chapter 13.60 SIDE SEWER REGULATIONS

Sections:

13.60.010    Side sewer contractor requirements.

13.60.020    Costs to be borne by owner.

13.60.030    Side sewers – Minimum cover requirements.

13.60.040    Side sewers constructed at more than 100 percent grade.

13.60.050    Permit required.

13.60.060    Variances to standards.

13.60.070    Materials and standards.

13.60.080    Restoration to original condition.

13.60.090    Manholes required.


13.60.010 Side sewer contractor requirements.

A. It is unlawful for anyone to construct, reconstruct or repair any side sewer in a public place unless he is a licensed side sewer contractor holding a current license under the city license code, or is an employee of the city engineer performing assigned duties.

B. No side sewer contractor’s license shall be issued until the applicant has appeared before the city engineer and has been examined by him, by oral and/or written examination as to the applicant’s knowledge of side sewer construction work and the ordinances of the city regarding side sewers. The city engineer shall deny the approval of any applicant whom he finds does not possess adequate experience or knowledge. Applicants for such examination by the city engineer shall pay to the city treasurer the sum of $15.00 before taking the examination, and the receipt number shall be noted upon the examination and filed in the city engineer’s office.

C. Each side sewer contractor shall file with the city engineer a certificate of insurance from an insurance company licensed to do business in the state that the contractor carries public liability and property damage insurance in the sum of at least $50,000 for any one person killed or injured in any one accident or occurrence, and $100,000 for more than one person killed or injured in any one accident or occurrence, and at least $25,000 for all damage arising out of injury to or destruction of property. Such policy shall contain an endorsement naming the city as an additional insured and providing for not less than 10 days’ notice to the city of any change, cancellation or expiration of such policy.

D. A licensed side sewer contractor must secure his own permits, be responsible for all work accomplished under his permits and connect all plumbing outlets or drainage facilities in a complete manner, as required by the city engineer. A property owner or his employee may construct, reconstruct or repair a side sewer on private property. (Ord. 270 § 5, 1973)


13.60.020 Costs to be borne by owner.

Costs and expense incidental to the installation, connection and maintenance of a side sewer shall be borne by the owner or occupant of the premises served by the side sewer. (Ord. 270 § 18, 1973)


13.60.030 Side sewers – Minimum cover requirements.

Side sewer shall be laid on not less than two percent nor more than 100 percent grade; shall be not less than 30 inches from any foundation wall of any building, and if there is no foundation wall, not less than 30 inches from the outer lines of any footings, pilings or building supports. Side sewers shall have not less than 60 inches of cover at the curb line, or in a public alley 30 inches of cover at the property line, and 18 inches of cover on the private property. Side sewers laid generally parallel to the curb or curb line shall not have less than 48 inches of cover between the curb or curb line and the sidewalk or sidewalk line nor less than 30 inches of cover between the sidewalk or sidewalk line and the property line. All cover measurements shall be based on the established grade, or on existing improvements, or shall be determined by the city engineer. (Ord. 270 § 22, 1973)


13.60.040 Side sewers constructed at more than 100 percent grade.

A. If a side sewer is to be constructed at more than 100 percent grade, or with less than the required minimum cover prescribed in this chapter, the city engineer may require special plans for the construction to be submitted for his approval, and he may require the use of cast iron pipe or asbestos-cement pipe or other material before approving the plan of construction. The wall thickness of the pipe to be used, and whether or not it should be encased in concrete or concrete with reinforcing steel shall be determined by the city engineer.

B. Six inches shall be the minimum diameter of pipe for gravity-flow side sewers in street areas.

C. Not more than one building shall be connected to a side sewer except by permission of, and in accordance with, rules and regulations of the city engineer.

D. Any one single-family dwelling shall be connected with not less than four-inch diameter pipe on private property; provided, that where a dual connection of two single-family dwellings, or a multiple dwelling or commercial building with a single-family dwelling is permitted by the city engineer, such connection shall be made with not less than six-inch diameter pipe below the point of dual connection

E. Any multiple dwelling, industrial or commercial building shall be connected with not less than six-inch diameter pipe on private property; provided, with the permission of the city engineer, three or less two-inch downspouts or one motel unit may be connected with four-inch diameter pipe on private property.

F. Cast iron or asbestos-cement pipe shall be used for all side sewers over water mains for a distance of at least five feet from the center of the water main. Side sewer lines must be laid at least one-half foot below and one foot away from all water service lines or one and one-half feet below all water department main water lines, unless cast iron or asbestos-cement pipe is used for the side sewer. (Ord. 270 § 23, 1973)


13.60.050 Permit required.

A. Before a side sewer may be located on a building site other than the site being served by the side sewer, and before the city engineer issues a permit authorizing the laying of such a side sewer, the owner of the side sewer shall secure a written easement from the owner of the building site to be crossed. The easement shall be duly acknowledged, and shall grant the right to occupy the property for side sewer or utility purposes. The easement shall be recorded in the office of the Clallam County Auditor, by the owner of the side sewer, and the recording number exhibited to the city engineer.

B. Where a side sewer is to be connected in a public area to a side sewer which is owned by another and does not involve an easement, written permission for such connection shall be obtained from the owner of such side sewer and shall be filed with the city engineer before a permit authorizing such connection is issued. (Ord. 270 § 24, 1973)


13.60.060 Variances to standards.

If, in the opinion of the city engineer, physical conditions make compliance with the provisions of this division impracticable, the city engineer may issue a permit for installation of a side sewer requiring compliance with the provisions insofar as is reasonably possible, and such permit shall be issued only upon the condition that the property owner shall record with the Clallam County Auditor an instrument acceptable to the city engineer agreeing to save harmless and indemnify the city from any damage or injury resulting from such installation. Such instrument shall be upon a form approved by the city engineer. This section is not intended to be used to allow storm drainage connections to a sanitary sewer. (Ord. 270 § 25, 1973)


13.60.070 Materials and standards.

A. Materials and workmanship in connection with the installation of any side sewer or drain shall be as required by the “Standard Plans and Specifications” of the state chapter of APWA, and modifications specified by the city engineer.

B. Fittings, increasers, traps, etc., shall be of standard manufacture.

C. Changes in line or grade shall be made with wyes or 45-degree bends, or for slight changes in line or grade, by setting each pipe out of line slightly, within the deflection angle allowed by the pipe manufacturer’s specifications, or by using 10-degree, 22-1/2-degree or 30-degree bends supplied by pipe manufacturers.

D. When laying around a 90-degree corner, a wye and 45-degree bend combination shall be used with the end of the wye left as a cleanout.

E. Increasers or wyes shall be used when changing the sizes of pipe. Pipe size may also be changed at a manhole.

F. Grafts on four-inch, six-inch or eight-inch pipe shall not be allowed.

G. Rubber-type gaskets or flexible-joint pipe must be used in side sewers constructed of concrete, or asbestos-cement pipe; cast iron pipe must have flexible joints or caulked lead joints. Copper pipe must have soldered joints.

H. Cast iron fittings must conform to the requirements of the plumbing code of the city as to quality of materials and type of fitting or structure.

I. A bend must not be used adjacent to a tee or wye at the main sewer but may be used at a length of pipe or more away from the main sewer, unless the bend is manufactured as a part of the first length of pipe.

J. Whenever it becomes necessary to disturb pavement in connection with any work authorized under the ordinance codified in this division, the opening shall be not less than three feet square; provided, the city engineer may specify a size of opening and additional cuts to be made when needed to insure a proper backfill.

K. No excavation shall be made in any public area except at the times and in the manner prescribed by the city engineer.

L. Backfill of excavation and tunnels under concrete or asphalt roadway surfacing and the restoration of these surfaces in public areas shall be accomplished by the contractor as directed by the city engineer.

M. Tunnels or excavations under public sidewalks or under driveways in public places may be backfilled by a side sewer contractor; provided, that the material has been approved by the city engineer, and provided it is tamped in place with a mechanical tamper, in layers of not more than 12 inches loose thickness; except that, within two feet of finish grade the loose thickness layers shall not exceed six inches. The density of all such compaction shall be approved by the city engineer. (Ord. 270 § 26, 1973)


13.60.080 Restoration to original condition.

Streets, sidewalks, planting strips and other public areas except as mentioned in SMC 13.60.080, disturbed or altered in the course of any side sewer or drainage work, shall be restored by the licensed sewer contractor to the original surface condition as approved by the city engineer; and in the event of the failure of the contractor to so restore the area the city engineer may make such restoration and charge the cost thereof to the side sewer contractor who shall, upon receiving written notice of the amount thereof or upon posting of such notice at the area, make immediate payment thereof to the city treasurer. (Ord. 270 § 27, 1973)


13.60.090 Manholes required.

In any property served by a side sewer carrying industrial waste, the owner or the occupant shall install a manhole in the side sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes, when required by the city engineer. Such manhole shall be accessible, safely located and shall be constructed and installed in accordance with the plans approved by the city engineer. The manhole shall be installed and maintained by the owner or occupant at his sole expense. (Ord. 270 § 31, 1973)


Chapter 13.64 STORM DRAINAGE

Sections:

13.64.010    Drainage required.


13.64.010 Drainage required.

Hard-surfaced or graded areas including but not limited to driveways, parking lots, roofs, service station yards and storage yards must be drained in such a manner as will protect adjacent public and private property from damage and such drainage must be managed as required by Chapters 13.104 and 13.108 SMC. Such storm drainage must not be connected to enter a sanitary sewer. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 270 § 21, 1973)


Chapter 13.68 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

13.68.010    Purpose.

13.68.020    Interpretation.


13.68.010 Purpose.

It is the purpose of the ordinance codified in this division to set forth the city’s schedule of charges pertaining to persons who connect to and use the city water distribution system and the city sewage disposal system. (Ord. 504 § 1, 1986)


13.68.020 Interpretation.

The city council of the city shall have full authority to interpret and apply the provisions of this division and its decision in such cases shall be final. (Ord. 504 § 12, 1986)


Chapter 13.72 INSTALLATION AND CONNECTION FEES

Sections:

13.72.010    Installation and connection fees.

13.72.020    Sewer general facility charges.

13.72.025    Water general facility charges.

13.72.030    Collection of fees.


13.72.010 Installation and connection fees.

A. From and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this division no person or firm shall connect to the city water distribution system or sewage disposal system without first paying to the city clerk the sum or sums set forth in this section and without having first obtained a permit from the city therefor.

B. For the purposes of this section, “developer installed services” shall be defined as services installed from the city main to the property line according to the city standards and including the developer’s purchase and placement of all materials, including meter, meter box, locking meter stop, piping, fittings and all related appurtenances, and including roadway replacement and sidewalk removal, if necessary.

C. Water. Service charges for connecting to any city water main shall be as follows:

	Meter Size	City  Installed Service	Developer Installed Service

	3/4 inch	$550.00 plus roadway and sidewalk removal and replacement costs.	$75.00 plus cost of materials and service funded by city.

	1 inch	$550.00 plus roadway and sidewalk removal and replacement costs.	$75.00 plus cost of materials and service funded by city.

	over 1 inch	Time, material and expenses, including roadway and sidewalk removal and replacement costs.	$75.00 plus cost of materials and service funded by city.

D. Sewer. Service charges for connecting to any city sewer main shall be as follows:

	 	City

Installed Service (1)	Developer

Installed Service (2)

	 	$550.00 plus roadway and sidewalk removal and replacement costs	$100.00 plus cost of materials and/or service to the city.

	(1) Time, material, expenses and costs shall be determined by the city, and shall include an additional 10 percent as overhead.

	(2) Utility location and inspection fee. 

(Ord. 93-012 § 2)


13.72.020 Sewer general facility charges.

From and after the effective date of the amending ordinance codified in this section, there shall be collected from each person, firm or corporation connecting to the sanitary sewer system of the city for property located within the city or within the urban growth area (UGA) the following charges (which shall be in addition to and supplemental to any other connection charges established in this chapter or in any other ordinances of the city). The GFC collected will be the charge in effect when a complete building permit application is filed. GFCs are not payable in advance. 

A. For connection to the city sewage disposal system:

	 	 	Type of Connection	General Facilities Charge (per unit)

	1.	 	Residential living unit	As established by resolution [one equivalent residential unit, ERU]

	 	 	 	(includes condominium units, mobile home park units and multifamily units under three-plex)

	2.	 	Multifamily units (over two units)	[0.7 ERU per unit]

	3.	 	Temporary residential units:	 

	a.	Motel and hotel rooms, seasonal overnight travel trailer parks and RV parks	[0.3 ERU per unit]

	b.	Rest homes, nursing homes, assisted care facilities 	[0.6 ERU per unit]

	4.	 	Commercial and industrial units and other units:

	 	 	Based on the following meter size as determined by approved engineering recommendation according to current ANSI/AWWA standard C700. Increases due to fire sprinkler installation may be disregarded in the below calculations; provided, that the increased capacity cannot be used for other than fire sprinklers.

	 	 	Meter Size (inches)	ERU

	 	 	5/8	1

	 	 	3/4	1.5

	 	 	1	2.5

	 	 	1-1/2	5

	 	 	2	8

Meters sized greater than two inches or any use requiring an industrial pretreatment plan requires an approved engineering analysis of equivalent ERUs.

B. The city public works director’s decision as to anticipated sewer usage may be appealed to the hearing examiner upon written notice filed with the city clerk within 21 days of the director’s decision. This amendatory section and amended rates do not affect rates contracted to be collected pursuant to any latecomer agreement.

C. If a project for which a GFC has been paid does not connect to the city sewer system before the building permit expires, a new GFC will be charged based on the difference between the GFC paid and the new GFC in effect on the date when a new complete building permit application is filed. No refund shall be issued if the new GC is lower than the paid GFC.

D. Extensions of service in Sequim’s corporate city limits and the urban growth area shall have a priority over extensions outside of Sequim’s urban growth area except in the case of risks to public health so certified by the Clallam County health director.

E. Connection to the City Sewage Disposal System for Service of Properties Lying Outside the Corporate Limits but Within the Sequim Urban Growth Area. The city council may, at its sole discretion, extend the city’s sewage disposal system to serve property lying outside the corporate city limits but within the UGA. Such UGA extensions shall be made upon such terms and conditions as the council deems appropriate. Such terms and conditions shall, at a minimum, include the following:

1. Owners of the property to be served shall sign and return to the city for recording purposes a declaration of covenant and an irrevocable power of attorney to the city and a commitment to annex and a waiver of all objections to annexation at such time as the extension of the corporate boundaries to include the subject property becomes desirable by the city. Such agreement shall constitute a covenant running with the land to be served.

2. Owners shall pay a monthly collection fee of not less than two times the fee charged to city residents. The council, at its discretion, may increase this amount in situations where the costs of providing service are extraordinary. Such monthly collection fees shall be adjusted at such time as the property is actually annexed into the city.

3. The city shall reserve the right to disconnect service in the event the continued service would subject the city sewage disposal system to unreasonable damage, or unreasonable increased maintenance costs. The city shall reconnect after the risk of unreasonable damage and unreasonable increased maintenance costs no longer exists.

4. The city may require installation of or bonding or no-protest LIDs for streets, curbs, gutters and sidewalks and other terms as part of a preannexation agreement or other agreement with the city, which agreement shall be recorded as a covenant affecting all of the parcels of the owner receiving city services.

5. Owners shall also be bound by the applicable terms of any interlocal agreement between the city and Clallam County concerning land use and utilities in the Sequim urban growth area.

F. Latecomer Applicability. Owners of property connecting laterally to developer- established sewer trunk lines shall be subject to payment of latecomer fees as established by a recorded agreement between the city and the developer/installer.

G. General Facilities Charges for Extensions of City Sewage Service Outside City Limits. General facilities charges for connection to the city sewage disposal system to serve property located outside the corporate city limits for use for regionally significant residential units, commercial or industrial uses shall be established by the city council at the time of application for service. Where existing contracts, executed prior to the adoption of the Growth Management Act (Chapter 36.70A RCW), provided for sewage service to areas outside of Sequim’s city limits, the general facility charges shall be at least two times the general facility charge provided for inside the city limits or as specifically provided by contract. Former SMC code section 13.72.020(F) (as referenced in some contracts and as existing in 1989) is intended to be modified and replaced by this subsection G.

H. Transfer of General Facilities Fees.

1. Persons or entities owning property for which sewer general facilities charges have previously been paid by the owner to the city may transfer the sewer development rights obtained by the general facilities payment to a different location under the following conditions:

a. The buildings which were served by the utilities provided pursuant to the general facilities payments are to be demolished or removed;

b. The general facility charge transfer shall be recorded in favor of the city in the county property records at the property owner’s expense.

2. In the event structures are destroyed or demolished on any site, an additional general facilities charge for a replacement structure erected upon the same site, and for which the same number of general facilities charges would be levied as had been previously paid, shall not be required.

3. The amount of general facilities charges which may be transferred shall be calculated based upon the amount actually paid by the owner of the premises at the time of the initial payment of general facilities charges. The funds paid may be transferred and applied to the new location at their face value. If, from the time of the initial payment to the time of the requested transfer, general facilities charges have increased, the transferor shall pay the difference between the general facilities charges paid and general facilities charges which would be levied under the new rate structure.

4. The terms of this section relating to transfer of general facilities charges shall apply to sewer general facilities charges. (Ord. 2019-004 (Exh. B); Ord. 2015-017 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 2013-005 § 1; Ord. 2008-003 § 2; Ord. 2007-001; Ord. 2005-029 § 2; Ord. 2004-002 Exh. A; Ord. 2002-015; Ord. 97-007 § 2)


13.72.025 Water general facility charges.

From and after the effective date of the amending ordinance codified in this section there shall be collected from each person, firm or corporation connecting to the water system of the city for property located within the city or within the urban growth area (UGA) the following charges (which shall be in addition to and supplemental to any other connection charges established in this chapter or in any other ordinances of the city). The GFC collected will be the charge in effect when a complete building permit application is filed. GFCs are payable only upon filing a complete building permit application. GFCs are not payable in advance.

A. For connection to the city water distribution system:

	 	 	Type of Connection	General Facilities Charge (per unit)

	1.	 	Residential living unit	As established by resolution [one equivalent residential unit, ERU]

	 	 	 	(includes condominium units, mobile home park units and multifamily units under three-plex)

	2.	 	Multifamily units (over two units)	[0.7 ERU per unit]

	3.	 	Temporary residential units:	 

	a.	Motel and hotel rooms, seasonal overnight travel trailer parks, and RV parks	[0.3 ERU per unit]

	b.	Rest homes, nursing homes, assisted care facilities 	[0.6 ERU per unit]

	4.	 	Commercial and industrial units and other units:

	 	 	Based on the following meter size as determined by approved engineering recommendation according to current ANSI/AWWA standard C700. Increases due to fire sprinkler installation may be disregarded in the below calculations; provided, that the increased capacity cannot be used for other than fire sprinklers.

	 	 	Meter Size (inches)	ERU

	 	 	5/8	1

	 	 	3/4	1.5

	 	 	1	2.5

	 	 	1-1/2	5

	 	 	2	8

Meters sized greater than two inches or any use requiring an industrial pretreatment plan requires a city-approved engineering analysis of equivalent ERUs.

B. The city public works director’s decision as to anticipated water usage may be appealed to the hearing examiner upon written notice filed with the city clerk within 21 days of the director’s decision.

C. If a project for which a GFC has been paid does not connect to the city water system before the building permit expires, a new GFC will be charged based on the difference between the GFC paid and the new GFC in effect on the date when a new complete building permit application is filed. No refund shall be issued if the new GFC is lower than the paid GFC.

D. Extensions of service in Sequim’s corporate city limits and the urban growth area shall have a priority over extensions outside of Sequim’s urban growth area except in the case of risks to public health so certified by the Clallam County health director.

E. Connection to the City Water System for Service of Properties Lying Outside the Corporate Limits but Within the Sequim Urban Growth Area. The city council may, at its sole discretion, extend the city’s water system to serve property lying outside the corporate city limits but within the UGA. Such UGA extensions shall be made upon such terms and conditions as the council deems appropriate. Such terms and conditions shall, at a minimum, include the following:

1. Owners of the property to be served shall sign and return to the city for recording purposes a declaration of covenant and an irrevocable power of attorney to the city and a commitment to annex and a waiver of all objections to annexation at such time as the extension of the corporate boundaries to include the subject property becomes desirable by the city. Such agreement shall constitute a covenant running with the land to be served.

2. Owners shall pay a monthly collection fee of not less than one and one-half times the fee charged to city residents. The council, at its discretion, may increase this amount in situations where the costs of providing service are extraordinary. Such monthly collection fees shall be adjusted at such time as the property is actually annexed into the city.

3. The city shall reserve the right to disconnect service in the event the continued service would subject the city water system to unreasonable damage, or unreasonable increased maintenance costs. The city shall reconnect after the risk of unreasonable damage and unreasonable increased maintenance costs no longer exists.

4. The city may require installation of or bonding or no-protest LIDs for streets, curbs, gutters and sidewalks and other terms as part of a preannexation agreement or other agreement with the city, which agreement shall be recorded as a covenant affecting all of the parcels of the owner receiving city services.

5. Owners shall also be bound by the applicable terms of any interlocal agreement between the city and Clallam County concerning land use and utilities in the Sequim urban growth area.

F. Latecomer Applicability. Owners of property connecting laterally to developer-established water trunk lines shall be subject to payment of latecomer fees as established by a recorded agreement between the city and the developer/installer.

G. General facilities charges for extensions of city water service outside city limits and outside the Sequim urban growth area for use for regionally significant residential units, commercial or industrial uses shall be established by the city council at the time of application for service.

H. Transfer of Water General Facilities Fees.

1. Persons or entities owning property for which water general facilities charges have previously been paid by the owner to the city may transfer the water development rights obtained by the general facilities payment to a different location under the following conditions:

a. The buildings which were served by the utilities provided pursuant to the general facilities payments are to be demolished or removed;

b. The general facility charge transfer shall be recorded in favor of the city in the county property records at the property owner’s expense. 

2. In the event structures are destroyed or demolished on any site, an additional general facilities charge for a replacement structure erected upon the same site, and for which the same number of general facilities charges would be levied as had been previously paid, shall not be required.

3. The amount of general facilities charges which may be transferred shall be calculated based upon the amount actually paid by the owner of the premises at the time of the initial payment of general facilities charges. The funds paid may be transferred and applied to the new location at their face value. If, from the time of the initial payment to the time of the requested transfer, general facilities charges have increased, the transferor shall pay the difference between the general facilities charges paid and general facilities charges which would be levied under the new rate structure.

4. The terms of this section relating to transfer of general facilities charges shall apply to water general facilities charges. (Ord. 2019-004 (Exh. B); Ord. 2015-017 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 2013-005 § 1; Ord. 2007-001; Ord. 2005-029 § 2; Ord. 2004-002 Exh. A; Ord. 2002-015; Ord. 97-008 § 2)


13.72.030 Collection of fees.

The connection charges established in this chapter shall be collected at the time the request for connection is made or if a building permit is to be issued at the time the building permit is issued. (Ord. 299 § 2, 1974)


Chapter 13.76 FEES FOR CONNECTION TO MAINS

Sections:

13.76.010    Connection to city constructed mains.


13.76.010 Connection to city constructed mains.

In addition to the connection charges set forth in other chapters of this division, persons or firms connecting to water or sewer mains constructed at the sole cost of the city and not pursuant to local improvement district bonds or through developer funding, shall pay the actual cost of the construction of the main serving the applicant’s property, plus 10 percent as overhead for city administration unless such charges have been paid under other provisions of the code. (Ord. 2011-004 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 504 § 4, 1986)


Chapter 13.80 SEWER RATES AND CHARGES

Sections:

13.80.010    Sewer charges established – Effective date.

13.80.020    Sewer billing classifications.

13.80.030    Sewer rates and charges by classification (city rates).

13.80.040    Sewer rate sufficiency increases.

13.80.041    Single-family residential rates.

13.80.050    Sewer rural rates.

13.80.060    Administration authority.

13.80.070    Normal billing period.

13.80.080    Dedicated source of sewer rate reduction funds.

13.80.085    Single-family residential reduced sewer rates.

13.80.090    Reserved – Multifamily reduced sewer rates.


13.80.010 Sewer charges established – Effective date.

There are hereby established and shall be collected from each user of sewer service provided by the city of Sequim revised charges as hereinafter provided. The charges hereby established shall apply to sewer service provided on and after July 1, 1999, and shall supersede all existing schedules of charges as of said date but shall not negate those charges in place for services received prior to July 1, 1999. Future rates may be provided for in a rate and fee ordinance which shall be codified. (Ord. 2010-023 Exh. A; Ord. 2000-015; Ord. 99-009 § 1)


13.80.020 Sewer billing classifications.

A. Classifications.

1. “Single-family residential” shall apply to detached and attached single-family dwelling units with individual water meters.

2. Duplex residential shall be billed at single-family residential rate per unit.

3. “Multifamily” shall mean any residential facility containing three or more dwelling units on the same meter, including but not limited to triplexes, apartment buildings, condominiums and mobile or manufactured home parks, but shall not include hotels, motels, or overnight RV facilities.

a. Beginning in FY 2018 adult care facilities shall be reclassified as multifamily and shall be billed at the multifamily rate per unit.

4. Mobile home parks units or condominiums on individual meters shall be billed at the single-family rate.

5. “Commercial” shall also include all nonresidential land uses which are not specifically itemized or defined as being included within another classification.

6. “Public authority” includes all public agencies and shall be billed at commercial rate.

7. Hotel/motel.

8. Overnight RV facilities with sewer hookups shall be billed at hotel/motel rate.

9. Industrial.

B. Other Definitions.

1. “City rates” are those which shall be charged to all properties connected to the sewer system which are located within the city limits of Sequim. “City rates” may include more than one rate if based on different classes of users.

2. “Cubic foot” (cf) equals approximately 7.48 gallons.

3. “Customer” shall mean the party contracting for sewer service.

4. “Rural rates” are those which shall be charged to all properties connected to the sewer system which are located outside the city limits of Sequim. If allowed, properties outside the UGA will be addressed by contract.

5. “Sewer base rate” is defined as the monthly minimum bill per unit. Charges for the other Sequim utilities will be listed separately on the utility bill.

6. “Summer rates” are defined as usage occurring during the months of May through October.

7. “Winter rates” are defined as usage occurring during the months of November through April of each year. (Ord. 2014-017 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 2010-023 Exh. A; Ord. 2000-015; Ord. 99-009 § 1)


13.80.030 Sewer rates and charges by classification (city rates).

No Free Service. The city will not furnish any service of the system to any customer whatsoever free of charge.

Sewer rates and charges shall be adopted as outlined below or as hereinafter adopted by resolution.

A. Single-Family Residential and Duplex.

1. Repealed by Ord. 2007-021.

2. Repealed by Ord. 2007-021.

3. The single-family residential or duplex standby rate shall be the same as for that single-family residential or duplex base city water charge specified in Chapter 13.84 SMC. Where a residential property is connected to sewer service but not to city-provided water service, the two-tier lower rate is not available. Standby rates are not available for sewer-only service.

4. Single-family rates shall be amended annually by rate and fee ordinance of the city council consisting of two volume tiers.

a. Winter water average 600 cf or fewer.

b. Winter water average greater than 600 cf.

B. Multifamily Residential.

1. Repealed by Ord. 2007-021.

2. Repealed by Ord. 2014-017.

3. Multifamily residential volume tiers shall be set at:

a. Winter water average 600 cf or fewer.

b. Winter water average greater than 600 cf.

4. Beginning in FY 2017 multifamily rates shall be set at 95 percent of the single-family rate.

C. Commercial and Public Authority. 

1. Repealed by Ord. 2007-021.

2. Persons, firms or corporations may, at their own expense, arrange to separate water which will be discharged into the sewer system from water which will not be so discharged and a separate meter shall be installed to measure the amount of water discharged for irrigation or landscaping purposes, etc. Any said irrigation meter shall conform to city standards and shall not be installed until a city permit has been issued for such installation. The installed meter shall be inspected by a representative of the Sequim public works director. The public works representative will then notify the treasurer’s office of the date, meter number, type, size, number of meter digits, location and customer name of the newly installed irrigation meter. The separate irrigation meter charge will then be addressed within the water rate schedule only.

3. Where a commercial property is connected to sewer service but not to water service, the director of public works shall determine the sewer volume to be charged on a case-by-case basis, using an estimated figure for water consumption to be charged in addition to the established base rate.

4. The commercial volume rate shall be set as follows:

a. Monthly water usage of 600 cf or fewer.

b. Monthly water usage of greater than 600 cubic feet.

5. Beginning in FY 2016 the commercial account shall be billed solely on the size of the installed meter and volume. All additional unit charges are removed.

6. Beginning in FY 2016 the commercial sewer base rate shall increase by one-half the difference between the current meter equivalent factor and 75 percent of the American Water Works Association (AWWA) meter equivalent factor based on three-fourths-inch meters, as shown in Table A, except that both five-eighths-inch meters and three-fourths-inch meter factors shall remain 1.00. 

Table A 

	AWWA Meter Factors	 

	Meter Size	 	Current Factor	AWWA Factor Based on 3/4	75% of AWWA Factor

	5/8- and 3/4-inch	 	1.00	1.00	1.00

	1-inch	 	1.33	1.67	1.25

	1-1/2-inch	 	2.15	3.33	2.50

	2-inch	 	3.14	5.33	4.00

	3-inch	 	5.78	10.00	7.50

7. Beginning in FY 2017 the commercial sewer base rate shall increase the remainder of the difference of the current meter equivalent factor to 75 percent of the full AWWA meter equivalent factor for three-fourths-inch meters, as shown in Table A, except that both five-eighths-inch meters and three-fourths-inch meter factors shall remain 1.00.

D. Hotel/Motel.

1. Repealed by Ord. 2007-021.

2. The overage rate will only apply to the balance of excess consumption after 600 cubic feet has been subtracted.

a. Beginning in FY 2017 hotel/motel shall be billed at 75 percent of the single-family residential rate per unit.

b. Beginning in 2017 the overage rate for excess consumption will only apply after 600 cubic feet per unit has been subtracted.

E. RV Sites with Sewer Hookups. Each permitted transient RV site located within the city limits will be charged at the hotel/motel sewer rate.

F. Industrial. Industrial users impacting the sewer system beyond personnel restroom facilities will be addressed separately by contract.

G. Other. Rates for swimming pools which empty to the Sequim wastewater treatment plant will be addressed on an individual basis by the city manager, public works director and treasurer with council confirmation of their recommendation. (Ord. 2015-017 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 2014-017 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 2011-007 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 2010-023 Exh. A; Ord. 2007-021 § 1; Ord. 2003-014 § 1; Ord. 2001-024 § 2; Ord. 2000-020; Ord. 2000-015; Ord. 2000-001 § 1; Ord. 99-020 § 1; Ord. 99-009 § 1)


13.80.040 Sewer rate sufficiency increases.

To meet the revenue requirements of the sewer utility fund for normal operating and maintenance expense, reserves for debt service and coverage ratios (as required by bond and loan covenants) and reserves for renewal and replacement of infrastructure and for other lawful purposes, the rates will be increased periodically. See additional general facility charges for new connections to the sewer system. General facility fees are used for expansion purposes and help defray costs to the long-time customer of the utility system. These rates may be further modified by a rate and fee ordinance. See Chapter 3.68 SMC. (Ord. 2014-017 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 2010-023 Exh. A; Ord. 2007-021 § 1; Ord. 2006-006 § 1; Ord. 2005-029 § 2; Ord. 2001-024; Ord. 2000-015; Ord. 99-009 § 1)


13.80.041 Single-family residential rates.

After January 1, 2011, the in-city single-family residential sewer rate shall be as set by a rate and fee resolution or ordinance. Where a residential property is connected to sewer service but not to city-provided water service, the two-tier lower rate is not available. (Ord. 2010-023 Exh. A; Ord. 2010-023 Exh. A)


13.80.050 Sewer rural rates.

Minimum rates for sewer service to customers located outside the current city limits shall be two times higher than the specified class base rate and usage fee charged inside the corporate limits of the city unless addressed under separate contract. Where a residential property is connected to sewer service but not to city-provided water service, the two-tier lower rate is not available. (Ord. 2010-023 Exh. A; Ord. 2000-015; Ord. 99-009 § 1)


13.80.060 Administration authority.

A. The finance director or his/her representative shall have authority under this chapter to adopt procedures necessary for the efficient and equitable administration of the residential volume-based sewer rate structure.

B. The public works director or his/her representative shall determine volume for equivalent residential units.

C. The director of the department of community development and the public works director shall determine the billing classification for any new sewer hookup application. (Ord. 2011-017 § 4 (Exh. A); Ord. 2010-023 Exh. A; Ord. 2000-015; Ord. 99-009 § 1)


13.80.070 Normal billing period.

The normal billing period for customers shall be a one-month cycle. During change of ownership, utility charges for periods of less than two months shall be prorated. (Ord. 2010-023 Exh. A; Ord. 2007-021 § 1; Ord. 2000-015; Ord. 99-009 § 1)


13.80.080 Dedicated source of sewer rate reduction funds.

A. The city council authorizes the finance officer or designee to utilize an amount up to one percent of the annual residential sewer revenue to fund a reduced sewer rates program set out herein, at the finance officer’s or designee’s discretion as designated herein. From these dedicated funds, the finance officer or designee may determine the sewer rate reduction percentage that may be applied to qualified applicants for the program year, based upon the estimated number of qualified applicants and the available funds.

B. The finance officer or designee may reserve a portion of the funds, referenced in subsection A of this section, to be used for qualified applicants who may become eligible for the program after the application deadline.

C. The city may contract with other governmental agencies or nonprofit agencies to implement the provisions of this section and SMC 13.80.085, and the reserved section SMC 13.80.090.

D. For the first year of the program’s existence, program implementation may be performed administratively if conducted uniformly and in compliance with the general intent of this section.

E. Once the dedicated source of funds has been exhausted or fully allocated, no new applications shall be approved, but the number of such applications shall be tabulated. (Ord. 2010-020 § 1 (Exh. A))


13.80.085 Single-family residential reduced sewer rates.

A. The city council may establish reduced sewer rates for specific customer classes as authorized by state law. The base rate for single-family residential sewer service supplied inside the city may be reduced by an amount not to exceed 50 percent for those customers who qualify under the following criteria:

1. Currently receives benefits from assistance programs as identified on the application for reduced utility rates and whose household has income and assets less than or equal to the minimum levels set by the city finance officer; and

2. Resides as a single occupant, head of household, or the spouse of the head of household in a single-family residential unit directly served by the sewer; and

3. Applicant is named on the bill or is the spouse of the person named on the bill.

4. Applicants whose water and sewer service charges are included in their housing payments shall not be eligible for reduced rates.

B. All applications must be renewed annually. Applications must be received by no later than November 30th of each year to apply for rate reductions for January usage of the following year. The credit shall not be retroactive and shall only be allowed from and after the date of approval for the program year. The city shall not be responsible for the failure of any qualified citizen to apply for reduced rates, and qualification without a completed and approved application shall not entitle any person to receive reduced rates.

C. Only one credit per utility shall be allowed for each billing period. Only one qualified person shall be allowed to accept and receive credits for each utility account. A qualified person shall not accept or receive credits for any residence that is not the qualified person’s primary residence.

D. Credits shall be applied to the utility bill as part of the utility billing process. No credit shall be redeemed for cash or otherwise be reimbursed to the qualified person in any manner except as specifically authorized in this section.

E. The finance officer or designee may make administrative adjustments for program eligibility and/or rate reduction percentages. Adjustments are typically made annually, prior to the renewal period. Administrative adjustments shall be applied uniformly to each recipient under this program.

F. The initial year of the program’s implementation may include revised application dates and other adjustments, which may be made administratively if conducted uniformly and within the general intent of this section.

G. The following acts are unlawful and subject to criminal punishment pursuant to Chapter 1.12 SMC:

1. Accepting or receiving any utility credit during or after any time in which the recipient is ineligible;

2. Providing any false information, including omitted information, on any application, form, or other document associated with determining eligibility to receive utility credit;

3. Failing to promptly, and no later than 14 days of a change, notify the city of any change that may affect continuing eligibility;

4. Failing to provide, within 14 days of a city request, proof of continuing eligibility for reduced rates;

5. If the city discovers any violation of these acts, the city will immediately terminate all future rate reduction credits and may seek reimbursement for loss to the city. Any applicant who has had their rate reduction credit terminated under this subsection shall be ineligible to re-apply. (Ord. 2010-020 § 1 (Exh. A))


13.80.090 Reserved – Multifamily reduced sewer rates.

Reserved. (Ord. 2010-020 § 1 (Exh. A))


Chapter 13.84 WATER RATES AND CHARGES

Sections:

13.84.010    Water charges established – Effective date.

13.84.020    Water billing classifications.

13.84.030    Water rates and charges by classification (city rates).

13.84.040    Water rural rates.

13.84.050    Administration authority.

13.84.060    Normal billing period.

13.84.070    Leak adjustments.

13.84.080    Dedicated source of water rate reduction funds.

13.84.085    Single-family residential reduced water rates.

13.84.090    Reserved.


13.84.010 Water charges established – Effective date.

There are hereby established and shall be collected from each user of water service provided by the city of Sequim revised charges as hereinafter provided. The charges hereby established shall apply to water service provided on and after January 1, 2008, and shall supersede all existing schedules of charges as of said date but shall not negate those charges in place for services received prior to January 1, 2008. These rates may hereafter be established by resolution. (Ord. 2007-020 § 1; Ord. 2000-016; Ord. 99-016 § 1)


13.84.020 Water billing classifications.

A. Classifications.

1. Single-family residential – shall apply to detached and attached single-family dwelling units with individual water meters.

2. Duplex residential shall be billed at single-family residential rate per unit.

3. Multifamily – shall mean any residential facility containing three or more dwelling units on the same meter, including but not limited to triplexes, apartment buildings, condominiums and mobile or manufactured home parks, but shall not include hotels, motels, or overnight RV facilities.

a. Beginning in FY 2017 adult care facilities shall be reclassified as multifamily and shall be billed at the multifamily rate per unit.

4. Mobile home parks units or condominiums on individual meters shall be billed at the single-family rate.

5. Commercial – shall also include all nonresidential land uses which are not specifically itemized or defined as being included within another classification.

6. Public authority includes all public agencies and shall be billed at commercial rate.

7. Hotel/motel.

8. Overnight RV facilities with sewer hookups shall be billed at hotel/motel rate.

9. Industrial.

B. Other Definitions.

1. “City rates” are those which shall be charged to all properties connected to the water system which are located within the city limits of Sequim.

2. “Cubic foot” (cf) equals approximately 7.48 gallons.

3. “Customer” shall mean the party contracting for water service.

4. “Rural rates” are those which shall be charged to all properties connected to the water system which are located outside the city limits of Sequim but within the city’s urban growth area. If allowed, properties outside the UGA will be addressed by contract.

5. “Water base rate” is defined as the monthly minimum bill per unit. Charges for the other Sequim utilities will be listed separately on the utility bill. (Ord. 2014-017 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 2000-016; Ord. 99-016 § 1)


13.84.030 Water rates and charges by classification (city rates).

No Free Service. The city will not furnish any service of the system to any customer whatsoever free of charge.

All volume rates for all accounts shall be set equally to match the single-family volume rates. 

A. Single-Family Residential and Duplex. The monthly water service for each single-family residential or each duplex unit will be amended annually by rate and fee ordinance of the city council consisting of three volume tiers beginning in FY 2015.

1. Monthly water usage of less than 601 cubic feet.

2. Monthly water usage of greater than 600 cubic feet.

3. Monthly water usage of greater than 1,200 cubic feet to be set 25 percent higher than the second tier.

B. Multifamily Residential.

1. The monthly water service for each multifamily residential unit will be amended annually by rate and fee ordinance of the city council consisting of three volume tiers.

2. The cubic foot consumption charge per unit shall be at the same rate per year as single-family residential. The overage rate will only apply to the balance of excess consumption after the total unit count multiplied by 600 cubic feet has been subtracted. For example, 10 units multiplied by 600 cubic feet equals 6,000 cubic feet. If the total consumption is 7,000 cubic feet, the over 600 cubic feet rate would only apply to the 1,000-cubic-foot excess.

a. Beginning in FY 2017 multifamily accounts will be billed at 95 percent of the single-family residential rate per unit.

C. Commercial and Public Authority.

1. The monthly water service base charge for each commercial business or public authority shall be set according to three-fourths-inch AWWA meter factors for the single-family base rate charge:

	Meter Size	AWWA Meter Equivalent Factor

	3/4-inch	1

	1-inch	1.67

	1-1/2-inch	3.33

	2-inch	5.33

	3-inch	10.00

2. The water service consumption charge for each commercial business or public authority shall be the same as for the first two volume tiers for single-family residential. No third volume tier applies for commercial accounts or public authority accounts.

D. Hotel/Motel.

1. The monthly water service charge for each permitted hotel/motel unit or pad shall be amended annually by rate and fee ordinance as set by city council.

2. The overage rate will only apply to the balance of excess consumption after the total unit count multiplied by 600 cubic feet has been subtracted.

3. Beginning in FY 2017 hotel/motel accounts shall be billed at 75 percent of the single-family residential rate per unit. 

E. RV Sites with Water Hookups. Each permitted transient RV site located within the city limits will be charged at the hotel/motel water rate per unit or pad.

F. Industrial. Industrial users impacting the water system beyond normal personnel restroom facilities will be addressed separately by contract.

G. Other.

1. Rates for swimming pools will be addressed on an individual basis.

2. Contract rates will be approved on a case-by-case basis with council approval. (Ord. 2015-017 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 2014-017 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 2007-020 § 2; Ord. 2006-011 § 1; Ord. 2006-004 § 1; Ord. 2005-029 § 2; Ord. 2001-016; Ord. 2000-016; Ord. 99-016 § 1)


13.84.040 Water rural rates.

Minimum rates for water service to customers located outside the current city limits shall be one-and-one-half times higher than the specified class base rate and usage fee charged per unit inside the corporate limits of the city (or one-and-one-half times the total water bill as computed by city rates) unless addressed under separate contract. (Ord. 2000-016; Ord. 99-016 § 1)


13.84.050 Administration authority.

The city exercising authority through the city manager or his/her designee shall:

A. Have authority under this chapter to adopt procedures and make interpretations necessary for the efficient and equitable administration of this chapter;

B. Make leak adjustments. (Ord. 2000-016; Ord. 99-016 § 1)


13.84.060 Normal billing period.

The normal billing period for customers shall be a one-month cycle. During change of ownership, utility charges for periods of less than one month shall be prorated. (See standby charges which still apply during building or unit vacancy when the water is shut off and not disconnected.) (Ord. 2011-007 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 2007-020 § 3; Ord. 2000-016; Ord. 99-016 § 1)


13.84.070 Leak adjustments.

A. When excessive meter registration is caused by a broken or leaking private water line and is verified to be leaking as a result of accidental damage or natural deterioration of the same, and not as a result of abuse or willful neglect, an adjustment may be made upon completion of an application provided by the city. Attach copy of customer-paid repair bill to application.

B. During any one-year time period, an adjustment can only be applied to one billing period, for one month in the case of monthly billing and for two months in the case of bimonthly billing after an on-site inspection and verification of repairs has been made.

C. The city shall have the discretion to make a reasonable and equitable reduction to a utility account for customers meeting all requirements of this section, on a case-by-case basis.

D. The customer shall be required to pay the base rate plus an average over 12 months, or fraction thereof, of the normal water consumption plus at least 25 percent of the applicable overage rate for all water which was lost by reason of the leak.

E. If approved, the city shall make this rate adjustment to the customer’s account after verification of leakage or water system failure; city inspection of water meter and water system, where applicable; and written verification that corrective repairs have been made. All repairs shall occur within 30 days of application to the city.

F. The decision of the city manager to grant or deny a rate adjustment shall be final. (Ord. 2000-016; Ord. 99-016 § 1)


13.84.080 Dedicated source of water rate reduction funds.

The city council may establish a dedicated source of water rate reduction funds in the same manner as provided for sewer in SMC 13.80.080. (Ord. 2010-020 § 2 (Exh. A))


13.84.085 Single-family residential reduced water rates.

The city council may establish reduced water rates for specific customer classes as authorized by state law. The base rate for single-family residential water service supplied inside the city may be reduced by an amount not to exceed 50 percent for those customers who qualify under the same criteria and with the same restrictions and conditions as provided for reduced sewer rates in SMC 13.80.085. (Ord. 2010-020 § 2 (Exh. A))


13.84.090 Reserved – Multifamily reduced water rates.

Reserved by Ord. 2010-020. (Ord. 2010-020 § 2 (Exh. A))


Chapter 13.92 WATER SHUT-OFF,  RECONNECTION (TURN-ON) AND WATER STANDBY CHARGES*

Sections:

13.92.010    Charges established – Effective date.

13.92.020    Water system shut-off charges established.

13.92.030    Water reconnection (turn-on) charges established.

13.92.040    Water standby charges.

13.92.050    Nonstandard operating hours.

13.92.060    Water system shut-off – Nonpayment.

13.92.070    Administration authority.

*Prior legislation: Ord. 99-018.


13.92.010 Charges established – Effective date.

There are hereby established charges for customer-requested water shut-off, water reconnection, read and leave-on, and water standby provided on and after October 1, 2000, and shall supersede all existing schedules of charges as of said date but shall not negate those charges in place for services received prior to October 1, 2000. (Ord. 2000-023; Ord. 2000-018; Ord. 2000-010 § 1)


13.92.020 Water system shut-off charges established.

Water shut-off service which involves water service being shut off at customer request shall be charged $22.00. (Ord. 2000-023; Ord. 2000-018; Ord. 2000-010 § 1)


13.92.030 Water reconnection (turn-on) charges established.

Water turn-on charges which involve a customer’s water service being turned on by request shall be $22.00. (Ord. 2000-023; Ord. 2000-018; Ord. 2000-010 § 1)


13.92.040 Water standby charges.

Water standby charges are to cover the continued services even though a building may remain empty and shall be amended annually by rate and fee ordinance of the city council. (Ord. 2014-017 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 2001-016; Ord. 2000-023; Ord. 2000-018; Ord. 2000-010 § 1)


13.92.050 Nonstandard operating hours.

A 1.5 rate factor will be applied to related charges for service which is provided during nonstandard city public works business hours. Standard public works business hours include service between 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, excluding holidays. (Ord. 2000-023; Ord. 2000-018; Ord. 2000-010 § 1)


13.92.060 Water system shut-off – Nonpayment.

See Chapter 3.52 SMC. (Ord. 2000-023; Ord. 2000-018; Ord. 2000-010 § 1)


13.92.070 Administration authority.

The city exercising authority through the city manager or his/her designee shall have authority under this chapter to adopt procedures and make interpretations necessary for the efficient and equitable administration of this chapter. (Ord. 2000-023; Ord. 2000-018; Ord. 2000-010 § 1)


Chapter 13.96 ENFORCEMENT

Sections:

13.96.010    Violation – Penalty.

13.96.020    Enforcement of existing requirements.


13.96.010 Violation – Penalty.

Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of the ordinance codified in this division is subject to the penalties and provisions as set forth in Chapter 1.13 SMC – Code Enforcement. (Ord. 2019-013 (Exh. B); Ord. 504 § 9, 1986)


13.96.020 Enforcement of existing requirements.

All rights of action under existing ordinances which the ordinance codified in this division in any way supersedes or repeals, whether action has been commenced thereon or not, shall proceed without being in any manner affected by the passage of the ordinance codified in this division. (Ord. 504 § 11, 1986)


Chapter 13.98 DEVELOPER REIMBURSEMENT COLLECTION AGREEMENTS

Sections:

13.98.010    Purpose and authorization.

13.98.020    Definitions.

13.98.030    Applicability.

13.98.040    Application for developer reimbursement collection agreement.

13.98.050    Preliminary determinations.

13.98.060    Preliminary determination notice.

13.98.065    Future services.

13.98.070    Developer reimbursement collection agreement.

13.98.080    Recording – Effective date – Payment of charge – Lien for nonpayment.

13.98.085    Final determination notice.

13.98.090    Segregation.

13.98.095    Relief from charges.

13.98.100    Term of developer reimbursement collection agreements.

13.98.110    Removal of unauthorized connections or taps.

13.98.120    Defective work.

13.98.130    City administrative fees.

13.98.140    Payment of developer reimbursement charge.

13.98.150    Appeal.

13.98.160    Enforcement of developer reimbursement obligations.

13.98.170    City creation of or participation in developer reimbursement collection agreement.

13.98.180    Severability.


13.98.010 Purpose and authorization.

A. The city council may contract with private developers who use private funds to construct public utility and/or street system improvements pursuant to Chapters 35.72 and 35.91 RCW.

1. The purpose of this chapter is to establish a uniform methodology and process for the administration of reimbursement contracts applied for after June 1, 2010, for developers in circumstances where a developer uses private funds to construct a public utility and/or street system improvement(s) and desires to be compensated by property owners benefited by the improvements.

2. If Chapters 35.72 and/or 35.91 RCW are amended in any manner as to make this chapter inconsistent or to create a conflict, the appropriate statute shall control.

B. The city council is authorized, but not required, to accept, review, and/or approve proposed developer reimbursement collection agreements. This process is voluntary, both on the part of the developer and the city.

C. The city manager is authorized to sign a developer reimbursement collection agreement on behalf of the city, after the agreement has been reviewed by the city attorney and approved by the city council.

D. The provisions of this chapter are in addition to and intended to supplement any other requirements contained elsewhere in the Sequim Municipal Code. (Ord. 2010-009 § 2)


13.98.020 Definitions.

A. “Adjacent” means abutting or having frontage upon the sides or margins of any public roads, streets, rights-of-way or easements in which street system improvements are installed or directly connecting to street and/or utility system improvements.

B. “Benefit” means:

1. Street improvements that would be required for subsequent developers within the reimbursement area, but who do not need to install those improvements because the improvements already exist;

2. Actual and/or physical use of utility system improvements.

C. “Charge” or “charges” means an equitable pro rata charge to be paid by an owner of property within the reimbursement area for the cost of private construction of public street and/or utility system improvements made pursuant to a developer reimbursement collection agreement.

D. “Reimbursement area” means that area that includes all parcels of real property that will benefit, as determined by the public works director, from the installation of public utility and/or street system improvements. For streets, the reimbursement area includes those parcels that are adjacent to street system improvements and that would require similar improvements upon development. For utilities, the reimbursement area includes parcels that are likely to require direct connection to or service by utility system improvements constructed by a developer.

E. “Cost of construction” is the sum of the direct construction costs incurred to construct the street and/or utility system improvements plus indirect costs, which are limited to the city latecomer administrative fee (SMC 13.98.130) and developer administrative costs (subsection G of this section). “Direct construction costs” include but are not limited to all related design services, engineering, surveying, legal services, bonding costs, environment mitigation, relocation and/or new construction of private utilities as required by the city (i.e., power, telephone, and cable), relocation and/or installation of street lights, relocation and/or installation of signage, acquisition of right-of-way and/or easements, government agency fees, testing services, inspection, plan review and approval, labor, materials, equipment rental, and contractor and/or subcontractor fees or charges.

F. “Developer” means the individual or entity that contracts with the city for the construction of street and/or utility system improvements, where such improvements are a requirement for development of real property owned by the entity or individual.

G. “Developer administrative costs” means all indirect costs incurred by the developer in the creation and execution of a developer reimbursement collection agreement and managing the project, such as office supplies, mailings, clerical services, telephone expenses, accounting expenses, project oversight, and the like. Administrative costs shall not exceed three percent of all direct construction costs.

H. “Developer extension agreement” means an agreement between the developer and the city prior to the construction of required city improvements.

I. “Developer reimbursement collection agreement (latecomer’s contract)” means a written contract between the city and one or more developers in which the contract provides partial reimbursement for cost of construction of street system improvements and/or utility system improvements to the developer by owners of property who are likely to utilize the improvements and who did not contribute to the original cost of construction. References to “agreement” in this chapter means a developer reimbursement collection agreement.

J. “Direct connection” means a service connection, owned and maintained by the property owner and not the city, from existing or new utility improvements to the property owner’s system as may be required by SMC Titles 13 and 15 as enacted or as amended.

K. “Segregation” means a large parcel, upon which is levied a reimbursement charge, is divided into smaller parcels. The associated charge is divided among the smaller parcels in accordance with the provisions of the original means of allocating the reimbursement charge.

L. “Street system improvements” means public street and alley improvements made in existing or subsequently dedicated or granted rights-of-way or easements and any associated improvements, including but not limited to acquisition of right-of-way and/or easements, design, engineering, surveying, inspection, grading, paving, installation of curbs, gutters, pedestrian facilities, street lighting, bike lanes, and traffic control devices, relocation and/or construction of private utilities as required by the city (such as power, telephone, and cable), relocation and/or construction of street lights, traffic control devices, signage, and other similar improvements.

M. “Utility system improvements” means public water, sewer and storm drainage system improvements, including but not limited to the acquisition of rights-of-way and/or easements, design, engineering, surveying, inspection, testing, connection fees, and installation of improvements, which may include increased pipe size, as required by the city and includes all appurtenances. (Ord. 2010-009 § 2)


13.98.030 Applicability.

A. This chapter is intended to apply to all street system improvements and all utility system improvements where the construction of such improvements are the result of a city of Sequim ordinance or ordinances that require such improvements as a prerequisite to property development. A valid developer extension agreement must be in place. Street system improvements shall be limited to those improvements set forth in the developer extension agreement as required by Chapter 35.72 RCW.

B. Developer reimbursement collection agreements are allowed only for those improvements constructed within city limits. For the purposes of this chapter, improvements constructed or properties benefited within the city’s urban growth area may be eligible for or subject to a reimbursement agreement if there is a valid interlocal agreement between the city and Clallam County in place at the time of contracting that allows improvement construction and reimbursement.

C. Only projects in which the amount exceeds $50,000, as determined by the public works director, shall be eligible for a developer reimbursement collection agreement.

D. The improvement costs associated with the developer’s abutting right-of-way and transitions shall not be included in or eligible for a developer reimbursement collection agreement. An exception to this provision may be granted by the public works director when vertical grade and alignment changes are required to promote traffic safety and the public works director recommends inclusion in or application for a developer reimbursement collection agreement.

E. If the applicant takes advantage of impact fee credits or general facilities charge credits or other similar credits or offsets that the city has in place to assist in community development, those credits shall reduce the costs sought for reimbursement.

F. The developer(s) may be reimbursed only for that portion of the allowed costs that did not benefit the developer(s). (Ord. 2010-009 § 2)


13.98.040 Application for developer reimbursement collection agreement.

A. Any developer using private funds to construct street system improvements and/or utility system improvements in the city or within the city’s utility service area may apply for a developer reimbursement collection agreement in order to recover a fair pro rata share of the costs of construction from other property owners that will later derive a benefit from the street and/or utility system improvements made by developer.

B. If there is more than one developer for a single project, all developers seeking reimbursement must join in the application for that project. Any developer not joined shall have that developer’s contribution excluded from the calculation of the reimbursement charge and shall not be entitled to reimbursement. Developer(s), at the time of application, must include a signed, written statement from any developer that does not intend to seek reimbursement.

C. The application for a developer reimbursement collection agreement shall be made within 30 days after the date street and/or utility system improvements have been accepted by the city. The developer shall test all portions and elements of the improvements as specified by the city to demonstrate the satisfactory construction of the improvements prior to acceptance. “Acceptance by the city” shall mean, for purposes of this section, the date the improvements are conveyed to the city by a deed of conveyance or other equivalent written document. Application shall be made on forms prepared by the planning and public works department and shall be accompanied by the city base fee set forth in SMC 13.98.130. The application shall contain the following information, which shall be approved by a state of Washington licensed engineer:

1. A legal description of the developer’s property.

2. A legal description of the properties within the developer’s proposed developer reimbursement area together with the name and address of the owners of each property as shown in the records of the auditor’s office of Clallam County.

3. Vicinity maps of developer’s property.

4. The developer’s proposed reimbursement area and general location of the street and/or utility system improvements.

5. Itemized costs, dated and approved by a state of Washington licensed engineer for the final cost of construction evidenced by actual invoices and receipts.

6. The developer’s proposed allocation of the final cost of construction to the individual properties within the proposed reimbursement area and the method used for such allocation.

D. Within 30 days of the planning and public works department receiving the application for a developer reimbursement collection agreement, the public works director or designee will provide the applicant written notice of whether the application is complete and, if incomplete, what must be done for the application to be considered complete. The applicant will have no more than 30 days from the date of the written notice to respond and provide the information required to complete the application or, if the applicant cannot submit the required information within the 30-day period, the applicant shall provide the city a written explanation of why they cannot provide the information within the designated time period and a date that the requested information will be submitted. In his/her discretion, the public works director or designee may grant the applicant one extension of not more than 60 days to submit the required information if the decision is supported by written evidence. If the applicant fails to meet the foregoing time frame, the application shall be rejected as untimely.

E. The public works director or designee shall establish procedures and/or checklists for processing applications and complying with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2010-009 § 2)


13.98.050 Preliminary determinations.

The public works department shall review the developer’s proposed preliminary reimbursement area and the preliminary charge for real property benefited by the street and/or utility system improvements. The public works director may revise or modify the developer’s proposed reimbursement area and charge, or formulate another reimbursement area and charge. The public works director shall provide the developer with the preliminary reimbursement area and the preliminary charge upon completion. Formulation, review, and modification shall be based on the criteria specified in subsections A through F of this section.

A. Whether the properties directly benefit from the improvements.

B. The likelihood that benefited property will be developed within 15 years or the maximum time allowed by statute (Chapter 35.72 RCW for streets, Chapter 35.91 RCW for utilities) from the date of recording of the developer reimbursement collection agreement.

C. The likelihood that at the time of development of the benefited property, the property will not be required to install similar street and/or utility system improvements because these improvements were already installed by the developer.

D. For street system improvements, benefited parcels that are adjacent to the street system improvements. Parcels not adjacent to the street system improvements shall not be included in the reimbursement area.

E. For utility system improvements, the likelihood (1) that the improvements will be tapped into or used by direct connections or connections to laterals or branches by properties within the reimbursement area, and that the improvements do not constitute mainline extensions to be owned and maintained by the city, or (2) that the properties will receive a special benefit from the utility system improvements including but not limited to pump stations, sewer lift stations, and additional utility pipe depth to accommodate future utility expansion.

F. An equitable allocation of the final cost of construction among the properties within the reimbursement area, so that each pays for benefits attributable to those improvements. The method or combination of methods used to calculate the allocation of the charge may be front footage, number of units, square footage, the zone and termini method, or other recognized methods of assessment authorized by Chapter 35.44 RCW for local improvement districts. The public works director is not required to use the same method that the applicant proposes for the allocation of costs. (Ord. 2010-009 § 2)


13.98.060 Preliminary determination notice.

A. The preliminary reimbursement area and the preliminary charge provided by the public works department shall be sent by certified mail to the property owners of record within the preliminary reimbursement area in accordance with Chapter 35.72 RCW, as from time to time amended.

1. If the city is participating in the project as a developer, the city shall send out notices.

2. If the project is funded solely by the applicant, the applicant shall send out notices on forms provided by the city. The applicant shall provide the city with a notarized affidavit providing proof of mailing within five days of mailing.

B. The city council has the authority to determine whether to enter into a developer reimbursement collection agreement pursuant to SMC 13.98.010(B), which includes the right to adopt, reject, or modify the reimbursement area and charge.

C. The applicant or any property owner within the preliminary reimbursement area may, in writing within 20 days of mailing the notice, request a hearing to be held before the city council to contest the preliminary reimbursement area and preliminary charge.

1. The city council, by ordinance or voice vote, may delegate a hearings officer to hold the requisite public hearing and establish a record, together with a recommendation for the city council.

2. Notice of the hearing shall be given to all property owners within the preliminary reimbursement area, and the hearing shall be conducted as soon as is reasonably practical.

3. The city council may adopt or reject the recommendations from the public works director, or the hearings officer, if applicable, in whole or in part or it may render its own findings and conclusions.

4. The city council’s determination of the reimbursement area and the charge for each parcel shall be final.

D. If the preliminary determination of reimbursement area boundaries and charges is amended, which raises any charge or includes previously omitted property, a new notice of reimbursement area boundaries and charges shall be given as in the case of an original notice. In any renotification, property owners who received the original notice and whose charges were not raised, but did not request a hearing, shall be deemed to have waived any right to a hearing. Requests for a hearing on any amendments to the reimbursement area boundaries or any increased charge shall be processed in the same manner as in the case of an original hearing.

E. In the event no written request for a hearing is timely received as required, the public works director’s recommendation of the reimbursement area and charge shall be presented to the city council. The council’s determination of the reimbursement area and charge shall be final. (Ord. 2010-009 § 2)


13.98.065 Future services.

A. Preliminary or final approval of a developer reimbursement collection agreement shall not be construed to vest or grant the right to the extension or allocation of utility service to properties affected by the developer reimbursement collection agreement.

B. Payment of infrastructure improvements and/or payment of reimbursement charges, without actual connection from the property to be served to the system, shall not be construed to vest or grant the right to the extension or allocation of utility service to properties affected by the developer reimbursement collection agreement. (Ord. 2010-009 § 2)


13.98.070 Developer reimbursement collection agreement.

A. If approved by the city council and based upon the city council’s determination of the reimbursement area and charge, the city council shall direct the city manager to enter into and execute a developer reimbursement collection agreement. The planning and public works department shall prepare and give to the applicant a developer reimbursement collection agreement for execution. The agreement must be signed by both parties within 60 days of receiving council direction.

B. Upon completion and acceptance of construction, the system(s) shall become the property of the city. The city may charge and receive rates and fees, in accordance with the city’s established rates, for each utility system used.

C. Improvements shall be accepted only in accordance with the terms of the associated developer extension agreement. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to relieve a developer from the duties associated with the developer extension agreement.

D. Any modification to the developer reimbursement collection agreement, including amendment, rescission, or assignment in any manner, shall be in writing and signed by an authorized person for the party to be charged. The agreement shall be binding to and for the benefit of all successors and/or assigns to this agreement.

E. Developer reimbursement collection agreements are controlled by the version of this chapter attached to the agreement entitled “Developer Reimbursement Collection Agreement Ordinance – Exhibit C.” (Ord. 2010-009 § 2)


13.98.080 Recording – Effective date – Payment of charge – Lien for nonpayment.

A. The developer’s right to reimbursement charges shall be effective as of the date of recording. The developer understands that any development within the reimbursement area that occurs prior to the date of recording shall not be subject to reimbursement charges, nor shall the city be liable for any such charges.

B. Any property described in the recorded application summary shall be subject to the charge after it has been approved by the city pursuant to this chapter.

1. Property owners who do not develop their property to the extent necessary to trigger the charges shall not be required to pay reimbursement charges. For streets, if a property owner, upon development, would not have been required to install similar improvements on which the charge is based, no payment shall be due. For utilities, if a property owner does not make a direct connection to the utility system upon which the charge is based, no payment shall be due.

2. If the developer is reimbursed for the cost of the improvements prior to the expiration of the period specified in the agreement, the agreement immediately terminates.

3. There is no guarantee that the developer will be reimbursed for any funds expended.

C. The developer reimbursement collection agreement shall be recorded by the developer with the Clallam County auditor within 30 days of the agreement’s final execution. The developer shall provide the city with a copy of the properly recorded agreement within 15 days of recording. No charges shall be collected prior to the city receiving a copy of the recorded agreement. The city shall not be liable for any charges that may be due but not collected during the time between recording and receipt of proof of recording.

D. The city shall not issue or approve a building permit or similar development permit, nor grant permission to use water, stormwater, or sewer service, unless the city has received full payment of the charge applicable to the property connecting to or using the street and/or utility system improvements constructed by developer; if the developer reimbursement collection agreement’s validity is being challenged, the city reserves the right to issue a permit, or give approval or permission without liability or prejudice to the city and without prejudicing the developer’s rights or remedies under this chapter, at law, or in equity. The city will notify the developer in writing of its decision not to collect a reimbursement charge and the reason(s) for its decision within 30 days of its determination.

E. If improvements are made to a property within the reimbursement area without payment of a charge otherwise due and without challenging the validity of the developer reimbursement collection agreement, the amount of such charge shall be a binding obligation upon the owner of record (and successors) of the affected property. Any city liability resulting from the city’s failure to collect a charge not challenged under subsection D of this section shall be limited to the amount of the charge that should have been collected.

F. Failure by a property owner to pay the charge due within 180 days of notice to this effect shall entitle the developer to pursue any remedy available at law or in equity. (Ord. 2010-009 § 2)


13.98.085 Final determination notice.

After the agreement is executed and recorded, final notice must be sent to all property owners within the reimbursement area. The final notice shall be implemented as set forth in SMC 13.98.060(A). There is no right to a public hearing in the final notice. (Ord. 2010-009 § 2)


13.98.090 Segregation.

A. The public works director or designee shall, upon the request of any property owner within the reimbursement area, segregate the reimbursement charge. The segregation shall be based upon the same factors applied when the charges were originally established, pursuant to SMC 13.98.050. The property owner seeking segregation of the charge shall pay an administrative fee to the city of Sequim based upon a segregation fee schedule to be established by the planning and public works department.

B. Properties derived from the parcel that is subject to the reimbursement charge shall be subject to that portion of the charge as determined by the public works director or designee. (Ord. 2010-009 § 2)


13.98.095 Relief from charges.

A. The city, through its designated agency, may relieve a parcel of a reimbursement charge if the property has a benefit from either (but not both) of two similar facilities. Relief shall be based upon sound engineering and policy justifications as to which facility(ies) directly benefit and/or are utilized by the parcel. Absent such justifications, the city shall give the applicant requesting relief the choice of facilities to utilize. The charge due shall be that charge associated with the utilized facility. The city shall provide notice to the developer within 30 days of relieving the parcel of the reimbursement charge.

B. In the event that a parcel is relieved from the reimbursement charge, the city shall not be liable for failure to collect the charge. (Ord. 2010-009 § 2)


13.98.100 Term of developer reimbursement collection agreements.

A. Each developer reimbursement collection agreement shall be valid for a period not to exceed 15 years or the maximum amount of time allowed by statute as enacted at the time of the agreement from the date of its recording.

B. Extension of a developer reimbursement collection agreement shall be allowed only when the city’s action, such as a moratorium, phasing ordinance, concurrency designation, or other similar action, prevents making application for or approval of any new development within the reimbursement area for a minimum of six consecutive months. If an extension is granted, the agreement must specify the duration of the extension and must be recorded pursuant to and in accordance with SMC 13.98.080(C) prior to the city collecting any charges. (Ord. 2010-009 § 2)


13.98.110 Removal of unauthorized connections or taps.

A. Whenever any tap or connection is made into any utility improvement without payment of the charge being made as required by this chapter, the public works department is authorized to remove and disconnect, or cause to be removed and disconnected, such unauthorized tap or connection including all connecting tile or pipe located in the right-of-way and to dispose of such unauthorized material without liability.

B. The owner of the property where the unauthorized connection is located shall be liable for all costs and expenses of any type incurred to remove, disconnect, and dispose of the unauthorized tap or connection. The city reserves the right to collect for the costs and expenses related to an unauthorized connection, and assertion of this right is a separate and distinct matter from any right that the developer may assert in another proceeding. (Ord. 2010-009 § 2)


13.98.120 Defective work.

The developer shall be responsible for all defective work pursuant to the terms of the developer extension agreement. The city retains all rights and remedies available under the developer extension agreement. (Ord. 2010-009 § 2)


13.98.130 City administrative fees.

A. The city shall charge for processing developer reimbursement collection agreements a base fee as set by resolution. To the base fee shall be added one percent of the cost of construction. The base fee shall be paid at the time of application.

B. Further, for every separate parcel of property within the reimbursement area as approved by the city council, a parcel fee shall be added to the base fee. This fee and the one percent cost of construction fee shall be paid prior to execution of the agreement.

C. The base fee and the parcel fee shall be adjusted annually and shall be set by resolution. The base fee and parcel fee(s) are nonrefundable.

D. The base fee, parcel fee(s), and one percent cost of construction fee shall be included in construction and administration costs for the purposes of developing the reimbursement charge. (Ord. 2010-009 § 2)


13.98.140 Payment of developer reimbursement charge.

A. Each charge shall be due in its entirety upon connection to or use of a street and/or utility system improvement by a property subject to a charge, and shall be paid to the city in one lump sum as set out in the agreement until date of payment. The city will pay over to developer any reimbursement charges within 60 days of receipt.

B. The developer, successors, and/or assigns shall provide the public works director and the finance director with current contact and mailing information in writing at least every two years from the agreement execution date for the duration of the agreement. Failure to provide current contact and mailing information within 60 days of the specified time may result in forfeiture of any funds presently due or due in the future.

C. In the event funds are forfeited, the city may collect any funds due and must deposit those funds in the appropriate capital fund. The city has no obligation to seek out, identify, or otherwise determine the appropriate recipient of any collected funds.

D. When the charge for any property has been paid in full, the public works director or designee shall prepare a certification of payment and release that will release that property from charges associated with the developer reimbursement collection agreement. Recording of the certification of payment and release at the Clallam County auditor’s office is the responsibility of the property owner to be released. The property owner must provide the city with a copy of the properly recorded release within 15 days of recording.

E. If payment of the reimbursement charge is made to someone other than the city prior to recording the agreement, the city will require proof of payment in the form of a written and signed release from the beneficiary and proof of the recorded release before allowing connection to or use of any system.

F. The city shall not be involved in enforcing private payment arrangements or mediating payment dispute between parties. (Ord. 2010-009 § 2)


13.98.150 Appeal.

With the exception of determination of the preliminary reimbursement area and preliminary charge as provided by SMC 13.98.060(B), a developer may appeal the interpretation and/or decisions of the public works department concerning any aspect of this chapter pursuant to Chapter 7.16 RCW. (Ord. 2010-009 § 2)


13.98.160 Enforcement of developer reimbursement obligations.

A. In processing and imposing obligations in this chapter for developer reimbursement, the city in no way guarantees payment, or enforceability of charges, or enforceability of the developer reimbursement collection agreement, or the amount(s) charged against persons or property within the reimbursement area, nor will the city offices or finances be used for enforcement or collection of any obligations beyond those duties specifically undertaken by the city as set out in the agreement. It shall be the developer’s obligation to take whatever authorized means are available to enforce payment of reimbursement charges; and developers are authorized to take such actions. The city shall not be responsible for locating any beneficiary or survivor entitled to any benefits by or through a developer reimbursement collection agreement.

B. Any funds collected under this chapter that are undeliverable to the developer after 60 days from the expiration of the developer reimbursement collection agreement may be forfeited and deposited into the city’s capital fund pursuant to SMC 13.98.140(C). (Ord. 2010-009 § 2)


13.98.170 City creation of or participation in developer reimbursement collection agreement.

A. Streets. The city may create or participate in a street improvement reimbursement agreement as a developer where the city has fully or partially funded the financing of the street improvements pursuant to Chapter 35.72 RCW.

B. Utilities. The city may participate in a utility improvement reimbursement agreement as a developer where the city has contributed to the financing of utility improvements pursuant to Chapter 35.91 RCW. (Ord. 2010-009 § 2)


13.98.180 Severability.

If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this chapter or its application to any person or circumstance is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order or judgment shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of the remainder of any part of this title. To this end, the provisions of each clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this law are declared severable. (Ord. 2010-009 § 2)


Chapter 13.100 UTILITY EXTENSIONS

Sections:

13.100.010    Extensions – Where to be constructed.

13.100.020    Approval of plans.

13.100.030    Cost to be borne by applicant.

13.100.040    Costs – Inspection deposit.

13.100.050    Connection – Testing.

13.100.060    Proof of securing of easements required.

13.100.070    Developer to obtain all permits.

13.100.080    Developer to provide insurance.

13.100.090    Performance bond.

13.100.100    Transfer of title to city.

13.100.110    Extension to be completed within one year.

13.100.120    City costs to be borne by developer.

13.100.130    Conformance with other ordinances.

13.100.140    Violation – Penalty.


13.100.010 Extensions – Where to be constructed.

All extensions to the existing sanitary sewers, storm sewers and water mains of the city shall be constructed only upon public streets or alleys of the city or upon public streets over which the city has recorded easements for such utility lines. (Ord. 278 § 1, 1973)


13.100.020 Approval of plans.

Proposed extensions of utility lines shall be constructed and installed in accordance with plans prepared by a licensed civil or sanitary engineer and such plans must be approved by the city’s engineer. All such extensions must be installed across the property being served in accordance with the requirements of the city engineer; provided, however, the city council may waive this requirement where the utility involved can never, under any circumstances, be extended beyond the property being served.

Construction and all other matters shall be approved by the city prior to construction. (Ord. 278 § 2, 1973)


13.100.030 Cost to be borne by applicant.

The actual cost of construction of extensions and appurtenances, including fire hydrants, manholes and valves shall be borne by the persons requesting the extensions. (Ord. 278 § 3, 1973)


13.100.040 Costs – Inspection deposit.

A. Persons obtaining extensions of the city sanitary sewers, storm sewers or water mains shall pay the city’s engineering costs incurred in reviewing the plans, consultations concerning the city’s requirements, inspection of the work and administration of the extension of the utility system. An inspection and engineering fee deposit shall be paid to the city at the time application for the extension is made. The deposit shall be in an amount equal to $0.10 per lineal foot of each utility under consideration as shown in the construction plans with a minimum deposit of $50.00 for each application.

B. Before the city will accept the completed extension, the applicant shall pay all of the city’s engineering costs that exceed the engineering and inspection fee deposit and if the city’s actual engineering and inspection expenses are less than the deposit the difference shall be refunded to the applicant. (Ord. 278 § 4, 1973)


13.100.050 Connection – Testing.

All connections to the existing system and all testing of the lines shall be made in the presence of the city’s engineer and/or his authorized representative. (Ord. 278 § 5, 1973)


13.100.060 Proof of securing of easements required.

Proof that the applicant has secured any required easements shall be delivered to the city prior to commencing construction. (Ord. 278 § 6, 1973)


13.100.070 Developer to obtain all permits.

The developer shall obtain all necessary permits and approvals from any governmental agencies concerned and provide the city with a copy of all permits. (Ord. 278 § 7, 1973)


13.100.080 Developer to provide insurance.

The developer agrees to provide liability and property damage insurance in the amounts determined by the city and to provide the city with written evidence of the insurance and its continuation and naming the city as an insured. (Ord. 278 § 8, 1973)


13.100.090 Performance bond.

A. The applicant shall furnish to the city a performance bond on that portion of the extension constructed on streets, alleys or dedicated easements in an amount equal to the city engineer’s estimated cost prior to construction. The performance bond shall be for the purpose of:

1. Guaranteeing satisfactory construction of the extension on public rights-of-way;

2. Benefiting all persons furnishing labor and materials claiming under the Public Work Lien Statutes or the Mechanic’s and Materialman’s Lien Statutes of the state.

B. The applicant shall also furnish a warranty maintenance bond in an amount to be determined by the city engineer prior to acceptance of the extension, guaranteeing all materials, equipment and labor for a period of one year from acceptance of the work by the city. (Ord. 278 § 9, 1973)


13.100.100 Transfer of title to city.

Upon completion of the construction and upon its approval, prior to the acceptance thereof by the city council, title to the system shall be transferred to the city in a form approved or furnished by the city, together with a certified statement as to the total construction cost, unit prices, and a list of all materials and manufacturers thereof as installed in the construction, as-built drawings and thereafter such extension shall be subject to the sole control, use and operation of the city. The system shall not be used for any purpose until accepted by the city. (Ord. 278 § 10, 1973)


13.100.110 Extension to be completed within one year.

The extension shall be complete and accepted within one year of the date of application. If the extension is not completed and accepted within one year from the date of application, then the applicant’s rights shall cease and he shall make new or amended application and pay the additional administrative, legal, engineering and inspection costs involved, all as determined by the city council. (Ord. 278 § 11, 1973)


13.100.120 City costs to be borne by developer.

Any costs reasonably incurred by the city for legal services, accounting services and other services incident to the receipt, study and approval or rejection of this application shall be borne by the developer, and the developer agrees to pay such costs within 30 days of billing by the city. If legal proceedings are instituted to enforce any provision of this agreement, the applicant will pay a reasonable attorney’s fee to the city. (Ord. 278 § 12, 1973)


13.100.130 Conformance with other ordinances.

All extensions of utilities shall be in compliance with all ordinances of the city including ordinances hereafter adopted relating to utility rates, assessments and connection charges. (Ord. 278 § 13, 1973)


13.100.140 Violation – Penalty.

Violations of this chapter are subject to the penalties and provisions as set forth in Chapter 1.13 SMC – Code Enforcement. (Ord. 2019-013 (Exh. B); Ord. 278 § 15, 1973)


Chapter 13.102 SERVICE EXTENSION  REVIEW PROCESS (SERP)

Sections:

13.102.010    Purpose.

13.102.020    Applicability and process.

13.102.030    Definitions.

13.102.040    Development exempt from municipal connection.

13.102.050    Land divisions (new lots).

13.102.060    Individual lot development (pre-existing lot).

13.102.070    Individual lot development (new lot).

13.102.080    STEP systems.

13.102.090    Nonmunicipal utilities.

13.102.100    Connection and design standards.

13.102.110    Waivers.

13.102.120    Administration.

13.102.130    Utility connection and user fees.


13.102.010 Purpose.

The purpose of the service extension review process (SERP) is to ensure that adequate public facilities for potable water and wastewater treatment are provided in an efficient and coordinated manner within the city of Sequim. (Ord. 98-021 § 1)


13.102.020 Applicability and process. 

The SERP contains the requirements for the provision of municipal and nonmunicipal sewer and water utilities within the city. All development which requires a city land use permit or Clallam County approval of sewage disposal and/or city review of water supply utilities shall comply with the provisions of this SERP. The city of Sequim shall provide the public reference information (e.g., flowcharts) and amend development application procedures as necessary to facilitate the SERP. (Ord. 98-021 § 1)


13.102.030 Definitions.

“Accessory dwelling unit” means a separate dwelling unit within a single family dwelling or a separate structure associated with a single family dwelling which is incidental and subordinate to the primary use of the property.

“Administrator” means the director of the city of Sequim public works department or his/her designee.

“Available municipal utility,” “sewer utility,” “water utility” means an existing municipal sewer and/or water utility main located within 200 feet of a property line or approved dryline utility, as measured along the public right-of-way or any public easement granted to municipal utilities, at the time of receipt by the city of Sequim of a complete application. Privately-owned utility connections to a municipal sewer and/or water public utility main are not considered available municipal utilities.

“Community on-site sewage disposal system” means an on-site sewage disposal system as defined under Chapter 246-272 WAC, that serves two or more dwelling units.

“Connection” means the physical linking or “hook-up” of municipal sewer and/or water services to a subject use or property. Connection includes all buildings, habitable structures, plumbing outlets, and domestic water lines requiring municipal sewer and/or water services.

“Development,” for the purposes of the SERP, means any activity located within the city of Sequim which requires a permit or approval of existing or new sewage disposal and/or water supply utilities from the city including, but not limited to, land divisions, building permits, and on-site sewage permits.

“Dryline utilities” include any of a number of methods of installing utilities at the time of development for connection to a municipal distribution system at a later time.

“Duplex” means two dwelling units having a common roof.

“Dwelling unit” means any building or any portion thereof which is intended or designed to be used, rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied for living purposes having independent living facilities for one family including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, sanitation and including accessory structures and improvements.

“Existing municipal utility” means an installed municipal water or sewer main located in the public right-of-way or public utility easement that is available for connection.

“Final plat” means as set forth under SMC Title 17.

“Group home” means a facility licensed by the state which is located in a single building utilized for the full-time shelter and care of a group of unrelated people.

“Land divisions” means any applications for division of land which is subject to the SMC Title 17 and/or Title 18, including a subdivision, planned unit development, binding site plan, minor subdivision, or major subdivision.

“Lot,” “parcel,” or “tract” shall be an ownership of land in which the boundary is defined by a deed recorded in the county auditor’s office and assigned a tax parcel number by the county assessor; or a lot which has been defined by a survey recorded pursuant to Washington State surveying or platting laws and is assigned a tax parcel number by the county assessor;

“Municipal services or utilities” means sewer and water services provided by the city of Sequim. For the purposes of the SERP, municipal water services may also include the Evergreen Public Utility District water system or other public water systems that have entered into an urban growth area service agreement with the city of Sequim.

“Multiple-family dwelling” means a building containing two or more dwelling units. For the purposes of this SERP, a group home is considered to be a multiple-family dwelling when it is occupied by 13 or more residents, including resident staff.

“Nonmunicipal utilities” means sewer and water services not defined as municipal services or utilities. Nonmunicipal utilities include on-site sewage systems, community on-site sewage systems, individual water supply wells, and public water systems.

“Planned municipal utilities” are those future municipal sewer and water utilities identified and mapped in the current version of the city of Sequim wastewater and water service plans.

“Pre-existing lot” means any lot, parcel or tract established prior to the effective date of the SERP, April 13, 1998.

“Public water system” means as defined and referenced under WAC 246-290-020.

“Residential use,” for the purposes of the SERP, shall mean single-family, multifamily, and accessory dwelling units.

“SERP” means the Service Extension Review Process (SERP) jointly adopted by the city of Sequim and Clallam County for the provision of sewage disposal and water within the unincorporated Sequim urban growth area and within the city of Sequim.

“Single-family dwelling” means a dwelling unit detached from any other dwelling unit and intended for occupation by one family and including accessory improvements and uses. This definition includes manufactured homes such as mobile homes, modular homes and other homes manufactured in components or as one complete dwelling unit. For the purposes of this SERP, a group home is considered to be a single-family dwelling when it is occupied by 12 or fewer residents, including resident staff.

“STEP system” means a septic tank effluent pump (STEP) system consisting of a tank or tanks for settling and digesting wastewater solids and a pressure piping system for conveying the supernatant liquid into the municipal sewer system. STEP systems permit only sanitary wastewater to be discharged into the tank. Roof drains and other stormwater sources shall be strictly excluded.

“Utilities,” for the purpose of the SERP, means private and municipal water and sewage disposal systems located within the city. (Ord. 98-021 § 1)


13.102.040 Development exempt from municipal connection.

Connection to municipal water and/or sewer utilities shall not be required for the types of development listed below; provided, that such development is otherwise consistent with the provisions of the SERP and all other applicable city and state regulations. Development exempt from municipal service connection may request municipal services to comply with city and state requirements for sewage disposal and potable water. The city shall consider connection to municipal services to comply with public health and sanitation requirements.

A. Development not requiring approval of water supply and sewage disposal systems.

B. One individual, detached single-family or duplex residential dwelling on a lot that is one acre or greater.

C. Any development that was connected to and served by a nonmunicipal utility prior to the effective date.

D. Nonmunicipal water utilities that are used solely for agricultural or nonhuman consumption.

E. Any development issued an applicable and valid building permit prior to the effective date; provided, that the permit remains applicable and valid pursuant to the Sequim Municipal Code; provided further, that this exemption does not apply to any lot required to be served by a municipal utility as a condition of preliminary or final plat or plan approval pursuant to the SMC Title 17 or Title 18.

F. Any development on a pre-existing lot that will be served by a public water system where such service was approved for such development as a condition of final plat approval shall not be required to connect to municipal water services.

G. Any development on a pre-existing lot that will be served by a community on-site sewage system where such service was approved for such development as a condition of final plat approval shall not be required to connect to municipal sewer services.

H. Accessory dwelling units on lots one acre or larger, except where the primary residential use on the lot is connected or required to connect to municipal utilities under the SERP.

I. Home enterprises and home based businesses permitted under the Sequim Municipal Code that do not require potable water and sewage disposal beyond what could be normally expected of a single-family residence, except where the primary residential use on the property is connected or required to connect to municipal utilities under the SERP.

J. Any expansion, remodeling, or reconstruction activity of an existing structure or use that does not involve drilling of a new well or cause wastewater flows to exceed the treatment or disposal capability of the existing on-site sewage system.

K. Development on pre-existing lots of record approved for connection to nonmunicipal utilities for a period of five years from the date of final plat approval. (Ord. 98-021 § 1)


13.102.050 Land divisions (new lots).

The city of Sequim agrees to process and condition applications for land divisions that are accepted as complete on or after the effective date as follows:

A. Nonresidential Lot. Any lot where the planned use of the lot is for a commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential use shall be connected to municipal sewer and water utilities prior to final plat approval. A note shall be placed on the face of the plat that indicates what municipal services are provided and that all future development requiring such services shall be required to connect to such services prior to development approval.

B. Multifamily Residential Lot. Any lot where the planned use of the lot is for a multifamily dwelling shall be connected to municipal sewer and water utilities prior to final plat approval. A note shall be placed on the face of the plat that indicates what municipal services are provided and that all future development requiring such services shall be required to connect to such services prior to development approval.

C. Single-Family Residential Lot Less than One-Half Acre. Any lot less than one-half acre where the planned use of the lot is for a single-family dwelling shall be connected to municipal sewer and water utilities prior to final plat approval. A note shall be placed on the face of the plat that indicates what municipal services are provided and that all future development requiring such services shall be required to connect to such services prior to development approval.

D. Single-Family Residential Lot Between One-Half and One Acre. Any lot between one-half acre and one acre where the planned use of the lot is for a single-family dwelling shall be connected to municipal sewer and water utilities prior to final plat approval. Land divisions that are not located within 200 feet of an available municipal utility, may be approved without connection to municipal utilities provided that all of the following criteria are met prior to final plat approval:

1. The county health official determines that the use of non-municipal utilities complies with all county and state requirements pertaining to sewage disposal and potable water.

2. Nonmunicipal utilities are otherwise provided consistent with the SERP.

3. A dry sanitary sewer main and water main is installed within the land division and side line sewer and water mains are provided to any lot between one-half acre and one acre. Common utility facilities associated with a public water system or community on-site sewage system shall be allowed in lieu of dryline utilities where such facilities meet the same design requirements for municipal utilities.

4. Any lot less than one acre shall connect to municipal utilities within one year of notification by the city of Sequim that an existing municipal sewer and/or water utility is determined to be available as defined in subsection (D)(3) of this section. A note shall be placed on the face of the plat that cites which lots are subject to connection and which states the requirements for future connection when municipal services become available. Connection shall not be required where water services are provided by a public water system that is otherwise consistent with the SERP.

E. Single-Family Residential Lot One Acre or Greater. Any lot that is one acre or greater where the planned use of the lot is for a single-family dwelling must obtain approval from the county health officer that the lot has met all state and county requirements pertaining to sewage disposal and potable water. Connection to municipal utilities is not required. Lots connected to municipal services shall be considered to comply with all state and county requirements pertaining to sewage disposal and potable water.

1. Any lot not connected to municipal utilities shall demonstrate that adequate accommodations have been provided for the future provision of municipal utilities. Accommodations for the future provision of municipal utilities may be demonstrated by one or more of the following methods:

a. Extension of municipal services to the property line;

b. Provision of dryline utilities; and/or

c. Provision of municipal utility easements and rights-of-way.

2. Notice shall be recorded on the face of the plat as follows:

All lots [or specify individual lot numbers] shown on this [specify land division type (e.g., short plat)] have not been required to connect to [specify applicable municipal utilities]. Future development or subdivision of this property may require the provision of municipal sanitary sewer and/or domestic water services. For information on municipal utility connection standards, contact the City of Sequim for lots located within the city limits. 

(Ord. 98-021 § 1)


13.102.060 Individual lot development (pre-existing lot).

A. Unless exempted under SMC 13.102.040, connection to municipal services consistent with this section is required for the following types of development on a pre-existing lot of record:

1. Nonresidential development;

2. Multifamily residential development consisting of a total of three or more dwelling units; and

3. Single-family and associated accessory dwelling unit (if applicable) and duplex residential development on lots less than one acre.

B. Available Municipal Utility. Where the municipal utility is an available municipal utility, connection to such utility shall be required prior to final approval of the development by the city of Sequim.

C. Municipal Utility Not Available. Where the municipal utility is not available, the provision for connection shall be met by either:

1. Extension of and connection to municipal utilities prior to final approval of the development by the city of Sequim; or

2. Installation of nonmunicipal utilities that are otherwise consistent with the provisions of the SERP; provided, that connection shall be required within one year of notification by the city of Sequim that an existing municipal sewer and/or water utility is determined to be available as defined in SMC 13.102.030. (Ord. 98-021 § 1)


13.102.070 Individual lot development (new lot). 

Development on any lot created after the effective date shall provide for connection to available municipal utilities as conditioned at the time the lot was legally established, or as otherwise required under the SERP. (Ord. 98-021 § 1)


13.102.080 STEP systems. 

Existing or new development required to connect to a municipal sewer utility, may be permitted to establish a septic tank effluent pump (STEP) wastewater system in lieu of conventional connection where consistent with the other provisions of the SERP and the below standards:

A. The STEP system shall consist of a tank or tanks for settling and digesting wastewater solids, and a pressure piping system for conveying the supernatant liquid into the city of Sequim sewer system.

B. The STEP system shall only allow sanitary wastewater to be discharged into the tank. Roof drains and other stormwater sources shall be prohibited.

C. Property owners will be responsible for the maintenance of all laterals and side (or building) sewer lines associated with STEP systems. (Ord. 98-021 § 1)


13.102.090 Nonmunicipal utilities.

Nonmunicipal utilities shall comply with all applicable state and local regulations. In addition, nonmunicipal utilities shall meet the following requirements:

A. Existing public water systems and/or community on-site sewage disposal systems shall not be allowed to expand their services to lots less than one acre unless such connection was approved prior to the effective date of the SERP by Clallam County and/or through an urban growth area service area agreement between the service provider and the city of Sequim, and such connection is otherwise consistent with the SERP.

B. Extension of services by existent public water systems and/or community on-site sewage disposal systems will be reviewed to ensure that all applicable state and local regulations have been met, and that no extension of a nonmunicipal service by an existing non-municipal utility creates an “unservable” condition within the city or within the Sequim urban growth area.

C. Nonmunicipal sewage utilities allowed to serve development not otherwise exempted from connection under the SERP agreement shall be designed and installed to be able to connect in the future to municipal sewer utflities. This may include drylining utilities for future connection or the provision of a STEP system.

D. New, nonmunicipal utilities shall not be located within 200 feet of the property boundary of a designated municipal wellfield area as identified on the current wellfield area map of the municipal provider.

E. Nonmunicipal utilities that provide service to more than 15 connections that propose to extend services shall enter into an service agreement with the city of Sequim. The service agreement shall be consistent with the guidelines and policies for such agreements under the Clallam County county-wide planning policies, dated June 30, 1992, as amended.

F. Accessory dwelling units must be connected to the same sewer and water utility as the primary residential unit on lots that are less than one acre in size.

G. Single-family and duplex residential development established after the effective date of the SERP on lots which are one acre or greater shall provide for connection to municipal utilities consistent with this SERP when such lots are redivided pursuant to SMC Title 17 or Title 18 to less than one acre.

H. Development served by a failing non-municipal sewage system shall connect to an existing municipal sewer utility in accordance with the Clallam County Health Rules, C.C.H.R. 4.040 and WAC 246-272-07001, as amended. The determination of whether an on-site sewage system is failing shall be made by the county based on the definition of failure, as amended, under the State On-Site Sewage System Rules, Chapter 246-272 WAC. (Ord. 98-021 § 1)


13.102.100 Connection and design standards. 

All facilities intended to be connected to a municipal utility, including dryline utilities and STEP systems, shall be designed, installed, connected, and inspected as required by the municipal service provider. (Ord. 98-021 § 1)


13.102.110 Waivers. 

The administrator reserves the right to waive connection requirements to municipal services for lots created prior to the effective date of the SERP which are encumbered by topographic, environmental, and/or significant technical limitations associated with the provision of services which would require the construction of facilities which are disproportionate in size and capacity to the proposed scale of development. Waivers shall not be granted in cases where failure to provide municipal utilities would have a probable adverse environmental impact.

The administrator shall only grant waivers based on adoption of appropriate findings and conclusions. Examples of circumstances supporting the granting of a waiver may include, but shall not be limited to, the unavoidable crossing of environmentally sensitive areas such as a wetland, or the provision of services in an area containing significant topographic variations which would require major improvements such as a municipal lift station with an ultimate service area of less than 10 connections, and/or connections which would require extensive revisions to existing infrastructure. (Ord. 98-021 § 1)


13.102.120 Administration. 

The public works director, as part of the development review process, shall determine whether extension of municipal services is required subject to the SERP. Where connection to municipal sewer and water services is required, the written determination shall include a statement for service commitment from the city of Sequim. (Ord. 98-021 § 1)


13.102.130 Utility connection and user fees.

Utility connection and user fees shall be established by the appropriate municipal provider. (Ord. 98-021 § 1)


Chapter 13.104 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT

Sections:

Article I. Findings of Fact, Need and Purpose

13.104.010    Findings of fact.

13.104.020    Need.

13.104.030    Purpose.

Article II. Definitions

13.104.040    Application.

Article III. General Provisions

13.104.050    Abrogation and greater restrictions.

13.104.060    Interpretation.

13.104.065    No liability.

Article IV. Applicability

13.104.070    Conflict.

Article V. Regulated Activities and Allowed Activities

13.104.080    Regulated activities.

13.104.090    Exemptions.

Article VI. General Requirements

13.104.100    Stormwater management manual adopted.

13.104.110    Stormwater best management practices (BMPs).

13.104.120    Illicit discharges.

Article VII. Approval Standards

13.104.130    Repealed.

13.104.140    Repealed.

13.104.150    Repealed.

13.104.160    Repealed.

13.104.170    Repealed.

13.104.180    Repealed.

13.104.190    Repealed.

13.104.200    Repealed.

13.104.210    Repealed.

13.104.220    Repealed.

13.104.230    Repealed.

13.104.240    Repealed.

13.104.250    Repealed.

13.104.260    Repealed.

13.104.270    Repealed.

13.104.280    Repealed.

13.104.290    Repealed.

13.104.300    Repealed.

13.104.310    Repealed.

13.104.320    Repealed.

13.104.330    Exception to the manual.

Article VIII. Administration

13.104.340    Director.

13.104.350    Review and approval.

13.104.360    Enforcement authority.

13.104.370    Construction and installation inspections.

Article IX. Enforcement

13.104.380    General.

13.104.390    Stop work order.

13.104.400    Civil penalty.

13.104.410    Penalties due.

13.104.420    Penalties recovered.

Article X. Exceptions

13.104.430    Hearing examiner.

13.104.440    Findings of fact.

13.104.450    Prior approval.

13.104.460    Duration of exception.

13.104.470    Right of appeal.

Article I. Findings of Fact, Need and Purpose


13.104.010 Findings of fact.

The city council of the city hereby finds that:

A. Stormwater pollution is a problem associated with land utilization and development and the common occurrence of potential pollutants, particularly sediments, metals, pesticides, fertilizers, petroleum products, and pet wastes.

Land utilization and development are also known to increase both the volume and duration of peak flows. The resulting erosion, scouring, and deposition of sediment affect the ecological balance in the stream or other receiving water body.

Sedimentation and stormwater pollution cause diversity of species to decrease and allows less desirable species to remain.

Stormwater pollution can cause or contribute to closures of shellfish beds and swimming beaches and other restrictions on public use of the waters within the city.

Contaminants introduced on the land surface can leach into ground water with infiltrating stormwater.

B. An expanding population and increased development of land have led to:

Surface and ground water quality degradation through pollutants carried by stormwater including sediments, nutrients, metals, oils, and other contaminants; localized flooding or ponding and erosion, causing street and other property damage within the city; and public safety hazards and nuisances posed by uncontrolled water runoff on streets and highways.

C. Stormwater is an important source of water which can benefit Sequim and the region if controlled, treated, and managed effectively.

D. The city’s stormwater program should follow the goals and implement the activities outlined in the storm and surface water master plan adopted by Resolution 2016-09.

E. Best management practices can be expected to perform as intended only when properly designed, constructed and maintained. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-003 § 1.1)


13.104.020 Need.

The city council finds that this chapter is necessary in order to:

A. Reduce localized flooding or ponding causing street and other property damage.

B. Reduce the level of pollutants carried by stormwater including sediments, nutrients, metals, oils, and other contaminants.

C. Protect property owners adjacent to existing and developing lands from increased runoff rates which could cause erosion.

D. Preserve and protect fish and wildlife habitat and the suitability of waters for contact recreation, fishing, and other beneficial uses.

E. Preserve and protect the quality of surface and ground water.

F. Promote sound development policies which respect and preserve city surface water, ground water, drinking water supply and all water resources, and which provide resilience from drought.

G. Ensure the safety of the city roads and rights-of-way.

H. Decrease stormwater-related damage to public and private property from existing and future runoff.

I. Protect the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-003 § 1.2)


13.104.030 Purpose.

The provisions of this chapter are intended to guide and advise all who conduct new development or redevelopment within the city. The provisions of this chapter establish the minimum level of compliance which must be met to permit a property to be developed or redeveloped within the city.

It is the purpose of this chapter to:

A. Minimize water quality degradation and sedimentation in streams, ponds, lakes, wetlands and other water bodies, including ground water;

B. Minimize the impact of increased runoff, erosion and sedimentation caused by land development and maintenance practices;

C. Maintain and protect ground water resources;

D. Minimize adverse impacts of alterations on ground and surface water quantities, locations and flow patterns;

E. Decrease potential landslide, flood and erosion damage to public and private property;

F. Provide site planning principles and construction practices that retain native vegetation and minimize impervious surfaces and are consistent with natural topography and hydrologic conditions;

G. Maintain and protect the city stormwater infrastructure;

H. Regulate clearing and grading of private and public land in order to protect public health and safety and water quality; and

I. Provide minimum requirements and best management practices for new development and redevelopment to control the quantity and quality of stormwater runoff to comply with water quality standards and contribute to the protection of beneficial uses of the city’s ground and surface water resources. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-003 § 1.3)

Article II. Definitions


13.104.040 Application.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

A. A Definitions.

“Approval” means the proposed work or completed work conforms to this chapter in the opinion of the administrator identified in SMC 13.104.340.

B. B Definitions.

“Best management practice” or “BMP” means the schedule of activities, prohibition of practices, maintenance procedures, and structural and/or managerial practices that, when used singly or in combination, prevent or reduce the release of pollutants and other adverse impacts to waters of Washington State. BMPs are listed and described in the manual as well as in guidance materials available from the city.

C. C Definitions.

“Clearing” means the destruction and removal of vegetation by manual, mechanical, or chemical methods.

“Commercial agriculture” means those activities conducted on lands defined in RCW 84.34.020(2), and activities involved in the production of crops or livestock for commercial trade. An activity ceases to be considered commercial agriculture when the area on which it is conducted is proposed for conversion to a nonagricultural use or has lain idle for more than five years, unless the idle land is registered in a federal or state soils conservation program, or unless the activity is maintenance of irrigation ditches, laterals, canals, or drainage ditches related to an existing and ongoing agricultural activity.

“Construction stormwater pollution prevention plan” (construction SWPPP) means a document that describes the potential for pollution problems on a construction project and explains and illustrates the measures to be taken on the construction site to control those problems.

D. D Definitions.

“Detention” means the release of stormwater runoff from the site at a slower rate than it is collected by the stormwater facility system, the difference being held in temporary storage.

“Director” means the public works director or a designee.

“Drainage basin” means a geographic and hydrologic subunit of a watershed.

E. E Definitions.

“Earth material” means any rock, natural soil or fill and/or any combination thereof.

“Ecology” means the Washington State Department of Ecology.

“Erosion” means the wearing away of the land surface by running water, wind, ice, or other geological agents, including such processes as gravitational creep. Detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice, or gravity.

“Excavation” means the mechanical removal of earth material.

“Experimental BMP” means a BMP that has not been tested and evaluated by the Department of Ecology in collaboration with local governments and technical experts.

F. F Definitions.

“Fill” means a deposit of earth material placed by artificial means.

“Flood” means an overflow or inundation that comes from a river or any other source, including (but not limited to) streams, tides, wave action, storm drains, or excess rainfall. Any relatively high stream flow overtopping the natural or artificial banks in any reach of a stream.

“Forest practice” means any activity conducted on or directly pertaining to forest land and relating to growing, harvesting, or processing timber, including but not limited to:

1. Road and trail construction.

2. Harvesting, final and intermediate.

3. Precommercial thinning.

4. Reforestation.

5. Fertilization.

6. Prevention and suppression of diseases and insects.

7. Salvage of trees.

8. Brush control.

G. G Definitions.

“Ground water” means water in a saturated zone or stratum beneath the land surface or a surface water body.

H. H Definitions.

“Hard surface” means an impervious surface, a permeable pavement, or a vegetated roof.

I. I Definitions.

“Illicit discharge” means all nonstormwater discharges to stormwater drainage systems that cause or contribute to a violation of state water quality, sediment quality or ground water quality standards, including but not limited to sanitary sewer connections, industrial process water, interior floor drains, car washing and greywater systems.

“Impervious surface” means a nonvegetated surface area which either prevents or retards the entry of water into the soil mantle as under natural conditions prior to development. A nonvegetated surface area which causes water to run off the surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate of flow from the flow present under natural conditions prior to development. Common impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, walkways, patios, driveways, parking lots or storage areas, concrete or asphalt paving, gravel roads, packed earthen materials, and oiled, macadam or other surfaces which similarly impede the natural infiltration of stormwater. Open, uncovered retention/detention facilities shall not be considered as impervious surfaces for the purposes of determining whether the thresholds for application of minimum requirements are exceeded. Open, uncovered retention/detention facilities shall be considered impervious surfaces for purposes of runoff modeling.

“Infiltration” means the downward movement of water from the land surface to the subsoil.

“Interflow” means that portion of rainfall that infiltrates into the soil and moves laterally through the upper soil horizons until intercepted by a stream channel or until it returns to the surface, for example, in a roadside ditch, wetland, spring or seep. Interflow is a function of the soil system depth, permeability, and water-holding capacity.

J. J Definitions. Reserved.

K. K Definitions. Reserved.

L. L Definitions.

“Land disturbing activity” means any activity that results in a change in the existing soil cover (both vegetative and nonvegetative) and/or the existing soil topography. Land disturbing activities include but are not limited to clearing, grading, filling and excavation. Compaction that is associated with stabilization of structures and road construction shall also be considered a land disturbing activity. Stormwater facility maintenance is not considered land disturbing if conducted according to established standards and procedures.

M. M Definitions.

“Mitigation” means, in the following order of preference:

1. Avoiding the impact altogether by not taking a certain action or part of an action;

2. Minimizing impacts by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action and its implementation, by using appropriate technology, or by taking affirmative steps to avoid or reduce impacts;

3. Rectifying the impact by repairing, rehabilitating or restoring the affected environment;

4. Reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation and maintenance operations during the life of the action; and

5. Compensating for the impact by replacing, enhancing, or providing substitute resources or environments.

N. N Definitions.

“New development” means land disturbing activities, including Class IV general forest practices that are conversions from timberland to other uses; structural development, including construction or installation of a building or other structure; creation of hard surfaces; and subdivision, short subdivision and binding site plans as defined and applied in Chapter 58.17 RCW. Projects meeting the definition of redevelopment shall not be considered new development.

O. O Definitions. Reserved.

P. P Definitions.

“Permanent stormwater control plan (PSCP)” means a plan which includes permanent facilities and BMPs for the control of runoff and pollution from stormwater after construction and/or land disturbing activity has been completed.

“Person” means any individual, partnership, corporation, association, organization, cooperative, public or municipal corporation, agency of the state, or local government unit, however designated.

“Pollution” means contamination or other alteration of the physical, chemical, or biological properties of waters of the state, including change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of the waters, or such discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive or other substance into any waters of the state as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety or welfare, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life.

Q. Q Definitions. Reserved.

R. R Definitions.

“Receiving water body” means naturally occurring and/or reconstructed surface water bodies, such as creeks, streams, rivers, lakes, wetlands, estuaries, and marine waters, or ground water, to which a stormwater drainage system discharges.

“Redevelopment” means, on a site that is already substantially developed (i.e., has 35 percent or more of existing hard surface coverage), the creation or addition of hard surfaces; the expansion of a building footprint or addition or replacement of a structure; structural development including construction, installation or expansion of a building or other structure; replacement of hard surface that is not part of a routine maintenance activity; and land disturbing activities.

“Retention” means the process of collecting and holding surface water and stormwater runoff with no surface outflow.

“Runoff” means water originating from rainfall and other precipitation that is found in drainage facilities, rivers, streams, springs, seeps, ponds, puddles, lakes and wetlands as well as shallow ground water.

S. S Definitions.

“Site” means the area defined by the legal boundaries of a parcel or parcels of land that is (are) subject to new development or redevelopment. For road projects, the length of the project site and the right-of-way boundaries define the site.

“Soil” means the unconsolidated mineral and organic material on the immediate surface of the earth that serves as a natural medium for the growth of land plants.

“Stormwater” means that portion of precipitation that does not naturally percolate into the ground or evaporate, but flows via overland flow, interflow, pipes and other features into a defined surface water body, or a constructed infiltration facility.

“Stormwater drainage system” means constructed and natural features which function together as a system to collect, convey, channel, hold, inhibit, retain, detain, infiltrate, divert, treat or filter stormwater.

“Stormwater facility” means a constructed component of a stormwater drainage system, designed or constructed to perform a particular function or multiple functions. Stormwater facilities include, but are not limited to, pipes, swales, ditches, culverts, street gutters, detention basins, retention basins, constructed wetlands, infiltration devices, catchbasins, oil/water separators, permeable pavement, biofiltration swales and bioretention systems.

“Stormwater management manual” or “manual” means the stormwater design, management, and maintenance guidance manual named in SMC 13.104.100.

“Stormwater site plan” means the comprehensive report containing all of the technical information and analysis necessary for regulatory agencies to evaluate a proposed new development or redevelopment project for compliance with stormwater requirements. Contents of the stormwater site plan will vary with the type and size of the project and individual site characteristics. It includes a construction stormwater pollution prevention plan (construction SWPPP) and a permanent stormwater control plan (PSCP). Guidance on preparing a stormwater site plan is contained in the manual.

T. T Definitions. Reserved.

U. U Definitions. Reserved.

V. V Definitions.

“Vegetation” means all organic plant life growing on the surface of the earth.

W. W Definitions.

“Water body” means surface waters including rivers, streams, lakes, marine waters, estuaries, and wetlands.

“Wetlands” means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. Wetlands do not include those artificial wetlands intentionally created from nonwetland sites, including, but not limited to, irrigation and drainage ditches, grass-lined swales, canals, detention facilities, wastewater treatment facilities, farm ponds, and landscape amenities, or those wetlands created after July 1, 1990, that were unintentionally created as a result of the construction of a road, street, or highway. Wetlands may include those artificial wetlands intentionally created from nonwetland areas to mitigate the conversion of wetlands.

X. X Definitions. Reserved.

Y. Y Definitions. Reserved.

Z. Z Definitions. Reserved. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-003 § 2)

Article III. General Provisions


13.104.050 Abrogation and greater restrictions.

It is not intended that this chapter repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing regulations, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. Where the manual specified in SMC 13.104.100 is more restrictive than provisions of this chapter, the manual shall control, except for amendments specified in Article VII of this chapter. This chapter requires compliance with all applicable provisions of the manual specified in SMC 13.104.100, except amendments specified in Article VII of this chapter. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-003 § 3.1)


13.104.060 Interpretation.

The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements in their interpretation and application and shall be liberally construed to serve the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-003 § 3.2)


13.104.065 No liability.

A. Administration of this chapter shall not be construed to impose or create a basis for any liability on the part of the city, its appointed and elected officials, officers, agents, or employees, nor shall this chapter be construed to create any special relationship with or otherwise protect any specific person or class of persons.

B. The city is not responsible for the accuracy of plans (preliminary or final) submitted for approval. The city expressly disclaims any responsibility for design or implementation of a drainage plan. The design and implementation of a drainage plan is the sole responsibility of the applicant. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A))

Article IV. Applicability


13.104.070 Conflict.

When any provision of any other ordinance of the city conflicts with this chapter, that which provides more environmental protection shall apply unless specifically provided otherwise in this chapter. The director is authorized to adopt written procedures for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter. Prior to fulfilling the requirements of this chapter, the city shall not grant any approval or permission to conduct a regulated activity including but not limited to the following:

A. Building permit, commercial or residential; conditional use permit; franchise right-of-way construction permit; grading and clearing permit; master plan development; right-of-way permit; shoreline substantial development permit; shoreline variance; shoreline conditional use permit; shoreline environmental redesignation; unclassified use permit; variance; zone reclassification; subdivision; short subdivision; special use permit; utility and other use permit; zone reclassification; or any subsequently adopted permit or required approval not expressly exempted by this chapter.

B. Regulated activities shall be conducted only after the public works director approves a stormwater site plan which includes the following as required or excepted by this chapter:

1. Construction stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP);

2. Permanent stormwater control plan (PSCP). (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-003 § 4)

Article V. Regulated Activities and Allowed Activities


13.104.080 Regulated activities.

Consistent with the requirements contained in this chapter, the director shall approve or disapprove the following activities, unless exempted in SMC 13.104.090:

A. New development as defined in SMC 13.104.040(N).

B. Redevelopment as defined in SMC 13.104.040(R). (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-003 § 5.1)


13.104.090 Exemptions.

All new development and redevelopment is subject to the minimum requirements of this chapter, except the following activities, which are exempt:

A. Commercial agriculture, and forest practices regulated under WAC Title 222, except Class IV general forest practices conversions from timberland to other uses.

B. Development undertaken by the Washington State Department of Transportation in state highway rights-of-way regulated by Chapter 173-270 WAC, the Puget Sound Highway Runoff Program. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-003 § 5.2)

Article VI. General Requirements


13.104.100 Stormwater management manual adopted.

The 2012 (as amended in 2014) Edition of Ecology’s Stormwater Management Manual for Western Washington is hereby adopted by reference and is hereinafter referred to as “the manual.” In addition, as an Ecology-approved equivalent manual, the city can use the Washington Department of Transportation’s Highway Runoff Manual for road projects. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-003 § 6.1)


13.104.110 Stormwater best management practices (BMPs).

General: BMPs shall be used to control pollution from stormwater. BMPs shall be used to comply with the standards in this chapter. BMPs are in the manual.

Experimental BMPs: In those instances where appropriate BMPs are not in the manual, experimental BMPs approved by Washington Department of Ecology’s TAPE or C-TAPE program should be considered. Experimental BMPs are encouraged as a means of solving problems in a manner not addressed by the manual in an effort to improve stormwater management technology. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-003 § 6.2)


13.104.120 Illicit discharges.

Illicit discharges to stormwater drainage systems are prohibited. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-003 § 6.3)

Article VII. Approval Standards

*    For specific details, refer to manual named in SMC 13.104.100.


13.104.130 Small parcel minimum requirements.

Repealed by Ord. 2017-002. (Ord. 95-003 § 7.1)


13.104.140 Small parcel requirement #1 – Construction access route.

Repealed by Ord. 2017-002. (Ord. 95-003 § 7.1.1)


13.104.150 Small parcel requirement #2 – Stabilization of denuded areas.

Repealed by Ord. 2017-002. (Ord. 95-003 § 7.1.2)


13.104.160 Small parcel requirement #3 – Protection of adjacent properties.

Repealed by Ord. 2017-002. (Ord. 95-003 § 7.1.3)


13.104.170 Small parcel requirement #4 – Maintenance.

Repealed by Ord. 2017-002. (Ord. 95-003 § 7.1.4)


13.104.180 Small parcel requirement #5 – Other BMPs.

Repealed by Ord. 2017-002. (Ord. 95-003 § 7.1.5)


13.104.190 Large development minimum requirements.

Repealed by Ord. 2017-002. 


13.104.200 New development.

Repealed by Ord. 2017-002. (Ord. 95-003 § 7.2.1)


13.104.210 Redevelopment.

Repealed by Ord. 2017-002. (Ord. 95-003 § 7.2.2)


13.104.220 Minimum requirement #1 – Erosion and sediment control.

Repealed by Ord. 2017-002. (Ord. 95-003 § 7.2.3)


13.104.230 Minimum requirement #2 – Preservation of natural drainage systems.

Repealed by Ord. 2017-002. (Ord. 95-003 § 7.2.4)


13.104.240 Minimum requirement #3 – Source control of pollution.

Repealed by Ord. 2017-002. (Ord. 95-003 § 7.2.5)


13.104.250 Minimum requirement #4 – Runoff treatment BMPs.

Repealed by Ord. 2017-002. (Ord. 95-003 § 7.2.6)


13.104.260 Minimum requirement #5 – Streambank erosion control.

Repealed by Ord. 2017-002. (Ord. 95-003 § 7.2.7)


13.104.270 Minimum requirement #6 – Wetlands.

Repealed by Ord. 2017-002. (Ord. 95-003 § 7.2.8)


13.104.280 Minimum requirement #7 – Water quality sensitive areas.

Repealed by Ord. 2017-002. (Ord. 95-003 § 7.2.9)


13.104.290 Minimum requirement #8 – Off-site analysis and mitigation.

Repealed by Ord. 2017-002. (Ord. 95-003 § 7.2.10)


13.104.300 Minimum requirement #9 – Basin planning.

Repealed by Ord. 2017-002. (Ord. 95-003 § 7.2.11)


13.104.310 Minimum requirement #10 – Operation and maintenance.

Repealed by Ord. 2017-002. (Ord. 95-003 § 7.2.12)


13.104.320 Minimum requirement #11 – Financial liability.

Repealed by Ord. 2017-002. (Ord. 95-003 § 7.2.13)


13.104.330 Exceptions to the manual.

Physical conditions including well-drained soils found in the central Sequim area, combined with the desirability of infiltration for recharging groundwater supplies and protecting surface water quality, merit special consideration for stormwater management.

A. Building permit applicants are not required to conduct infiltration testing related to feasibility criteria or to follow a prioritized flow chart from the manual and may choose from the manual’s on-site stormwater management BMP lists which method to implement only if all of the following conditions are met:

1. Applications must be for “small” and “very small” projects (as defined in city stormwater guidance, “Stormwater Worksheet and Guidance for Building Permits”);

2. The percent of the subject property’s land area located within USDA soil type 6/Carlsborg or 63/Sequim, alone or in combination, comprises a minimum of 90 percent of the total land area;

3. The proposed land use does not involve storage of hazardous materials; and

4. Where plat notes do not otherwise provide specificity.

Applicants choosing to implement this exception do so at the applicant’s own risk.

B. For any application involving off-site release of runoff, the city requires completion of the optional guidance contained in the manual regarding off-site analysis and mitigation. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A))

Article VIII. Administration


13.104.340 Director.

The director shall administer this chapter. The director shall have the authority to develop and implement administrative procedures to administer and enforce this chapter. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-003 § 8.1)


13.104.350 Review and approval.

The director may approve, conditionally approve or deny an application for activities regulated by this chapter. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-003 § 8.2)


13.104.360 Enforcement authority.

The director shall enforce this chapter. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-003 § 8.3)


13.104.370 Construction and installation inspections.

All activities regulated by this chapter, except those exempt in SMC 13.104.090, shall be inspected by or reported in a timely fashion to the director, using checklists available from the city. Projects shall be inspected at various stages to determine that adequate control is being exercised. These inspections will include, but not be limited to, the following:

A. Prior to site clearing and construction to assess site erosion potential;

B. During construction to verify installation and maintenance of required erosion and sediment control BMPs and other approved plan components in accordance with the approved plans and specifications, such as installation of utilities, landscaping, and retaining walls; 

C. Upon completion of construction and prior to final approval to verify that installation of permanent stormwater facilities is consistent with the approved plans and specifications and that a maintenance plan is completed and responsibility for maintenance is assigned for stormwater facilities. When required by the director due to inability to verify appropriate installation, a special inspection and/or testing shall be performed;

D. All permanent stormwater facilities after final approval, once during winter (January-March) and once during summer (July-September) until 90 percent of the lots are constructed (or when construction is stopped and the site is fully stabilized) to verify facilities are functioning in accordance with the approved plans and specifications. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-003 § 8.4)

Article IX. Enforcement


13.104.380 General.

Enforcement action will be in accordance with this chapter or Chapter 1.13 SMC, Code Enforcement, whenever a person has violated any provision of this chapter. The choice of enforcement action and the severity of any penalty will be based on the nature of the violation, the damage or risk to the public or to public resources, and/or the degree of bad faith of the person subject to the enforcement action. (Ord. 2019-013 (Exh. B); Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-003 § 9.1)


13.104.390 Stop work order.

The director shall have the authority to serve a person a stop work order if an action is being undertaken in violation of this chapter.

A. Content of Order. The order shall contain:

1. A description of the specific nature, extent, and time of violation and the damage or potential damage; and

2. A notice that the violation or the potential violation cease and desist and, in appropriate cases, the specific corrective action to be taken within a given time. A civil penalty under SMC 13.104.400 through 13.104.420 may be issued with the order.

B. Notice. A stop work order shall be imposed by a notice in writing, either by certified mail with return receipt requested, or by personal service, to the person incurring the same.

C. Effective Date. The stop work order issued under this section shall become effective immediately upon receipt by the person to whom the order is directed.

D. Compliance. Failure to comply with the terms of a stop work order shall result in enforcement actions including, but not limited to, the issuance of a civil penalty. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-003 § 9.2)


13.104.400 Civil penalty.

A person who fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter, who fails to conform to the terms of an approval or order issued, who undertakes new development without first obtaining city approval, or who fails to comply with a stop work order issued under these regulations shall be subject to a civil penalty.

A. Amount of Penalty. The penalty shall be $100.00 for each violation. Each day of continued violation or repeated violation shall constitute a separate violation.

B. Aiding or Abetting. Any person who, through an act of commission or omission, aids or abets in the violation shall be considered to have committed a violation for the purposes of the civil penalty.

C. Notice of Penalty. A civil penalty shall be imposed by a notice in writing, either by certified mail with return receipt requested or by personal service, to the person incurring the same from the city. The notice shall describe the violation, approximate the date(s) of violation, and shall order the acts constituting the violation to cease and desist and, in appropriate cases, require necessary corrective action within a specific time.

D. Application for Remission or Mitigation. Any person incurring a penalty may apply in writing within 10 days of receipt of the penalty to the city for remission or mitigation of such penalty. Upon receipt of the application, the city council may remit or mitigate the penalty only upon a demonstration of extraordinary circumstances, such as the presence of information or factors not considered in setting the original penalty.

E. Appeal of Civil Penalty. Persons incurring a penalty imposed by the director may appeal in writing within 10 days of the receipt of the penalty to the city council. The city council decision may be appealed to the superior court within 10 days of the decision. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-003 § 9.3)


13.104.410 Penalties due.

Penalties imposed under this section shall become due and payable 30 days after receiving it unless application for remission or mitigation is made or an appeal is filed. Whenever an application for remission or mitigation is made, penalties shall become due and payable 30 days after receipt of the decision regarding the remission or mitigation. Whenever an appeal of a penalty is filed, the penalty shall become due and payable after all review proceedings and a final decision has been issued confirming all or part of the penalty. If the amount of a penalty owed the city is not paid within the time specified, the city may take actions necessary to recover such penalty. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-003 § 9.3.1)


13.104.420 Penalties recovered.

Penalties recovered shall be paid to a fund dedicated to enforcement and/or enhancement of the stormwater management program. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-003 § 9.3.2)

Article X. Exceptions


13.104.430 Hearing examiner.

After a public hearing, the hearing examiner may grant an exception from the requirements of this chapter. In granting any exception, the hearing examiner may prescribe conditions that are deemed necessary or desirable for the public interest and consistent with the manual. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-003 § 10.1)


13.104.440 Findings of fact.

Exceptions to this chapter may be granted prior to permit approval and construction. An exception may be granted following a public hearing, if written findings of fact are prepared that address all of the following:

A. The exception provides equivalent environmental protection and is in the public’s best interest; and that the objectives of safety, function, environmental protection and facility maintenance, based upon sound engineering, are met;

B. That there are special physical circumstances or naturally occurring conditions affecting the property and that strict application of these provisions would deprive the applicant of all reasonable use of the subject parcel and reasonable efforts to find creative ways to meet the intent of the minimum standards have been made;

C. That the granting of the exception will not be detrimental to the public health and welfare, nor injurious to other properties in the vicinity and/or downstream, and to the quality of waters of the state; and

D. The exception is the least possible exception that could be granted to comply with the intent of the manual named in SMC 13.104.100. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-003 § 10.2)


13.104.450 Prior approval.

Any exception shall be approved prior to permit approval and construction. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-003 § 10.3)


13.104.460 Duration of exception.

Exceptions granted shall be valid for a maximum of two years. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-003 § 10.4)


13.104.470 Right of appeal.

All actions of the hearing examiner shall be final and conclusive, unless, within 10 days of the date of the hearing examiner’s action, the original applicant or an adverse party gives written notice of appeal to the superior court for review of the action. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-003 § 10.5)


Chapter 13.108 STORMWATER MAINTENANCE

Sections:

Article I. Findings of Fact, Need and Purpose

13.108.010    Findings of fact.

13.108.020    Need.

13.108.030    Purpose.

Article II. Definitions

13.108.040    Application.

Article III. General Provisions

13.108.050    Abrogation and greater restrictions.

13.108.060    Interpretation.

Article IV. Applicability

13.108.070    Conflict.

Article V. General Requirements

13.108.080    Inspection and maintenance required.

13.108.090    Minimum standards.

13.108.100    Disposal of waste from maintenance activities.

13.108.110    Compliance.

Article VI. Administration

13.108.120    Director.

13.108.130    Inspection program authority.

13.108.140    Enforcement authority.

Article VII. Inspection Program

13.108.150    Inspection authorization.

13.108.160    Inspection procedures.

13.108.170    Inspection schedule.

13.108.180    Inspection and maintenance records.

13.108.190    Public reporting requirements.

Article VIII. Enforcement

13.108.200    General.

13.108.210    Orders.

13.108.220    Civil penalty.

13.108.230    Penalties due.

13.108.240    Penalties recovered.

Article I. Findings of Fact, Need and Purpose


13.108.010 Findings of fact.

City council of the city hereby finds that:

A. Stormwater facilities are a common feature of urban development.

B. Stormwater facilities must be regularly inspected and maintained to function properly and perform as designed.

C. If not adequately maintained, stormwater facilities can become sources of pollutants to surface water and ground water and cause considerable damage. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-004 § 1.1)


13.108.020 Need.

The city council finds that this chapter is necessary to ensure maintenance of all stormwater facilities within the city by setting minimum standards for the inspection and ongoing maintenance of stormwater facilities. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-004 § 1.2)


13.108.030 Purpose.

The provisions of this chapter are intended to:

A. Provide for inspection and maintenance of stormwater facilities in the city to provide for an effective, functional stormwater drainage system.

B. Authorize the director to require that stormwater facilities be inspected, maintained and repaired in conformance with this chapter.

C. Establish the minimum level of compliance that must be met.

D. Guide and advise all who conduct inspection and maintenance of stormwater facilities. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-004 § 1.3)

Article II. Definitions


13.108.040 Application.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply:

A. A Definitions. Reserved.

B. B Definitions.

“Best management practice” or “BMP” means the schedule of activities, prohibition of practices, maintenance procedures, and structural, and/or managerial practices that, when used singly or in combination, prevent or reduce the release of pollutants and other adverse impacts to waters of Washington State. BMPs are listed and described in the manual and in guidance materials from the city.

C. C Definitions. Reserved.

D. D Definitions.

“Director” means the public works director or a designee.

E. E Definitions. Reserved.

F. F Definitions. Reserved.

G. G Definitions. Reserved.

H. H Definitions. Reserved.

I. I Definitions.

“Inspection” means the examination and reporting of the condition of stormwater facilities according to criteria established by the city.

“Inspector” means a city employee or a qualified private contractor trained in stormwater facility O&M and authorized by the director to perform the duties of an inspector as described in this chapter.

J. J Definitions. Reserved.

K. K Definitions. Reserved.

L. L Definitions. Reserved.

M. M Definitions.

“Maintenance” means actions intended to prolong the effective utilization of a stormwater facility.

N. N Definitions. Reserved.

O. O Definitions. Reserved.

P. P Definitions.

“Person” means any individual, partnership, corporation, association, organization, cooperative, public or municipal corporation, agency of the state, or local government unit, however designated.

Q. Q Definitions. Reserved.

R. R Definitions. Reserved.

S. S Definitions.

“Stormwater” means that portion of precipitation that does not naturally percolate into the ground or evaporate, but flows via overland flow, interflow, pipes and other features into a defined surface water body, or a constructed infiltration facility.

“Stormwater drainage system” means constructed and natural features that function together as a system to collect, convey, channel, hold, inhibit, retain, detain, infiltrate, divert, treat or filter stormwater.

“Stormwater facility” or “facility” means a constructed component of a stormwater drainage system, designed or constructed to perform a particular function or multiple functions. Stormwater facilities include, but are not limited to, pipes, swales, ditches, culverts, street gutters, detention basins, retention basins, constructed wetlands, infiltration devices, catch basins, oil/water separators, permeable pavements, biofiltration swales and bioretention systems. Stormwater facilities that control flow and treat runoff are also known as BMPs.

“Stormwater management manual” or “manual” means the stormwater design, management, and maintenance guidance manual named in SMC 13.104.100.

T. T Definitions. Reserved.

U. U Definitions. Reserved.

V. V Definitions. Reserved.

W. W Definitions. Reserved.

X. X Definitions. Reserved.

Y. Y Definitions. Reserved.

Z. Z Definitions. Reserved. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-004 § 2)

Article III. General Provisions


13.108.050 Abrogation and greater restrictions.

This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing regulations, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter prevail. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-004 § 3.1)


13.108.060 Interpretation.

The provisions of this chapter represent the minimum requirements necessary and will be liberally construed in their interpretation and application to serve the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-004 § 3.2)

Article IV. Applicability


13.108.070 Conflict.

When any provision of any other city ordinance conflicts with this chapter, that which provides more environmental protection applies unless specifically provided otherwise in this chapter. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-004 § 4)

Article V. General Requirements


13.108.080 Inspection and maintenance required.

All stormwater facilities shall be inspected and maintained by the property owner in accordance with this chapter and the manual. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-004 § 5.1)


13.108.090 Minimum standards.

The following are the minimum standards for the inspection and maintenance of stormwater facilities:

A. Facilities shall be inspected regularly and cleared of debris, sediment and vegetation to ensure the functioning and/or design capacity of the facility.

B. Vegetated stormwater facilities shall be inspected regularly and mowed or replanted during the growing season as necessary. Clippings are to be removed and properly disposed of.

C. Where lack of maintenance is causing or contributing to a water quality or flooding problem, immediate action must be taken to correct the problem. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-004 § 5.2)


13.108.100 Disposal of waste from maintenance activities.

Disposal of waste from maintenance activities must be conducted in accordance with the minimum functional standards for solid waste handling, Chapter 173-304 WAC, and where appropriate, the dangerous waste regulations, Chapter 173-303 WAC. Guidance on managing waste materials from stormwater maintenance activities is found in the manual. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-004 § 5.3)


13.108.110 Compliance.

Property owners are responsible for the inspection, maintenance, operation and repair of stormwater drainage systems and BMPs. Property owners must inspect and maintain, operate and repair these facilities in compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the manual. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-004 § 5.4)

Article VI. Administration


13.108.120 Director.

The director shall administer this chapter. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-004 § 6.1)


13.108.130 Inspection program authority.

The director has the authority to develop an inspection program for stormwater facilities in the city. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-004 § 6.2)


13.108.140 Enforcement authority.

The director has the authority to develop and implement administrative procedures to administer and enforce this chapter. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-004 § 6.3)

Article VII. Inspection Program


13.108.150 Inspection authorization.

Whenever implementing the provisions of the inspection program or whenever there is cause to believe that a violation of this chapter has been or is being committed, the inspector is authorized to inspect, during regular working hours and at other reasonable times, all stormwater drainage systems within the city to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-004 § 7.1)


13.108.160 Inspection procedures.

Prior to making any inspections, the inspector shall present identification credentials, state the reason for the inspection, and request entry.

A. If the property, or any building or structure on the property, is unoccupied, the inspector shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person(s) having charge or control of the property or portions of the property and request entry.

B. If, after reasonable effort, the inspector is unable to locate the owner or other person(s) having charge or control of the property, and has reason to believe the condition of the stormwater drainage system creates an imminent hazard to persons or property, the inspector may enter.

C. Unless entry is consented to by the owner or person(s) in control of the property or portion of the property, or unless conditions are reasonably believed to exist that create imminent hazard, the inspector shall obtain a search warrant prior to entry, as authorized by the laws of the state of Washington.

D. The inspector may inspect the stormwater drainage system without obtaining a search warrant provided for in subsection C of this section; provided the inspection can be conducted while remaining on the public property or other property on which permission to enter is obtained. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-004 § 7.2)


13.108.170 Inspection schedule.

The director is authorized to establish an inspection, maintenance and reporting schedule for stormwater facilities critical to the efficient management of runoff in the city. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-004 § 7.3)


13.108.180 Inspection and maintenance records.

Property owners of stormwater facilities critical to the efficient management of runoff in the city must submit records to the public works department including but not limited to the following records, to the extent possible:

A. As-built plans and locations.

B. Findings of fact granted by the city.

C. Operation and maintenance requirements and records of inspections, maintenance actions and frequencies.

D. Engineering reports, as appropriate. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-004 § 7.4)


13.108.190 Public reporting requirements.

The director will report as necessary to the city council about the status of the inspections. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-004 § 7.5)

Article VIII. Enforcement


13.108.200 General.

Enforcement action will be taken in accordance with SMC 1.13 – Code Enforcement whenever a person has violated any provision of this chapter. The choice of enforcement action taken and the severity of any penalty will be based on the nature of the violation, the damage or risk to the public or to public resources, and/or the degree of bad faith of the persons subject to the enforcement action. (Ord. 2019-013 (Exh. B); Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-004 § 8.1)


13.108.210 Orders.

The director shall have the authority to issue to an owner or person an order to maintain or repair a component of a stormwater facility or BMP to bring it in compliance with this chapter, the manual and/or city regulations. The order shall include:

A. A description of the specific nature, extent and observed time of the violation and the damage or potential damage that reasonably might occur;

B. A notice that the violation, or the potential violation, cease and desist and, in appropriate cases, the specific corrective actions to be taken; and

C. A reasonable time to comply, depending on the circumstances. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-004 § 8.2)


13.108.220 Civil penalty.

A. A person who fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter or who fails to conform to the terms of an approval or order issued is subject to the provisions and penalties as set forth in Chapter 1.13 SMC.

B. Aiding or Abetting. Any person who, through an act of commission or omission, aids or abets in the violation is considered to have committed a violation for the purposes of the civil penalty. (Ord. 2019-013 (Exh. B); Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-004 § 8.3)


13.108.230 Penalties due.

Penalties imposed under this section shall become due and payable 30 days after receiving notice of penalty, unless application for remission or mitigation is made or an appeal is filed. Whenever an application for remission or mitigation is made, penalties shall become due and payable 30 days after receipt of the decision regarding the remission or mitigation. Whenever an appeal of a penalty is filed, the penalty shall become due and payable after all review proceedings and a final decision has been issued confirming all or part of the penalty. If the amount of a penalty owed is not paid within the time specified in this section, the city may take actions necessary to recover such penalty. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-004 § 8.4)


13.108.240 Penalties recovered.

Penalties recovered shall be paid to a fund dedicated to enforcement and/or enhancement of the stormwater management program. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 95-004 § 8.5)




Chapter 13.112 RECLAIMED WATER

Sections:

13.112.010    Reuse policy.

13.112.020    Definitions.

13.112.030    Cross-connection control and use area requirements.

13.112.040    Allowable uses.

13.112.050    Connection policy.

13.112.060    Rates.

13.112.070    Unauthorized work on reclaimed water system.

13.112.080    Inspection.

13.112.090    Administration authority.

13.112.100    Penalty.

13.112.110    Ownership.


13.112.010 Reuse policy.

It is the policy of the city that reclaimed water shall be used within its jurisdiction wherever feasible, and consistent with legal requirements, preservation of the public health, safety, and welfare, and the environment. (Ord. 2002-021 § 1; Ord. 2000-017; Ord. 99-019)


13.112.020 Definitions.

“Beneficial use” means the use of reclaimed water, which has been transported from the point of production to the point of use without an intervening discharge to waters of the state, for a beneficial purpose.

“Landscape impoundment” means a body of reclaimed water which is used for aesthetic enjoyment or which otherwise serves a function not intended to include public contact. Examples may include, but are not limited to, golf course water ponds/hazards, landscape ponds and vegetative landscape ponds, e.g., “lily ponds.”

“Potable water” means water which conforms to the federal, state, and local standards for human consumption.

“Reclaimed water,” for the purposes of this chapter, means reclaimed water that, at a minimum, is at all times an oxidized, coagulated, filtered, disinfected wastewater. The wastewater shall be considered adequately disinfected if the median number of total coliform organisms in the wastewater after disinfection does not exceed 2.2 per 100 milliliters, as determined from the bacteriological results of the last seven days for which analyses have been completed, and the number of total coliform organisms does not exceed 23 per 100 milliliters in any sample. Reclaimed water meeting or exceeding these criteria is classified by the state of Washington as Class A reclaimed water.

“Reclamation plant” means an arrangement of devices, structures, equipment, processes, and controls which produce reclaimed water suitable for the intended reuse.

“Reuse” means the use of reclaimed water, in compliance with the Washington Departments of Health and Ecology regulations and the Water Reclamation and Reuse Standards, for a direct beneficial use.

“Sewage” means water-carried human wastes from residences, buildings, industrial and commercial establishments, or other places, together with such ground water infiltration, surface waters, or industrial wastewater as may be present.

“Streamflow augmentation” means the discharge of reclaimed water to rivers and streams of the state or other surface water bodies, but not wetlands.

“Use area” means any facility, building, or area approved for reuse and permitted by the Washington Departments of Health and Ecology. (Ord. 2002-021 § 1; Ord. 2000-017; Ord. 99-019)


13.112.030 Cross-connection control and use area requirements.

A. Prior to connecting a use to the reclaimed water system, the public potable water supply shall be protected by installation of an approved cross-connection control assembly in accordance with the Water Reclamation and Reuse Standards published jointly by the Washington State Departments of Health and Ecology (1997), or subsequent revisions.

B. The reclaimed water distribution system shall include special considerations to avoid cross-connections with the potable water system, in accordance with the Water Reclamation and Reuse Standards published jointly by the Washington State Departments of Health and Ecology (1997), or subsequent revisions. The following features shall be included in reclaimed water systems to protect the public health:

1. Reclaimed water distribution systems shall be constructed with purple pipe (Pantone 522 or other shades of purple acceptable to review agencies) and embossed or integrally stamped or marked “CAUTION: RECLAIMED WATER – DO NOT DRINK” or be installed with a purple (Pantone 512 or other shades of purple acceptable to review agencies) identification tape or polyethylene vinyl wrap. The warning shall be stamped on opposite sides of the pipe and repeated every three feet or less.

2. Square valve box covers painted purple (Pantone 522 or other shades of purple acceptable to review agencies) to distinguish from potable water system valve boxes.

3. Purple strip on street curb to identify reclaimed water customer.

4. Reclaimed water meters color-coded with tape to distinguish from potable water meters (where applicable). Meters, covers and meter box covers should be cast to indicate reclaimed water. (Ord. 2002-021 § 1; Ord. 2000-017; Ord. 99-019)


13.112.040 Allowable uses.

The city shall encourage and allow uses of its reclaimed water for applications that produce benefit to the city and further its adopted goals for the system. As such, all allowable uses identified in accordance with the Water Reclamation and Reuse Standards published jointly by the Washington State Departments of Health and Ecology (1997), or subsequent revisions shall be considered for application of the city’s reclamation water. (Ord. 2002-021 § 1; Ord. 2000-017; Ord. 99-019)


13.112.050 Connection policy.

A. Within all new development areas, a reclaimed water system shall be encouraged to satisfy current planning and use of reclaimed water as established by the reclaimed water master plan, or subsequent revisions. Costs for the installation of a nonpotable water distribution system shall be borne by the owner/developer.

B. Within areas already developed, owners/ developers who wish to utilize reclaimed water may request to be allowed to install distribution lines to their property. All costs for the installation of such nonpotable water distribution system shall be borne by the owner/developer. (Ord. 2002-021 § 1; Ord. 2000-017; Ord. 99-019)


13.112.060 Rates.

A. Reuse Water Rates and Charges (No Free Service). The city will not furnish any service of the system to any customer whatsoever free of charge.

B. All Classifications.

1. All classifications shall be set by meter size. 

2. The water service base charge for each service, business or public authority shall be monthly as follows:

	Meter Size	 

	3/4"	$4.25

	1"	$5.69 

	1-1/2"	$9.17

	2"	$13.38

	3"	$24.60

3. The reuse water service consumption charge for each service per month shall be as follows: 

	 From	 To 	 Rate/c.f.

	Zero 	 5,000	$.004

	5,001	20,000	 $.003

	20,001	50,000	 $.002

	50,001 and above	 $.001

C. Reuse Water Rural Rates. Minimum rates for reuse water service to customers located outside the current city limits shall be two times higher than the specified class base rate and the usage fee charged per unit inside the corporate limits of the city or two times the total bill as computed by the in-city rate.

D. Normal Billing Period. The normal billing period for customers shall be a two-month cycle and shall be that period falling between two consecutive water meter read dates; provided, however, the city may elect to change to a monthly utility billing cycle for accounts when feasible. During change of ownership, utility charges for periods of less than two months shall be prorated.

E. Effective Date. The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be effective after its approval, passage and publication as required by law for services rendered on or after the first day of November, 2002. (Ord. 2002-021 § 1; Ord. 2000-017; Ord. 99-019)


13.112.070 Unauthorized work on reclaimed water system.

A. No person, unless expressly authorized by the city manager or his/her designee, shall tamper with, work on, or in any way alter or damage any city reclaimed water facility. “Tampering with” or “working on” shall include, but not be limited to, opening or closing of valves, or causing any reclaimed water to flow from the system. No unauthorized person shall cut into or make any connection with the system. The offending person shall be liable for the cost of all charges attributable to the correction of such tampering, including legal expenses, but payment of or correcting such damage shall not relieve the offending person from civil or criminal penalties the city or a court of law may impose for a violation of a city ordinance.

B. The service valve located between the customer’s reclaimed water system and the city’s distribution system may be operated by the customer when his private cut-off valve, required on the customer’s premises, requires repair. (Ord. 2002-021 § 1; Ord. 2000-017; Ord. 99-019)


13.112.080 Inspection.

A. To ensure that the provisions of city ordinances, regulations, and procedures are being observed, the city reserves the right and privilege of inspecting, removing, and/or securing any or all devices installed by the customer which connect to or control the reclaimed water.

1. Inspections without cause to believe that an ordinance or regulation is being violated shall be at reasonable times and shall not exceed a reasonable frequency.

2. Inspections where there is reasonable cause to believe that an ordinance or regulation is being violated shall be at such times and shall occur with such frequency as is necessary to establish that an ordinance is or is not being violated.

B. Each customer of reclaimed water shall give prior written consent to entry upon his premises for the purposes of inspecting the reclaimed water system, and thereby waives any other written notice for such inspection. Failure of the city to obtain such a written waiver shall not affect the right of the city to proceed pursuant to this chapter.

C. Refusing to permit an authorized city agent or employee to enter onto the premises for the purposes of inspecting the customer’s reclaimed water system pursuant to this section shall constitute a violation of this section and shall be grounds for immediate discontinuance of reclaimed water service by the city to the subject premises. (Ord. 2002-021 § 1; Ord. 2000-017; Ord. 99-019)


13.112.090 Administration authority.

The city exercising authority through the city manager or his/her designee shall have authority under this chapter to adopt procedures and make interpretations necessary for the efficient and equitable administration of this chapter. (Ord. 2002-021 § 1; Ord. 2000-017; Ord. 99-019)


13.112.100 Penalty.

Violation of any provision of this chapter is subject to the penalties and provisions as set forth in Chapter 1.13 SMC – Code Enforcement. (Ord. 2019-013 (Exh. B); Ord. 2002-021 § 1; Ord. 2000-017; Ord. 99-019)


13.112.110 Ownership.

All constructed reclaimed water facilities and appurtenances, other than indoor plumbing and irrigation systems, shall be approved by the city, and shall become and remain the property of the city. No person shall by payment of any charges provided herein, or by causing any construction of the facilities accepted by the city, acquire any interest or right in any of these facilities, or any portion thereof, other than the privilege of having their property connected thereto for reclaimed water services in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 2002-021 § 1; Ord. 2000-017; Ord. 99-019)


Chapter 13.120 CROSS CONNECTIONS

Sections:

13.120.010    Cross connection control manual.


13.120.010 Cross connection control manual.

The control, including elimination, of cross connections for all new and existing water service customers shall be in accordance with the City of Sequim’s Cross Connection Control Manual, attached hereto and incorporated in reference herein. In addition, applicable regulations of the Department of Health stated in the State of Washington Administrative Code (WAC 246-290-490) or subsequent revisions, shall be complied with. Where, in a specific case, different materials, methods or other requirements apply, the more restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement the specific requirement shall govern. (Ord. 2002-013)


Title 14 (Reserved)


Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION

Chapters:

15.04    Building Code


Chapter 15.04 BUILDING CODE

Sections:

15.04.010    International Building Code (Chapter 51-50 WAC).

15.04.012    International Building Code requirements for barrier-free accessibility.

15.04.015    References to Uniform Building Code revised to International Building Code.

15.04.020    International Residential Code (Chapter 51-51 WAC).

15.04.025    Exemptions from permits.

15.04.030    International Building Code – Building valuation costs.

15.04.031    Time limitation of applications.

15.04.032    Building and residential permit, plan review, inspection and expired permit fees.

15.04.033    Change of use permit fees.

15.04.034    Work commencing before permit issuance.

15.04.035    Refunds.

15.04.040    International Mechanical Code (Chapter 51-52 WAC).

15.04.050    Mechanical permit and inspection fees.

15.04.060    Uniform Plumbing Code (Chapter 51-56 WAC).

15.04.070    Plumbing permit and inspection fees.

15.04.080    International Fire Code (Chapter 51-54A WAC).

15.04.081    Fire lane.

15.04.082    Fire lanes – Penalties.

15.04.083    Building standpipes.

15.04.084    Fire alarm and detection systems.

15.04.085    Propane tank regulations.

15.04.090    Washington State Residential Energy Code (Chapter 51-11R WAC).

15.04.095    Washington State Commercial Energy Code (Chapter 51-11C WAC).

15.04.110    Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings.

15.04.120    Documents to be filed and available for public inspection.

15.04.130    Penalties.


15.04.010 International Building Code (Chapter 51-50 WAC).

The International Building Code, 2015 Edition, including Appendix E, as published by the International Code Council, with all Washington State amendments and exceptions as contained in Chapter 51-50 WAC, is hereby adopted as modified by the additions and amendments specified in SMC 15.04.030, except that the following appendices are the only appendices adopted:

Appendix J – Grading. (Ord. 2016-004 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2013-007 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2010-010 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2008-017 § 1; Ord. 2007-004; Ord. 2004-012; Ord. 98-015 § 2; Ord. 95-025 § 2)


15.04.012 International Building Code requirements for barrier-free accessibility.

Chapter 11 and other International Building Code requirements for barrier-free access, including ICC A117.1-2009 and Appendix E, are adopted. (Ord. 2016-004 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2013-007 § 1 (Exh. A))


15.04.015 References to Uniform Building Code revised to International Building Code.

All references to the Uniform Building Code which may exist in the Sequim Municipal Code shall be interpreted to refer to the International Building Code except where set forth otherwise herein (e.g., SMC 18.08.020, 18.58.030, 18.58.100, 18.62.020 and 18.66.050). (Ord. 2016-004 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2013-007 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2010-010 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2008-017 § 1; Ord. 2007-004; Ord. 2004-012)


15.04.020 International Residential Code (Chapter 51-51 WAC).

The International Residential Code, 2015 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted by reference with the following additions, deletions, and exceptions; provided, that Chapters 11 and 25 through 43 of this code are not adopted.

Additional residential regulations are located in the following documents:

Energy code is regulated by Chapter 51-11R WAC;

Plumbing code is regulated by Chapter 51-56 WAC;

Electrical code is regulated by Chapter 296-46B WAC or electrical code as adopted by the local jurisdiction;

Appendix F, Radon Control Methods;

Appendix Q – Dwelling Unit Fire Sprinkler Systems are included in adoption of the International Residential Code. (Ord. 2016-004 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2013-007 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2010-010 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2008-017 § 1; Ord. 2007-004; Ord. 2004-012; Ord. 98-015 § 2; Ord. 95-025 § 2)


15.04.025 Exemptions from permits.

Section R105.2 of the International Residential Code (IRC) as published by the International Code Council regarding exemptions from permit requirements shall be amended to read as follows:

A. One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 200 square feet.

B. Fences not over 7 feet high.

C. Retaining walls that are not over 4 feet in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge.

D. Water tanks supported directly upon grade if the capacity does not exceed 500 gallons and the ratio of height to diameter or width does not exceed 2 to 1.

E. Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work.

F. Prefabricated swimming pools that are less than 24 inches deep.

G. Swings and other playground equipment.

H. Window awnings supported by an exterior wall which do not project more than 54 inches from the exterior wall and do not require additional support.

I. Decks, platforms, walks, and driveways not more than thirty inches above grade and not located over any basement or story below.

J. Minor construction and alteration activities to R-3 and U Occupancies, where the total valuation, as determined by the Building Official or as documented by the applicant to the satisfaction of the Building Official, does not exceed $1,500.00 in any 12-month period. The construction and/or alteration activity shall not affect any structural components or reduce existing egress, light, air, and ventilation conditions. This exemption does not include electrical, plumbing, or mechanical activities. The permit exemption shall not otherwise exempt the construction or alteration from the substantive standards or the codes enumerated in Section 19.27.031 RCW, as amended and maintained by the state Building Code Council under Section 19.27.070 RCW.

Unless otherwise exempted, separate plumbing, electrical, and mechanical permits will be required for the above exempted items.

Exemption from the permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of the city of Sequim.

(Ord. 2016-004 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2013-007 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2010-010 § 1 (Exh. A))


15.04.030 International Building Code – Building valuation costs.

Building valuation costs used to determine permit fees shall be from the most current issue of the Building Safety Journal, published by the International Code Council. (Ord. 2016-004 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2013-007 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2010-010 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2008-017 § 1; Ord. 2007-004; Ord. 2004-012; Ord. 98-015 § 2; Ord. 95-025 § 2)


15.04.031 Time limitation of applications.

Section 105.3.2 of the International Building Code (IBC) as published by the International Code Council regarding time limitations of applications shall be amended to read as follows:

An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180 days after the date of filing, unless such application has been pursued in good faith or a permit has been issued; except that the Building Official is authorized to grant one extension of time for an additional period not to exceed 180 days. The extension shall be requested in writing.

(Ord. 2016-004 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2013-007 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2010-010 § 1 (Exh. A))


15.04.032 Building and residential permit, plan review, inspection and expired permit fees.

Fees relating to the International Building Code and the International Residential Code, building permits, plan reviews and inspections, utilizing IBC valuations, shall be as provided for in the 1997 Uniform Building Code, Table 1-A, or as amended by the city of Sequim, or as excepted for affordable/workforce housing.

2015 International Building Code, Section 105.5 – Issued Permit Expiration.

Issued building permit shall expire two (2) years from the date of permit issuance. Building permits may be renewed prior to the expiration date for one (1) additional year period at a charge of 50 percent of the original permit fee.

In order to obtain a new permit for the same proposed construction after expiration, the permittee shall obtain a new building permit but may pay a fee as provided below:

A. If no work has been started – the permittee shall pay 100 percent of the original building permit fee.

B. If project is completed through the approved foundation and floor being constructed – the permittee shall pay 75 percent of the original building permit fee.

C. If project is completed through the approved framing inspection – the permittee shall pay 50 percent of the original building permit fee.

D. If project is completed through the approved drywall inspection – the permittee shall pay a one time final inspection fee of $50.00 in order to final the building permit.

Should the permittee make substantial structural and/or life safety changes to the original approved plans of which the building permit has expired, but for the same building, a new plan review fee of 65 percent of the above-referenced building permit fee shall be charged for residential building permits. A new plan review fee of 80 percent of the above-referenced building permit fee shall be charged for commercial building permits.

Should a change in building code or building requirements have taken place, and the permittee intends to continue the work of the expired permit, a new plan review fee shall be charged in the amount of 65 percent of the original building permit fee for residential building permits. A new plan review fee of 80 percent of the above referenced building permit fee shall be charged for commercial building permits and the permittee shall be required to comply with all such new requirements.

(Ord. 2016-004 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2013-007 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2010-010 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2008-017 § 1. Formerly 15.04.031.)


15.04.033 Change of use permit fees.

Building permit applications submitted for a change of use shall be charged according to the new use the structure will accommodate. The valuation of the existing use shall be determined using the most current issue of the Building Safety Journal, published by the International Code Council. The proposed new use building valuation shall be determined using the Building Safety Journal, published by the International Code Council. The valuation of the proposed new use shall be deducted from the existing use valuation, and the building permit and plan review fees shall be as provided for in the 1997 Uniform Building Code, Table 1-A, or as amended by the city of Sequim based on the revised new value. (Ord. 2016-004 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2013-007 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2010-010 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2008-017 § 1. Formerly 15.04.032.)


15.04.034 Work commencing before permit issuance.

Any person who commences any work, activity or operation regulated by this code before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a penalty fee by multiplying the building permit fee times two. This penalty fee shall be in addition to any other required permit fee(s). The payment of such penalty fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this code nor from any penalty prescribed by law. (Ord. 2016-004 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2013-007 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2010-010 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2008-017 § 1. Formerly 15.04.033.)


15.04.035 Refunds.

Section 109.6 of the International Building Code (IBC) as published by the International Code Council regarding refunds shall be amended to read as follows:

The building official may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan reviewing is done.

The building official may authorize refunding in the amount of 80 percent of the building permit fee when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code. Such requests shall be made in writing by the permittee requesting withdrawal or cancellation of the building permit not later than 180 days after the date of the fee payment.

(Ord. 2016-004 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2013-007 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2010-010 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2008-017 § 1. Formerly 15.04.034.)


15.04.040 International Mechanical Code (Chapter 51-52 WAC).

The International Mechanical Code, 2015 Edition, as published by the International Code Conference, is hereby adopted by reference except that the standards for liquefied petroleum gas installations shall be NFPA 58 (Storage and Handling of Liquefied Petroleum Gases and ANSI Z223.1 / NFPA 54 (National Fuel Gas Code). (Ord. 2016-004 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2013-007 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2010-010 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2008-017 § 1; Ord. 2007-004; Ord. 2004-012; Ord. 98-015 § 2; Ord. 95-025 § 2)


15.04.050 Mechanical permit and inspection fees.

Fees relating to the International Mechanical Code, mechanical permits and inspections shall be as provided in the 1997 Uniform Mechanical Code, Table 1-A, or as amended by the city of Sequim. (Ord. 2016-004 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2013-007 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2010-010 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2008-017 § 1; Ord. 2007-004; Ord. 2004-012; Ord. 98-015 § 2; Ord. 95-025 § 2)


15.04.060 Uniform Plumbing Code (Chapter 51-56 WAC).

The Uniform Plumbing Code, 2015 Edition, including Appendices A, B, and I, as published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, IAPMO, is hereby adopted by reference with the following additions, deletions and exceptions: Chapters 12 and 14 of this code are not adopted; provided further, that those requirements of the Uniform Plumbing Code relating to venting and combustion air of fuel fired appliances as found in Chapter 5 and those portions of the code addressing building sewers are not adopted. (Ord. 2016-004 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2013-007 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2010-010 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2008-017 § 1; Ord. 2007-004; Ord. 2004-012; Ord. 98-015 § 2; Ord. 95-025 § 2)


15.04.070 Plumbing permit and inspection fees.

Fees relating to the Uniform Plumbing Code, plumbing permits and inspections shall be as provided in the 1997 Uniform Plumbing Code, Table 1-1, or as amended by the city of Sequim. (Ord. 2016-004 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2013-007 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2010-010 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2008-017 § 1; Ord. 2007-004; Ord. 2004-012; Ord. 98-015 § 2; Ord. 95-025 § 2)


15.04.080 International Fire Code (Chapter 51-54A WAC).

The International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, including those standards of the National Fire Protection Association specifically referenced in the IFC is hereby adopted with the following additions, deletions, and exceptions. The following appendices are also adopted:

Appendix B – Fire Flow for Buildings.

Appendix C – Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution.

Appendix D – Fire Apparatus Access Roads.

Appendix E – Hazard Categories.

Appendix F – Hazard Ranking. 

Appendix H – Hazardous Materials Management Plan (HMMP) and Hazardous Materials Inventory Statement (HMIS) Instructions.

Appendix I – Fire Protection Systems – Noncompliant Conditions. (Ord. 2016-004 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2013-007 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2010-010 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2008-017 § 1; Ord. 2007-004; Ord. 2004-012; Ord. 98-015 § 2; Ord. 95-025 § 2)


15.04.081 Fire lane.

The fire marshal shall establish and designate fire lanes in conformance with the following requirements:

A. All designated fire lanes shall be clearly marked in the following manner. Vertical curbs shall be painted red six inches in height and shall be painted on the top and side, extending the length of the designated fire lane with four-inch white block lettering stenciled on the face “NO PARKING – FIRE LANE.” The stenciling shall be spaced every 50 feet. Rolled curbs or surfaces without curbs shall be a red six-inch-wide stripe painted extending the length of the designated fire lane with four-inch white block lettering stenciled on the stripe “NO PARKING – FIRE LANE.” The stenciling shall be spaced every 50 feet.

B. Signs may be substituted for curb painting when approved in writing by the fire marshal.

C. Signs shall not be less than 18 inches in height by 12 inches in width, with block lettering of not less than three-inch-high brush strokes, reading “NO PARKING – FIRE LANE.” Such signs shall be reflective in nature, with red lettering on a white background, and be spaced at intervals of not more than 50 feet apart. The top of such signs shall not be less than four feet or more than six feet from the ground. Signs may be placed on buildings when approved by the fire marshal. When posts are required, they shall be constructed of either two-inch or greater galvanized steel, or four-inch by four-inch or greater pressure-treated wood. 

D. The fire marshal may approve deviations from any of the specifications when practical difficulties exist. Requests for deviations shall be made in writing and shall state the reasons therefor and shall be maintained on file in the fire marshal’s records.

E. Existing signs may be allowed to remain until the fire marshal determines that a need for replacement exists based on the illegibility or other deterioration of the existing signs. Such replacement shall occur within 30 days of receiving written notification of the deficiency.

F. Fire lane markings shall be established and maintained as often as required by the fire marshal to clearly identify the designated area as a fire lane, at the sole expense of the property owner. The property owner shall have completed the required establishment or maintenance of the fire lanes within 30 days of receiving written notification that such is necessary.

G. At the entrance to the property where fire lanes have been designated, signs shall be posted in a clearly conspicuous location, and shall clearly state that vehicles parked in fire lanes may be impounded, and the name, telephone number, and address of the towing firm where the vehicle may be redeemed.

H. The owner, manager, or person in charge of any property upon which any designated fire lane has been established shall be responsible to prevent the parking of vehicles in such fire lanes by informing the appropriate towing company of the violation. If the lane is blocked by any other obstruction, the owner, manager, or person in charge of the property shall attempt to remove the obstruction, and, if unable to do so, shall inform the fire marshal that the obstruction exists.

I. Any vehicle or object obstructing a designated fire lane is hereby declared to be an immediate hazard to the public safety, and may be impounded without notice to the owner pursuant to Chapter 46.55 RCW, and in accordance with Chapter 8.05 SMC. (Ord. 2016-004 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2013-007 § 1 (Exh. A))


15.04.082 Fire lanes – Penalties.

Any person who fails to mark or maintain the marking of or tampers with the marking of a designated fire lane or sign as required by this chapter, or willfully obstructs or allows the obstruction of a designated fire lane or sign, shall be subject to penalties in accordance with SMC 15.04.130. (Ord. 2016-004 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2013-007 § 1 (Exh. A))


15.04.083 Building standpipes.

Section 905.3, Required Installations, of the International Fire Code (IFC) as published by the International Code Council regarding standpipe locations shall be an added section to read as follows: 

905.3.8 Class 1 Standpipes shall be required in any building with three (3) floor levels or more and in buildings with two (2) floor levels where the travel distance at required exits on the ground level to the most remote location of the second level is more than 150’ for non-sprinklered buildings or 200’ for sprinklered buildings.

EXCEPTIONS: Residential structures constructed under the current International Residential Code.

(Ord. 2016-004 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2013-007 § 1 (Exh. A))


15.04.084 Fire alarm and detection systems.

Section 907.1.4 of the International Fire Code (IFC) as published by the International Code Council regarding fire alarm and detection system designer requirements shall be an added section to read as follows:

907.1.4 Designer of Record. 

907.1.4.1 The designation “Designer of Record” shall refer to a competent individual acceptable to, and in good standing with, the City of Sequim Fire Marshal, who designs or directly supervises the design of all alarm system submittals, re-submittals, and field changes, until complete installation, testing, and final City of Sequim Fire Marshal acceptance. This person shall be designated at the beginning of the job and follow it through to completion. 

907.1.4.2 Any Designer of Record approved by the City of Sequim Fire Marshal who fails to follow the published process for review, installation, and inspection may jeopardize the designer’s standing with the City of Sequim Fire Marshal.

907.1.4.3 Acceptable proof of competence shall be any one of the following:

A. State of Washington Professional Electrical Engineer or a Fire Protection Engineer’s license. Documentation of certification shall be provided to the Fire Marshal.

B. A valid NICET Level III or higher Certification for Fire Alarm Systems. Documentation of certification shall be provided to the Fire Marshal.

(Ord. 2016-004 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2013-007 § 1 (Exh. A))


15.04.085 Propane tank regulations.

Section 5703.6 of the International Fire Code is amended as follows:

Piping Systems. Piping systems, and their component parts, for flammable and combustible liquids must be in accordance with Section 5703.6.1 through 5703.6.11. Piping for above ground Liquid Propane systems greater than or equal to 125-gallons must be of approved flexible connect tubing from the tank to the appliance.

Section 6107 of the International Fire Code adds three new sections to read as follows:

SECTION 6107

SAFETY PRECAUTIONS AND DEVICES

6107.5 Protecting containers from displacement. LP-gas containers greater than or equal to 125-gallons must be anchored or strapped to prevent lateral displacement. Anchors or straps must be an approved, listed device. Anchors or straps for LP-gas containers greater than or equal to 2000-gallons must be designed by a licensed professional.

6107.6 Earthquake shut-off valves. LP-gas containers greater than or equal to 125-gallons must be protected with an approved, listed earthquake shut-off device.

6107.7 Non-compliant installed LP-gas containers. Non-compliant LP-gas containers must comply with Sections 6107.5 and 610.7.6 when a change of use / occupancy occurs.

(Ord. 2017-008 § 1 (Exh. A))


15.04.090 Washington State Residential Energy Code (Chapter 51-11R WAC).

The 2015 Washington State Energy Code, with all Washington State amendments and adopted appendices as contained in Chapter 51-11R WAC, is hereby adopted. (Ord. 2016-004 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2013-007 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2010-010 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2008-017 § 1; Ord. 2007-004; Ord. 2004-012; Ord. 98-015 § 2; Ord. 95-025 § 2)


15.04.095 Washington State Commercial Energy Code (Chapter 51-11C WAC).

The 2015 Washington State Energy Code, with all Washington State amendments and adopted appendices as contained in Chapter 51-11C WAC, is hereby adopted. (Ord. 2016-004 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2013-007 § 1 (Exh. A))


15.04.110 Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings.

The 1997 Edition of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings published by the International Code Council is hereby adopted. (Ord. 2016-004 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2013-007 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2010-010 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2008-017 § 1; Ord. 2007-004; Ord. 2004-012. Formerly 15.04.120.)


15.04.120 Documents to be filed and available for public inspection.

The codes, appendices and standards set forth in this chapter shall be filed with the department of community development, and a copy thereof made available for use and examination by the public, pursuant to RCW 35A.12.140. (Ord. 2016-004 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2013-007 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2010-010 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2008-017 § 1; Ord. 2007-004; Ord. 2004-012; Ord. 98-015 § 2; Ord. 95-025 § 2. Formerly 15.04.130.)


15.04.130 Penalties.

Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter or the codes or standards adopted herein or fails to comply therewith, or who violates or fails to comply with any order made thereunder, or who builds in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, within the time fixed herein, is severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance, respectively, guilty of a gross misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $5,000 or by imprisonment for not more than one year or by both such fine and imprisonment. The imposition of one penalty for any violation does not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons are required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each day that prohibited conditions are maintained constitutes a separate offense. In addition, the director is authorized to apply Chapter 1.13 SMC, Code Enforcement, to secure compliance. (Ord. 2019-013 (Exh. B); Ord. 2016-004 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2013-007 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2010-010 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2008-017 § 1; Ord. 2007-004; Ord. 2004-012; Ord. 98-015 § 2; Ord. 95-025 § 2. Formerly 15.04.140.)


Title 16 ENVIRONMENT

Chapters:

16.04    Environmental Policy


Chapter 16.04 ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY

Sections:

Article I. Authority

16.04.010    Authority.

Article II. General Requirements

16.04.020    Purpose and adoption by reference.

16.04.030    Additional definitions.

16.04.040    Designation of responsible official.

16.04.050    Lead agency determination and responsibilities.

16.04.060    Additional timing considerations.

Article III. Categorical Exemptions and Threshold Determinations

16.04.070    Purpose and adoption by reference.

16.04.080    Use of exemptions.

16.04.090    Environmental checklist.

16.04.100    Mitigated DNS.

Article IV. Environmental Impact Statement (EIS)

16.04.110    Purpose and adoption by reference.

16.04.120    Preparation of EIS – Additional considerations.

Article V. Commenting

16.04.130    Adoption by reference.

16.04.140    Public notice.

16.04.150    Designation of official to perform consulted agency responsibilities.

Article VI. Using Existing Environmental Documents

16.04.160    Purpose and adoption by reference.

Article VII. SEPA and Agency Decisions

16.04.170    Purpose and adoption by reference.

16.04.180    Substantive authority.

16.04.190    Notice – Statute of limitations.

Article VIII. Definitions

16.04.200    Purpose and adoption by reference.

Article IX. Categorical Exemptions

16.04.210    Adoption by reference.

Article X. Agency Compliance

16.04.220    Purpose and adoption by reference.

16.04.230    Fees.

Article XI. Forms

16.04.240    Adoption by reference.

Article I. Authority


16.04.010 Authority.

A. The city adopts the ordinance codified in this chapter under the State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA), RCW 43.21C.120, and the SEPA rules, WAC 197-11-904.

B. This chapter contains the city’s SEPA procedures and policies.

C. The SEPA rules, Chapter 197-11 WAC, must be used in conjunction with this chapter.

D. This chapter has been adopted pursuant to public review and comment. (Ord. 458 § 1, 1984)

Article II. General Requirements


16.04.020 Purpose and adoption by reference.

This article contains the basic requirements that apply to the SEPA process. The city adopts the following sections of Chapter 197-11 WAC by reference:

WAC

197-11-040Definitions.

197-11-050Lead agency.

197-11-055Timing of the SEPA process.

197-11-060Content of environmental review.

197-11-070Limitations on actions during SEPA process.

197-11-080Incomplete or unavailable information.

197-11-090Supporting documents.

197-11-100Information required of applicants.

(Ord. 458 § 2, 1984)


16.04.030 Additional definitions.

In addition to those definitions contained within WAC 197-11-700 through 197-11-799, when used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context indicates otherwise:

A. “Department” means any division, subdivision or organizational unit of the city established by ordinance, rule or order.

B. “Early notice” means the city’s response to an applicant stating whether it considers issuance of a determination of significance likely for the applicant’s proposal (mitigated determination of nonsignificance (DNS) procedures).

C. “Ordinance” means the ordinance, resolution or other procedure used by the city to adopt regulatory requirements.

D. “SEPA rules” means Chapter 197-11 WAC adopted by the Department of Ecology. (Ord. 458 § 3, 1984)


16.04.040 Designation of responsible official.

A. For public and private proposals, the head of the city planning department, renamed as the department of community development (the city planner, renamed as the director of the department of community development) or his or her designee, which designation may be either oral or written, shall be the responsible official.

B. For all proposals for which the city is the lead agency, the responsible official shall make the threshold determination, supervise scoping and preparation of any required environmental impact statement (EIS), and perform any other functions assigned to the lead agency or responsible official by those sections of the SEPA rules that were adopted by reference in WAC 173-806-020.

C. The city shall retain all documents required by the SEPA rules (Chapter 197-11 WAC) and make them available in accordance with Chapter 42.17 RCW. (Ord. 2011-017 § 4 (Exh. A); Ord. 595 § 2, 1991; Ord. 458 § 4, 1984)


16.04.050 Lead agency determination and responsibilities.

A. The department within the city receiving an application for or initiating a proposal that involves a nonexempt action shall determine the lead agency for that proposal under WAC 197-11-050 and 197-11-922 through 197-11-940, unless the lead agency has been previously determined or the department is aware that another department or agency is in the process of determining the lead agency.

B. When the city is the lead agency for a proposal, the department receiving the application shall determine the responsible official who shall supervise compliance with the threshold determination requirements, and if an EIS is necessary, shall supervise preparation of the EIS.

C. When the city is not the lead agency for a proposal, all departments of the city shall use and consider, as appropriate, either the DNS or the final EIS of the lead agency in making decisions on the proposal. No city department shall prepare or require preparation of a DNS or EIS in addition to that prepared by the lead agency, unless required under WAC 197-11-600. In some cases, the city may conduct supplemental environmental review under WAC 197-11-600.

D. If the city or any of its departments receives a lead agency determination made by another agency that appears inconsistent with the criteria of WAC 197-11-922 through 197-11-940, it may object to the determination. Any objection must be made to the agency originally making the determination and resolved within 15 days of receipt of the determination, or the city must petition the Department of Ecology for a lead agency determination under WAC 197-11-946 within the 15-day time period. Any such petition on behalf of the city may be initiated by the city clerk.

E. Departments of the city are authorized to make agreements as to lead agency status or shared lead agency duties for a proposal under WAC 197-11-942 and 197-11-944; provided, that the responsible official and any department that will incur responsibilities as the result of such agreement approve the agreement.

F. Any department making a lead agency determination for a private project shall require sufficient information from the applicant to identify which other agencies have jurisdiction over the proposal (that is: which agencies require nonexempt licenses?). (Ord. 458 § 5, 1984)


16.04.060 Additional timing considerations.

A. For nonexempt proposals, the DNS or draft EIS for the proposal shall accompany the city’s staff recommendation to any appropriate advisory body, such as the planning commission, or similar advisory body.

B. If the city’s only action on a proposal is a decision on a building permit or other license that requires detailed project plans and specifications, the applicant may request in writing that the city conduct environmental review prior to submission of the detailed plans and specifications. (Ord. 458 § 6, 1984)

Article III. Categorical Exemptions and Threshold Determinations


16.04.070 Purpose and adoption by reference.

This article contains the rules for deciding whether a proposal has a “probable significant, adverse environmental impact” requiring an environmental impact statement (EIS) to be prepared. This article also contains rules for evaluating the impacts of proposals not requiring an EIS. The city adopts the following WAC sections by reference, as supplemented in this article:

WAC

197-11-300Purpose of this part.

197-11-305Categorical exemptions.

197-11-310Threshold determination required.

197-11-315Environmental checklist.

197-11-330Threshold determination process.

197-11-335Additional information.

197-11-340Determination of nonsignificance (DNS).

197-11-350Mitigated DNS.

197-11-360Determination of significance (DS)/initiation of scoping.

197-11-390Effect of threshold determination.

(Ord. 458 § 7, 1984)


16.04.080 Use of exemptions.

A. Each department within the city that receives an application for a license or, in the case of governmental proposals, the department initiating the proposal, shall determine whether the license and/or the proposal is exempt. The department’s determination that a proposal is exempt shall be final and not subject to administrative review. If a proposal is exempt, none of the procedural requirements of this chapter apply to the proposal. The city shall not require completion of an environmental checklist for an exempt proposal.

B. In determining whether or not a proposal is exempt, the department shall make certain the proposal is properly defined and shall identify the government licenses required (WAC197-11-060). If a proposal includes exempt and nonexempt actions, the department shall determine the lead agency, even if the license application that triggers the department’s consideration is exempt.

C. If a proposal includes both exempt and nonexempt actions, the city may authorize exempt actions prior to compliance with the procedural requirements of this chapter, except that:

1. The city shall not give authorization for:

a. Any nonexempt action,

b. Any action that would have an adverse environmental impact, or

c. Any action that would limit the reasonable choice of alternatives;

2. A department may withhold approval of an exempt action that would lead to modification of the physical environment, when such modification would serve no purpose if nonexempt action(s) were not approved; and

3. A department may withhold approval of exempt actions that would lead to substantial financial expenditures by a private applicant when the expenditures would serve no purpose if nonexempt action(s) were not approved. (Ord. 458 § 8, 1984)


16.04.090 Environmental checklist.

A completed environmental checklist (or a copy), in the form provided in WAC 197-11-960, shall be filed at the same time as an application for a permit, license, certificate, or other approval not specifically exempted in this chapter; except, a checklist is not needed if the city and applicant agree an EIS is required, SEPA compliance has been completed, or SEPA compliance has been initiated by another agency. The city shall use the environmental checklist to determine the lead agency and, if the city is the lead agency, for determining the responsible official and for making a threshold determination. (Ord. 458 § 9, 1984)


16.04.100 Mitigated DNS.

A. As provided in this section and in WAC 197-11-350, the responsible official may issue a DNS based on conditions attached to the proposal by the responsible official or on changes to, or clarifications of, the proposal made by the applicant.

B. An applicant may request in writing early notice of whether a DS is likely under WAC 197-11-350. The request must:

1. Follow submission of a permit application and environmental checklist for a nonexempt proposal for which the department is lead agency; and

2. Precede the city’s actual threshold determination for the proposal.

C. The responsible official should respond to the request for early notice within 15 working days. The response shall:

1. Be written;

2. State whether the city currently considers issuance of a DS likely and, if so, indicate the general or specific area(s) of concern that is/are leading the city to consider a DS; and

3. State that the applicant may change or clarify the proposal to mitigate the indicated impacts, revising the environmental checklist and/or permit application as necessary to reflect the changes or clarifications.

D. As much as possible, the city should assist the applicant with identification of impacts to the extent necessary to formulate mitigation measures.

E. When an applicant submits a changed or clarified proposal, along with a revised or amended environmental checklist, the city shall base its threshold determination on the changed or clarified proposal and should make the determination within 15 days of receiving the changed or clarified proposal:

1. If the city indicated specific mitigation measures in its response to the request for early notice, and the applicant changed or clarified the proposal to include those specific mitigation measures, the city shall issue and circulate a DNS under WAC 197-11-340(2).

2. If the city indicated areas of concern, but did not indicate specific mitigation measures that would allow it to issue a DNS, the city shall make the threshold determination, issuing a DNS or DS as appropriate.

3. The applicant’s proposed mitigation measures (clarification, changes, or conditions) must be in writing and must be specific. For example, proposals to “control noise” or “prevent storm water runoff” are inadequate, whereas proposals to “muffle machinery to X decibel” or “construct 200-foot storm water retention pond at Y location” are adequate.

4. Mitigation measures which justify issuance of a mitigated DNS may be incorporated in the DNS by reference to agency staff reports, studies or other documents.

F. Mitigated DNSs issued under WAC 197-11-340(2) require a 15-day comment period and public notice.

G. Mitigation measures incorporated in the mitigated DNS shall be deemed conditions of approval of the permit decision and may be enforced in the same manner as any term or condition of the permit, or enforced in any manner specifically prescribed by the city.

H. If the city’s tentative decision on a permit or approval does not include mitigation measures that were incorporated in a mitigated DNS for the proposal, the city should evaluate the threshold determination to assure consistency with WAC 197-11-340(3)(a) (withdrawal of DNS).

I. The city’s written response under subsection B of this section shall not be construed as a determination of significance. In addition, preliminary discussion of clarifications or changes to a proposal, as opposed to a written request for early notice, shall not bind the city to consider the clarifications or changes in its threshold determination. (Ord. 458 § 10, 1984)

Article IV. Environmental Impact Statement (EIS)


16.04.110 Purpose and adoption by reference.

This article contains the rules for preparing environmental impact statements. The city adopts the following sections by reference:

WAC

197-11-400Purpose of EIS.

197-11-402General requirements.

197-11-405EIS types.

197-11-406EIS timing.

197-11-408Scoping.

197-11-410Expanded scoping (optional).

197-11-420EIS preparation.

197-11-425Style and size.

197-11-430Format.

197-11-435Cover letter or memo.

197-11-440EIS contents.

197-11-442Contents of EIS on nonproject proposals.

197-11-443EIS contents when prior nonproject EIS.

197-11-444Elements of the environment.

197-11-448Relationship of EIS to other considerations.

197-11-450Cost-benefit analysis.

197-11-455Issuance of DEIS.

197-11-460Issuance of FEIS.

(Ord. 458 § 11, 1984)


16.04.120 Preparation of EIS – Additional considerations.

A. Preparation of draft and final EIS’s (DEIS and FEIS) and draft and final supplemental EIS’s (SEIS) is the responsibility of the department under the direction or the responsible official. Before the city issues an EIS, the responsible official shall be satisfied that it complies with this chapter and Chapter 197-11 WAC.

B. The DEIS and FEIS or draft and final SEIS shall be prepared by city staff, the applicant, or by a consultant selected by the city or the applicant. If the responsible official requires an EIS for a proposal and determines that someone other than the city will prepare the EIS, the responsible official shall notify the applicant immediately after completion of the threshold determination. The responsible official shall also notify the applicant of the city’s procedure for EIS preparation, including approval of the DEIS and FEIS prior to distribution.

C. The city may require an applicant to provide information the city does not possess, including specific investigations. However, the applicant is not required to supply information that is not required under this chapter or that is being requested from another agency. (This does not apply to information the city may request under another ordinance or statute.) (Ord. 458 § 12, 1984)

Article V. Commenting


16.04.130 Adoption by reference.

This article contains the rules for consulting, commenting and responding on all environmental documents under SEPA, including rules for public notice and hearings. The city adopts the following sections by reference, as supplemented in this article:

WAC

197-11-500Purpose of this part.

197-11-502Inviting comment.

197-11-504Availability and cost of environmental documents.

197-11-508SEPA register.

197-11-535Public hearings and meetings.

197-11-545Effect of no comment.

197-11-550Specificity of comments.

197-11-560FEIS response to comments.

197-11-570Consulted agency costs to assist lead agency.

(Ord. 458 § 13, 1984)


16.04.140 Public notice.

A. Whenever the city issues a DNS under WAC 197-11-340(2), or a DS under WAC 197-11-360(3), or a DEIS under WAC 197-11-455(5), or a SEIS under WAC 197-11-620, the city shall give public notice as follows:

1. If public notice is required for a nonexempt license, the notice shall state whether a DS or DNS has been issued and when comments are due.

2. If no public notice is required for the permit or approval, the city shall give notice of the DNS or DS by:

a. Posting the property, for site-specific proposals;

b. Publishing notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the county, city, or general area where the proposal is located;

c. Notifying public or private groups which have expressed interest in a certain proposal or in the type of proposal being considered;

d. Notifying the news media;

e. Placing notices in appropriate regional, neighborhood, ethnic or trade journals;

f. Publishing notice in agency newsletters and/or sending notice to agency mailing lists (either general lists or lists for specific proposals for subject areas);

g. Announcing the availability pursuant to a meeting of the city council and placing notice and availability in the minutes of the meeting.

3. Whenever the city issues a DS under WAC 197-11-360(3), the city shall state the scoping procedure for the proposal in the DS as required in WAC 197-11-408 and in the public notice.

B. Whenever possible, the city shall integrate the public notice required under this section with existing notice procedures for the city’s nonexempt permit(s) or approval(s) required for the proposal.

C. The city may require an applicant to complete the public notice requirements for the applicant’s proposal at his or her expense. (Ord. 458 § 14, 1984)


16.04.150 Designation of official to perform consulted agency responsibilities.

A. The city council or its designee shall be responsible for preparation of written comments for the city in response to a consultation request prior to a threshold determination, participation in scoping, and reviewing a DEIS.

B. This person shall be responsible for the city’s compliance with WAC 197-11-550 whenever the city is a consulted agency and is authorized to develop operating procedures that will ensure that responses to consultation requests are prepared in a timely fashion and include data from all appropriate departments of the city. (Ord. 458 § 15, 1984)

Article VI. Using Existing Environmental Documents


16.04.160 Purpose and adoption by reference.

This article contains rules for using and supplementing existing environmental documents prepared under SEPA or National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) for the city’s own environmental compliance. The city adopts the following sections by reference:

WAC

197-11-600When to use existing environmental documents.

197-11-610Use of NEPA documents.

197-11-620Supplemental environmental impact statement – Procedures.

197-11-625Addenda – Procedures.

197-11-630Adoption – Procedures.

197-11-635Incorporation by reference – Procedures.

197-11-640Combining documents.

(Ord. 458 § 16, 1984)

Article VII. SEPA and Agency Decisions


16.04.170 Purpose and adoption by reference.

This article contains rules (and policies) for SEPA’s substantive authority, such as decisions to mitigate or reject proposals as a result of SEPA. This article also contains procedures for appealing SEPA determinations to agencies or the courts. The city adopts the following sections by reference:

WAC

197-11-650Purpose of this part.

197-11-655Implementation.

197-11-660Substantive authority and mitigation.

197-11-680Appeals.

(Ord. 458 § 17, 1984)


16.04.180 Substantive authority.

A. The policies and goals set forth in this chapter are supplementary to those in the existing authorization of the city.

B. The city may attach conditions to a permit or approval, or deny a permit or approval for a proposal on the basis of SEPA so long as the city has complied with the provisions contained in WAC 197-11-660, which section is adopted by reference and incorporated as if set forth fully in this chapter.

C. The city designates and adopts by reference the following policies as the basis for the city’s exercise of authority pursuant to this section:

1. The city shall use all practicable means, consistent with other essential considerations of state policy, to improve and coordinate plans, functions, programs and resources to the end that the state and its citizens may:

a. Fulfill the responsibilities of each generation as trustee of the environment for succeeding generations;

b. Assure for all people of Washington safe, healthful, productive, and aesthetically and culturally pleasing surroundings;

c. Attain the widest range of beneficial uses of the environment without degradation, risk to health or safety, or other undesirable and unintended consequences;

d. Preserve important historic, cultural and natural aspects of our national heritage;

e. Maintain, wherever possible, an environment which supports diversity and variety of individual choice;

f. Achieve a balance between population and resource use which will permit high standards of living and a wide sharing of life’s amenities; and

g. Enhance the quality of renewable resources and approach the maximum attainable recycling of depletable resources.

2. The city recognizes that each person has a fundamental and inalienable right to a healthful environment and that each person has a responsibility to contribute to the preservation and enhancement of the environment.

3. The city adopts by reference the policies in the following city ordinances and resolutions:

a. The city’s comprehensive plan;

b. The city’s subdivision ordinance;

c. The city’s zoning code;

d. The city’s building code and/or mechanical and fire codes. (Ord. 458 § 18, 1984)


16.04.190 Notice – Statute of limitations.

A. The city, applicant for, or proponent of an action may publish a notice of action pursuant to RCW 43.21C.080 for any action.

B. The form of the notice shall be substantially in the form provided in WAC 197-11-990. The notice shall be published by the city clerk, applicant or proponent pursuant to RCW 43.21C.080. (Ord. 458 § 19, 1984)

Article VIII. Definitions


16.04.200 Purpose and adoption by reference.

This article contains uniform usage and definitions of terms under SEPA. The city adopts the following sections by reference, as supplemented by WAC 173-806-040:

WAC

197-11-700Definitions.

197-11-702Act.

197-11-704Action.

197-11-706Addendum.

197-11-708Adoption.

197-11-710Affected tribe.

197-11-712Affecting.

197-11-714Agency.

197-11-716Applicant.

197-11-718Built environment.

197-11-720Categorical exemption.

197-11-722Consolidated agency.

197-11-724Consulted agency.

197-11-726Cost-benefit analysis.

197-11-728County/city.

Days: Days shall be defined as calendar days. If any day under which an action must be taken falls upon a legal holiday, the action must be taken upon the next calendar day which is not a holiday.

197-11-730Decision maker.

197-11-732Department.

197-11-734Determination of nonsignificance (DNS).

197-11-736Determination of significance (DS).

197-11-738EIS.

197-11-740Environment.

197-11-742Environmental checklist.

197-11-744Environmental document.

197-11-746Environmental review.

197-11-748Environmentally sensitive area.

197-11-750Expanded scoping.

197-11-752Impacts.

197-11-754Incorporation by reference.

197-11-756Lands covered by water.

197-11-758Lead agency.

197-11-760License.

197-11-762Local agency.

197-11-764Major action.

197-11-766Mitigated DNS.

197-11-768Mitigation.

197-11-770Natural environment.

197-11-772NEPA.

197-11-774Nonproject.

197-11-776Phased review.

197-11-778Preparation.

197-11-780Private project.

197-11-782Probable.

197-11-784Proposal.

197-11-786Reasonable alternative.

197-11-788Responsible official.

197-11-790SEPA.

197-11-792Scope.

197-11-793Scoping.

197-11-794Significant.

197-11-796State agency.

197-11-797Threshold determination.

197-11-799Underlying governmental action.

(Ord. 458 § 20, 1984)

Article IX. Categorical Exemptions


16.04.210 Adoption by reference.

The city adopts by reference the following rules for categorical exemptions, as supplemented in this chapter, including WAC 173-806-080 (Use of exemptions):

WAC

197-11-800Categorical exemptions.

197-11-880Emergencies.

197-11-890Petitioning DOE to change exemptions.

(Ord. 458 § 21, 1984)

Article X. Agency Compliance


16.04.220 Purpose and adoption by reference.

This article contains rules for agency compliance with SEPA, including rules for charging fees under the SEPA process, designating environmentally sensitive areas, listing agencies with environmental expertise, selecting the lead agency, and applying these rules to current agency activities. The city adopts the following sections by reference, as supplemented by WAC 173-806-043 through 173-806-045:

WAC

197-11-900Purpose of this part.

197-11-902Agency SEPA policies.

197-11-916Application to ongoing actions.

197-11-920Agencies with environmental expertise.

197-11-922Lead agency rules.

197-11-924Determining the lead agency.

197-11-926Lead agency for governmental proposals.

197-11-928Lead agency for public and private proposals.

197-11-930Lead agency for private projects with one agency with jurisdiction.

197-11-932Lead agency for private projects requiring licenses from more than one agency, when one of the agencies is a county/city.

197-11-934Lead agency for private projects requiring licenses from a local agency, not a county/ city, and one or more state agencies.

197-11-936Lead agency for private projects requiring licenses from more than one state agency.

197-11-938Lead agencies for specific purposes.

197-11-940Transfer of lead agency status to a state agency.

197-11-942Agreements on lead agency status.

197-11-944Agreements on division of lead agency disputes.

197-11-946DOE resolution of lead agency disputes.

197-11-948Assumption of lead agency status.

(Ord. 458 § 22, 1984)


16.04.230 Fees.

The city shall require the following fees for its activities in accordance with the provisions of this chapter:

A. Threshold Determination. For every environmental checklist the city will review when it is lead agency, the city shall collect a fee of $250.00 from the proponent of the proposal prior to undertaking the threshold determination. The time periods provided by this chapter for making a threshold determination shall not begin to run until payment of the fee and the responsible official has determined that the environmental checklist is complete.

B. Environmental Impact Statement.

1. When the city is the lead agency for a proposal requiring an EIS and the responsible official determines that the EIS shall be prepared, the city may charge and collect a reasonable fee from any applicant to cover costs incurred by the city in processing the EIS.

2. The responsible official may determine that the city will contract directly with a consultant for preparation of an EIS, or a portion of the EIS, for activities initiated by some persons or entity other than the city and may bill such costs and expenses directly to the applicant. The city may require to post bond or otherwise ensure payment of such costs. Such consultants shall be selected by mutual agreement of the city and the applicant after a call for proposals.

3. If a proposal is modified so that an EIS is no longer required, the responsible official shall refund any fees collected under subdivisions 1 and 2 of this subsection which remain after incurred costs are paid.

C. The city may collect a reasonable fee from an applicant to cover the cost of meeting the public notice requirements of this chapter relating to the applicant’s proposal.

D. The city may charge any person for copies of any document prepared under this chapter, and for mailing the document, in a manner provided by Chapter 42.17 RCW. (Ord. 93-013 § 2; Ord. 458 § 23, 1984)

Article XI. Forms


16.04.240 Adoption by reference.

The city adopts the following forms and sections by reference:

WAC

197-11-960Environmental checklist.

197-11-965Adoption notice.

197-11-970Determination of nonsignificance (DNS).

197-11-980Determination of significance and scoping notice (DS).

197-11-985Notice of assumption of lead agency status.

197-11-990Notice of action.

(Ord. 458 § 27, 1984)

 


Title 17 SUBDIVISIONS

Chapters:

17.04    General Provisions

17.08    Definitions

17.12    Administration and Enforcement

17.20    Subdivisions

17.21    Final Plats

17.22    Boundary and Lot Line Adjustments

17.24    Binding Site Plans

17.25    Vacation and Alteration of Final Plats

17.26    Phased Development Standards

17.28    General Design Standards

17.32    Street Design Standards

17.36    Repealed

17.40    Lot Design Standards

17.43    Repealed

17.44    Manufactured Home Park Design Standards

17.48    Improvements

17.56    Monuments

17.64    Guarantees


Chapter 17.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

17.04.010    Authority and purpose.

17.04.020    Exemptions.

17.04.030    Industrial and commercial subdivisions.


17.04.010 Authority and purpose.

A. The provisions of this title are adopted pursuant to the authority delegated to the city of Sequim under Chapters 35A.58 and 58.17 RCW.

B. The purpose of this title is to provide rules, regulations and standards for the division of land within the city, while protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare. Application of this title shall insure the orderly growth and development of the city, and require adequate provisions for circulation, utilities, drainage and public services. 

C. The provisions of this title shall be administered to ensure orderly growth and development and shall implement the goals, policies and provisions of the Sequim comprehensive plan, SMC Title 18, Zoning, the official zoning map, and the Sequim shoreline master plan, and the Clallam County-City of Sequim service extension review process (SERP). (Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.04.020 Exemptions.

The provisions of this title shall not apply to:

A. Any cemetery or burial plot, established consistent with the requirements of SMC Title 18, Zoning, while used for that purpose;

B. Any division of land made by testamentary provisions, the laws of descent, or upon court order;

C. Divisions of land into lots or tracts classified for commercial or industrial use when a binding site plan has been approved consistent with the provisions of Chapter 17.24 SMC;

D. Divisions of land for the purpose of lease when no residential structure other than manufactured homes or travel trailers are permitted to be placed upon the land and a site plan has been prepared in accordance with provisions of Chapter 17.24 SMC, Binding Site Plans. (Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.04.030 Industrial and commercial subdivisions.

Industrial and commercial subdivisions shall comply with the requirements of this title, excepting that industrial and commercial land divisions are exempted from the subdivision process, and shall be considered consistent with the requirements of Chapter 17.24 SMC, Binding Site Plans, and RCW 58.17.035. Additional provisions and requirements relating to traffic flow, fire safety, environmental impacts and other similar potential impacts may be required in commercial and industrial subdivisions. (Ord. 98-005 § 4)


Chapter 17.08 DEFINITIONS

Sections:

17.08.010    Purpose.

17.08.020    Definitions.


17.08.010 Purpose.

The definitions contained in these chapters are provided to define those words and terms that have a specialized meaning and/or may be used in an unfamiliar way for the purposes of this title. In addition, the following definitions, where deemed necessary, include examples or clarifications that will assist in the understanding of the terms, application and enforcement of this title. 

The following definitions shall pertain to the regulations, processes, and standards contained within this title only. Definitions found in other adopted titles, ordinances, resolutions, codes, and/or regulations shall be subordinate in meaning to the definitions contained herein in applying the provisions of this title. (Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.08.020 Definitions.

For the purposes of this title, certain words are defined as follows: 

Words in the present tense include the future tense; words in the singular shall include the plural; the word “shall” is mandatory; the word “should” indicates that which is recommended but not required; the word “may” is permissive.

A. “Adjacent property owner” means any property owner of record according to the records of the Clallam County auditor, whose property adjoins or abuts property used for division, or any portion thereof, or whose property is within 300 feet of the property proposed for division, or any portion which is directly across a street or public right-of-way which is contiguous to both properties.

B. “Alley” means a public or private way permanently reserved as a secondary, but not primary, means of access to abutting property.

C. “Applicant” means a person, firm, agent or developer, including a corporate person, who undertakes to create a subdivision, binding site plan or boundary line adjustment.

D. “AASHTO” means American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.

E. “Binding site plan” means a plan which illustrates the locations of all proposed uses, streets, roads, utilities, open spaces, and any other improvements or natural features as specified by the city of Sequim, and which contains descriptions and/or attachments setting forth all limitations and conditions of the use of the land which are established as conditions of approval, consistent with the requirements of Chapter 17.24 SMC. Binding site plans shall contain provisions which require development activities to be in conformity with the conditions of approval.

F. “Block” means a group of lots, tracts or parcels within well defined and fixed boundaries.

G. “Comprehensive plan” means the comprehensive plan of the city of Sequim, as approved or amended by the city council.

H. “Cul-de-sac” means a road closed at one end by a circular area of sufficient size for turning vehicles around.
[IMAGE]


I. “Dedication” means the deliberate appropriation of land by an owner for any general and/or public uses, reserving to the owner no other rights than such as are compatible with the full exercise and enjoyment of the public uses to which the property has been devoted. The intention to dedicate shall be evidenced by the owner by the presentment for filing of a final plat or final plan showing the dedication thereon; and, the acceptance by the public shall be evidenced by the approval of such plat for filing by the city.

J. “Easement” means a covenant which grants or restricts a specific right of use of a specifically designated portion of property.

K. “Flexible lot subdivisions” means those subdivisions which propose a variance in particular lot design and bulk and dimension requirements, but which do not propose to vary from the use or density requirements of SMC Title 18.

L. “Health officer” means the Clallam County district health officer unless at some future time the city employs its own health officer.

M. “Lot” means a fractional part of subdivided lands having fixed boundaries, being of sufficient area and dimensions to meet minimum zoning requirements for width and area. The term shall include tracts and parcels.

N. “Plat” means a map or representation of a subdivision, showing thereon the division of a tract or parcel of lands into lots, blocks, roads and alleys or other divisions and dedications.

O. “Plat, final” means the final drawing of the subdivision or short plat and dedication prepared for filing for record with the county auditor and containing all elements and requirements set forth in this title and other applicable codes and ordinances.

P. “Plat, preliminary” means a neat and approximate drawing of a proposed subdivision or short plat showing the general layout of streets and alleys, lots, blocks, and other elements of a subdivision consistent with the provisions of this title.

Q. “Planned unit developments” means those developments proposed consistent with the requirements of Chapter 18.40 SMC, which adopt an “overlay” zone which may permit variance in the bulk, dimensional, density and use requirements of a particular zoning district.

R. “Replat” means the division, in whole or in part, of lands which were previously platted. Applications for replat which meet the criteria for approval as boundary line adjustments may be approved consistent with the requirements of Chapter 17.22 SMC, Boundary and Lot Line Adjustments. All other applications for replatting shall be considered subdivision applications and processed consistent with the applicable requirements of this title.

S. “SERP” means service extension review process, adopted by the city of Sequim and Clallam County, March 23, 1998.

T. “Short plat” or “minor subdivision” means the division or redivision of land into four or fewer lots, tracts, parcels, sites or divisions for the purpose of sale or transfer. For the purposes of compliance with other state and local codes and regulations, minor subdivisions or short plats shall be consistent with major subdivisions, except as set forth in this title. The provisions of RCW 58.17.060 apply to short plats.

U. “Street” means a public or approved private right-of-way which provides vehicular circulation or principal means of access to abutting properties, and which may also include provisions for public utilities, pedestrian walkways, public open space and recreation areas, cut and fill slopes and drainage.

V. “Subdivider” means a person, firm, agent or developer, including a corporate person, who undertakes to create a subdivision or short plat.

W. “Subdivision, major” or “subdivision” means the division of land into 10 or more lots, tracts, parcels, sites or divisions for the purpose of sale or lease or transfer and shall include all resubdivision or replatting of land. 

X. “Subdivision, minor” or “short plat” means the division or redivision of land into four or fewer lots, tracts, parcels, sites or divisions for the purpose of sale or transfer. For the purposes of compliance with other state and local codes and regulations minor subdivisions or short plats shall be consistent with major subdivisions.

Y. “SUDR” means streets and utilities development regulations.

Z. “WSDOT” means Washington State Department of Transportation. (Ord. 2010-016 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2006-019 § 2; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


Chapter 17.12 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT

Sections:

17.12.010    Administration.

17.12.015    Preapplication conference required.

17.12.020    Procedure – Application.

17.12.030    Procedure – Fees.

17.12.040    Procedure – Determination of completeness – Distribution of applications.

17.12.050    Procedure – Notice of hearing.

17.12.060    Development of illegally divided land.

17.12.070    Penalties for violation.

17.12.080    Optional code election.


17.12.010 Administration.

The planning department shall administer the subdivision and platting regulations of this title. The planning department may prepare and require the use of such forms as are essential to such administration. The planning department, where applicable, shall review all proposed subdivisions for the purpose of determining conformance with state law, the general purposes of the comprehensive plan, and the design standards and engineering specifications found in this title. Final authority to approve plats and subdivisions resides with the planning director and/or city council, as applicable. Notwithstanding this precept, it is the intent that the planning director has the authority to make advisory determinations in accordance with the provisions of this title. (Ord. 2007-014 § 1; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.12.015 Preapplication conference required.

Preapplication conference shall be required for all applications for subdivision, binding site plan and boundary line adjustment approval consistent with the provisions of SMC Title 20, unless preapplication is specifically exempted by the planning director. The following information shall be submitted with the request for a preapplication conference:

A. A completed preapplication form as provided by the city;

B. A preliminary sketch or conceptual design which includes proposed lot configurations, utilities, streets and rights-of-way, open spaces, and existing structures, improvements, and approximate location of any critical areas, irrigation or drainage ditches and other significant natural features;

C. A vicinity map and tax assessor’s parcel map, with the location of the subject property clearly marked. (Ord. 2007-014 § 1; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.12.020 Procedure – Application.

An application for subdivision, or subdivision exemption, as defined by SMC 17.04.020, shall include as applicable, the items specified in Table 17.12.020(A).

	Table 17.12.020(A)

	Application Type	Boundary Line Adjustment (BLAs)	Minor Subdivisions	Major Subdivisions	Binding Site Plans Major and Minor

	Required Submittal Item

	Preapplication meeting	X1	X1	X	X1

	Preapplication checklist (provided by the city of Sequim) and a preliminary sketch or conceptual design as per SMC 17.12.015, and a vicinity map and tax assessor’s parcel map, with the location of the subject property clearly marked	 	X1	X	X1

	Subdivision or plan name	 	X	X	X

	Completed application form	X	X	X	X

	Legal description (township, section and range, tax parcel number)	X	X	X	X

	Preliminary sketch (drawn at 1" = 100')	X	X	X	X

	North arrow	X	X	X	X

	Bar scale	X	X	X	X

	Acreage of proposed lots or tracts	X	X	X	X

	Dimensions of proposed lots or structures	X	X	X	X

	Size and location of existing structures	X	X	X	X

	Size and location of existing and proposed streets, alleys and rights-of-way, including proposed ownership	X	X	X	X

	Proposed open spaces or public or private dedications for lands, trails, parks or passive and active recreation	 	X	X	X

	Location of streams, irrigation ditches, drainage ditches, wetlands, ponds, floodways or other water courses on or within 200' of the proposed project	X	X	X	X

	Location, extent and type of wooded areas and all trees greater than eight inches in diameter, or identified as species of local significance	X	X	X	X

	Location and extent of existing and proposed landscaping	 	X	X	X

	Location and extent of steep slopes (more than 15%) and other significant physical features	X	X	X	X

	Proposed and existing easements for ingress, egress, utility corridors, irrigation ditch access, and other easements	X	X	X	X

	Adjacent property owners’ list for all properties located within a 300' radius obtained for Clallam County assessor’s office	 	X	X	X

	Two separate illustrations or plan maps or diagrams, drawn to a common scale, depicting the “before” and “after” conditions of the proposed adjustment	X	 	 	 

	A title report, subdivision certificate, or other proof of ownership which documents any previous land use approvals	 	X	X	X

	A scaled vicinity map showing the subject property in reference to surrounding properties, streets, subdivisions, municipal boundaries, identified critical areas within 500' of the subject property, and including a north arrow	 	X	X	X

	Copies of any existing and/or proposed deed restrictions or covenants	X	X	X	X

	Draft maintenance agreements and proposed management entities responsible for tax payments and maintenance of common facilities (such as roads, stormwater facilities, open spaces, trails, parks, etc.)	 	X	X	X

	Preliminary phasing plan, if proposed	 	 	X	X

	Preliminary stormwater drainage plans, prepared consistent with the requirements of SMC Title 13	 	X	X	X

	Preliminary utility plans, including provisions for water, sewer, underground power where appropriate, telecommunications, and solid waste disposal	 	X	X	X

	Preliminary road plans including plan, sections, and profiles	 	X2	X	X

	Preliminary clearing and grading plans, including cut and fill amounts	 	X	X	X

	Environmental information worksheet and SEPA checklist	 	X3	X	X3

	Preliminary landscaping plans	 	 	X	X

	A description of how parking requirements will be met	 	 	X	X

	Any additional materials, as determined by the department during the required preapplication meeting, to be necessary to fully evaluate the application	X	X	X	X

	For proposed replatting of existing subdivisions: the lots, blocks, streets, etc. of the original plat shown with dotted lines in the proper positions in relation to the new arrangement of the plat, the new plat being clearly shown in solid lines to avoid ambiguity	 	X	X	X

	Number of copies required of application materials to be submitted	3	3	3	3

	Number of copies of any plats, plans or maps greater than 11" x 17"	30	30	30	30

	Notes	1.    Preapplication conference may be waived by permission of the planning director.

2.    Sections and profiles may not be required for minor subdivisions or short plats, with permission of the planning director.

3.    Minor subdivisions or short plats of four or fewer lots and minor binding site plans may be exempt from SEPA, consistent with the requirements of SMC Title 16 and WAC 197-11-800.

(Ord. 2010-016 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2007-014 § 1; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.12.030 Procedure – Fees.

Application fees shall be paid consistent with Chapter 20.05 SMC, Fee Schedule. (Ord. 2007-014 § 1; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.12.040 Procedure – Determination of completeness – Distribution of applications.

If in the opinion of the director of the department of community development or his/her designee, the application is deemed complete, consistent with requirements of SMC Title 20, a copy of the application shall be forwarded to the appropriate agencies and officials, and the application shall be noticed consistent with the requirements of SMC Title 20, Land Use and Development. (Ord. 2011-017 § 2; Ord. 2007-014 § 1; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.12.050 Procedure – Notice of hearing.

When required, the department of community development shall provide notice of a public hearing consistent with the requirements of SMC Title 20, Land Use and Development. (Ord. 2011-017 § 1; Ord. 2007-014 § 1; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.12.060 Development of illegally divided land.

An application for a building permit, septic tank installation or other development permit for any lot, tract or parcel of land divided in violation of state law or this title shall not be granted without prior approval of the city council, consistent with the provisions of Chapter 58.17 RCW. (Ord. 2007-014 § 1; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.12.070 Penalties for violation.

A. In the event subdivision occurs in violation of the provisions of this title, the city has the authority to enjoin any transfer, sale, agreement, lease or option concerning the property involved; or to bring an appropriate action for damages, abatement, specific performance or any other remedy allowed by law; provided, that the failure of the city to so enjoin any transfer, etc., does not prejudice the city’s other rights under this title.

B. The costs of such action will be assessed against the person, firm, corporation or agent selling or transferring the property, including reasonable attorneys’ fees.

C. Any person, agent, firm or developer who violates any provision of this title is subject to the penalties and provisions as set forth in Chapter 1.13 SMC, Code Enforcement, and/or RCW 58.17.300 as applicable. (Ord. 2019-013 (Exh. B); Ord. 2007-014 § 1; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.12.080 Optional code election.

A landowner or developer of property in the city of Sequim whose property has been approved for development in conformance with Chapter 17.20 SMC (Subdivisions) and Chapter 17.24 SMC (Binding Site Plans) may elect to have the SMC existing at the time of the election apply to the property and waive the right to have the SMC in existence at the time of the determination of completeness as defined in SMC 20.01.130 apply to the property with respect to current bulk and dimensional standards and/or building codes; provided, that the use of such new regulations does not require changes to recorded documents.

Such election and waiver shall be in writing, acknowledged and filed with the department of community development of the city of Sequim and shall be submitted by the owner or owners of all lots, units or divisions in the development or approved separate phase of the development, as the case may be. (Ord. 2011-017 § 1; Ord. 2007-014 § 1)


Chapter 17.20 SUBDIVISIONS

Sections:

17.20.010    Subdivision procedure.

17.20.015    Preapplication conference required.

17.20.020    Submittal documents.

17.20.030    Review required.

17.20.040    Approval criteria.

17.20.050    Dedications and/or easements – Required.

17.20.060    Preliminary plat approval.

17.20.070    Authorization for subdivider.

17.20.080    Expiration and requests for extension.

17.20.090    Expiration of phased development proposals – No development agreement.

17.20.100    Expiration of phased development proposals – With approved development agreement.


17.20.010 Subdivision procedure.

All applications for subdivision shall be considered by the city, consistent with the requirements of SMC Title 20. 

A. Major subdivision shall include those applications for land division which request approval for five or more parcels or divisions.

B. Minor subdivision or short plats shall include those applications for land division which request approval for four or less parcels or divisions. (Ord. 2010-016 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.20.015 Preapplication conference required.

A preapplication conference shall be required for all applications for subdivision, consistent with the requirements of SMC 17.12.015. (Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.20.020 Submittal documents.

An application for major subdivision or minor subdivision shall include all materials specified in Table 17.12.020(A). (Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.20.030 Review required.

Review of the proposed application shall include consideration of all public and agency comment or testimony received. The city engineer shall evaluate and determine the engineering accuracy of the proposed subdivision, including but not limited to, the proposed street system, the proposed sewage disposal system, the proposed storm drainage system and the proposed water supply system. The planning department shall evaluate and determine the proposal’s conformance with the comprehensive plan and all zoning requirements. The public works department shall evaluate the application to determine the adequacy of system improvements and capacity. (Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.20.040 Approval criteria.

The city shall not approve applications for subdivisions unless it is demonstrated by the subdivider that each of the following criteria has been met or will be met:

A. Each lot resulting from the subdivision shall conform with the comprehensive plan and zoning regulations;

B. Each lot shall adjoin a public street or a private street in the subdivision;

C. Curb, gutter, sidewalk, trail connections, transit stops, streets, storm drainage, sanitary sewer lines, water lines and other utilities as required shall be installed at the expense of the applicant and meet city specifications and applicable ordinances and the city engineer has certified or approved the proposed plans;

D. The subdivider has provided an easement for utilities transmission services, if necessary;

E. Private property necessary for public use for streets will be dedicated by a deed of dedication acceptable to the city or by preparing a plat to be recorded;

F. A bond will be posted to ensure completion of those improvements required under these criteria but not yet installed or provided;

G. Adequate public facilities will be provided, as required by the adopted capital facilities plan. These facilities may include, but not necessarily be limited to, parks, playgrounds, schools, open spaces, transit stops, and trails and trail connections;

H. All requirements of the environmentally sensitive areas and wetlands sections of the SMC and the State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA) have been met;

I. No development may occur which causes a flooding hazard, and until any development occurring within an identified floodplain has been properly mitigated;

J. The public interest will be served by the proposal;

K. All the requirements of Chapter 58.17 RCW have been met; and

L. The proposed project phasing schedule, if applicable, meets the requirements contained in SMC 17.20.090. (Ord. 2007-002 § 1; Ord. 2005-022 § 1; Ord. 2004-015 § 1; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.20.050 Dedications and/or easements – Required.

No plat shall be approved unless all areas to be used by the public which are required to be dedicated are conveyed to, and accepted by the city, and all easements which are required as conditions of approval are granted in a form acceptable to the city. (Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.20.060 Preliminary plat approval.

Preliminary plat approval shall be granted by the city after adoption of findings of fact, conclusions and conditions, which clearly describe the proposed subdivision and the proposals consistent with all applicable review criteria. In addition all conditions which are required to be met prior to final plat approval shall be specifically described in the findings. (Ord. 2005-022 § 2; Ord. 2004-015 § 2; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.20.070 Authorization for subdivider.

Approval of the preliminary plat by the city, consistent with the provisions of SMC Title 20, shall constitute authorization for the subdivider to develop the subdivision’s facilities and improvements in strict accordance with final design and/or construction drawings which have been reviewed and approved by the public works director, with state laws, this title and all applicable conditions of the preliminary plat approval. (Ord. 2005-022 § 3; Ord. 2004-015 § 3; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.20.080 Expiration and requests for extension.

A. The preliminary plat approval shall expire after five years unless a proposed final plat, in proper form, and meeting all final plat requirements, is submitted to the city department of community development; provided, however, that an extension of time, not to exceed one year, may be granted by the city council upon the recommendation of the director of the department of community development. Only two such extensions shall be granted. However, any extension of time may require additional review and shall require application of all applicable land use regulations including zoning adopted subsequent to the vesting date of the application as additional conditions of approval. This section shall be interpreted to be consistent with RCW 58.17.140.

B. Effective June 10, 2010, through December 31, 2014, preliminary plat approval shall expire seven years after approval. This seven-year expiration of preliminary plats shall apply to unexpired preliminary plats in existence on June 10, 2010, and to valid complete preliminary plats applied for between June 10, 2010, and December 31, 2014, inclusive. No extensions shall be granted. Effective January 1, 2015, preliminary plat expiration and extensions shall be governed by subsection A of this section. (Ord. 2011-017 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 2010-015 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2010-001 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2005-022 § 4; Ord. 2004-015 § 4; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.20.090 Expiration of phased development proposals – No development agreement.

Preliminary plats that have been approved for phased development consistent with the requirements of Chapter 17.26 SMC shall submit a proposed final plat (or request for extension in appropriate form) for the development within five years of the date of preliminary plat approval, seven years if preliminary plat approval was in accordance with SMC 17.20.080(B). Subsequent phases shall be required to submit proposed final plats within five years of the date of preliminary approval, or seven years if SMC 17.20.080(B) applies, excepting that the city council may approve an alternative date of expiration for subsequent phases if an approved development agreement consistent with the requirements of SMC 17.26.070 and SMC Title 20 has been adopted. (Ord. 2010-015 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2005-022 § 5; Ord. 2004-015 § 5; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.20.100 Expiration of phased development proposals – With approved development agreement.

Phased developments with approved development agreements entered into pursuant to SMC 17.26.070 shall be governed by SMC 17.26.070 and the development agreement. (Ord. 2010-015 § 1 (Exh. A))


Chapter 17.21 FINAL PLATS

Sections:

17.21.010    Final plats.

17.21.020    Statement of completion.

17.21.030    Dedications and easements to be shown on plat.

17.21.040    Notice to title.

17.21.050    Final plat approval or disapproval.

17.21.060    Repealed.


17.21.010 Final plats.

A final plat consistent with the requirements of Chapter 58.17 RCW shall be filed with the department of community development, which shall acknowledge receipt thereof and indicate whether it meets the requirements of the city. Upon finding in the affirmative, the department shall forward the original to the city council or the director of the department of community development, as applicable for final approval. Should the submitted final plat not meet the requirements of the city, it shall be returned to the subdivider with detailed notes describing all identified areas of noncompliance. (Ord. 2011-017 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 2007-014 § 2; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.21.020 Statement of completion.

The public works director and city engineer shall each submit a statement to the director of the department of community development verifying that the subdivider has completed the required installations in accordance with the provisions of this title, the preliminary plat approval, and the specifications and standards of the departments. (Ord. 2011-017 § 2; Ord. 2007-014 § 2; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.21.030 Dedications and easements to be shown on plat.

All dedications of land and/or easements shall be clearly and precisely indicated on the face of the final plat. (Ord. 2007-014 § 2; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.21.040 Notice to title.

A notice to title shall be included on the face of the final plat which indicated that city approval of the subdivision does not automatically dedicate the use of water, sewer, stormwater, solid waste disposal or other utilities of the city, unless specifically provided for in the preliminary plat approvals, or in an approved development agreement. Potential purchasers of the property should be advised to contact the city for information regarding assessments and fees for utility services. (Ord. 2007-014 § 2; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.21.050 Final plat approval or disapproval.

A. The city council or director of the department of community development, as applicable, shall determine:

1. Whether all conditions imposed when the preliminary plat was approved have been successfully met;

2. Whether any bonds proposed will assure the completion of unconstructed improvements;

3. Whether the public use and interest will be served by approving the proposed final plat;

4. Whether the requirements of state law and this chapter have been satisfied by the subdivider; and

5. Any required bond has been posted to insure completion of those improvements required under these criteria but not yet installed or provided, consistent with the criteria of Chapter 17.64 SMC.

B. The city council and/or director of the department of community development shall approve or disapprove the proposed final plat through adoption of written findings of facts. The subdivider shall file the original final plat with the county auditor for the record and return a reproducible copy to the city clerk who shall retain the reproducible copy in the files of the department of community development. (Ord. 2011-017 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 2007-014 § 2; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.21.060 Alteration of final plats.

Repealed by Ord. 2016-010. (Ord. 2011-017 § 1; Ord. 2007-014 § 2)


Chapter 17.22 BOUNDARY AND LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS

Sections:

17.22.010    Purpose.

17.22.020    Approval required.

17.22.025    Change in zoning.

17.22.030    Application and fees.

17.22.040    Recordation required.


17.22.010 Purpose.

The purpose of boundary and lot line adjustments is to provide for minor alterations to the configuration or area of existing platted and unplatted lots in lieu of filing an application for subdivision or replat. (Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.22.020 Approval required. 

Boundary and lot line adjustments may be made in accordance with RCW 58.17.040(6); provided, that written administrative approval by the director of the department of community development, consistent with the provisions of SMC Title 20, is granted. All approved boundary or lot line adjustments shall ensure that:

A. No additional lot, tract, parcel, site or division is created;

B. No lot, tract, parcel, site or division which does not meet the building lot criteria for dimensions and area within a zoning district is created;

C. No lot line or boundary line subject to adjustment is realigned equal to or more than 90 degrees from its pre-existing configuration;

D. The total area involved in the lot line adjustment is no greater than one-half of the area of the largest lot to be adjusted;

E. The cumulative effect of the proposed boundary and/or lot line adjustment and all previous boundary and lot line adjustments involving any of the subject properties would not serve to erode the purpose of this title and Chapter 58.17 RCW;

F. No environmental impacts would occur from allowing the boundary line or lot line adjustment; and

G. The health, safety and welfare of the public will be protected. (Ord. 2011-017 § 2; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.22.025 Change in zoning. 

If the net effect of a proposed boundary or lot line adjustment would create a change in zoning consistent with the standards of SMC 18.16.050, Boundary interpretation, then the application shall be docketed for review and approval consistent with the requirements for a Type III Comprehensive Plan Amendment, Chapter 18.88 SMC. (Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.22.030 Application and fees. 

Boundary and lot line adjustments shall be by application to the city. Fees shall be paid consistent with Chapter 20.05 SMC, Fee Schedule. A preapplication, consistent with the requirements of SMC 17.12.015, may be required. An application for boundary or lot line adjustment shall include all materials specified in Table 17.12.020(A). (Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.22.040 Recordation required. 

The approved boundary and/or lot line adjustment shall be prepared for recordation by a registered and licensed land surveyor. The final boundary and/or lot line adjustment shall include a certificate giving a full and correct description of the lands being adjusted as they appear on the map to be recorded, including the statement that the adjustment has been made with the free consent and in accordance with the desires of the owners. The final boundary and/or lot fine adjustment shall be reviewed and approved by the director of the department of community development prior to being recorded by the applicant with the county auditor. Copies of the recorded boundary or lot line adjustment shall be filed with the city clerk. (Ord. 2011-017 § 2; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


Chapter 17.24 BINDING SITE PLANS

Sections:

17.24.010    Purpose and adoption authority.

17.24.020    Applicability.

17.24.025    Binding site plans – Minor.

17.24.030    Preapplication conference required.

17.24.040    Application.

17.24.050    Fees.

17.24.060    Distribution of plans.

17.24.070    Notice of hearing.

17.24.080    Hearing.

17.24.090    Design regulations.

17.24.100    Preliminary approval and authorization for land divider.

17.24.110    Expiration.

17.24.120    Final binding site plan – Requirements.

17.24.130    Final binding site plan survey requirements.

17.24.140    Final binding site plan approval and filing.

17.24.150    Performance bonds in lieu of required improvements.

17.24.160    Development in conformity with the final binding site plan.

17.24.170    Repealed.


17.24.010 Purpose and adoption authority.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish a binding site plan review procedure as provided for under the authority of RCW 58.17.040(4), (5) and (7). The binding site plan serves as an official land use control pursuant to Chapter 36.70 RCW. Binding site plans provide an alternative to the conventional platting requirements of the State Subdivision Act (Chapter 58.17 RCW) and allow more flexibility in design and operation of manufactured home parks, recreational vehicle parks, condominium developments, multifamily developments, planned unit developments and commercial and industrial developments. (Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.24.020 Applicability.

A. Binding site plan review and approval pursuant to this chapter shall be required prior to undertaking any of the following actions:

1. Divisions of land for lease for commercial or industrial uses; and/or

2. Divisions of land for lease where no residential structures, other than recreational vehicles are permitted; and/or

3. The establishment of manufactured home parks, where no lots will be sold; and/or

4. The establishment of condominium developments.

B. Binding site plan review and approval pursuant to this chapter may be pursued as an alternative to the subdivision process for any of the following actions:

1. Divisions of land for sale which is restricted to commercial or industrial uses.

2. Multifamily or apartment complex development where no lots are to be sold. (Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.24.025 Binding site plans – Minor.

Binding site plans which do not require State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA) review, consistent with the requirements of SMC Title 16, may be considered minor binding site plans, and may be reviewed administratively, consistent with the requirements of SMC Title 20. The director of the department of community development may determine that an application for binding site plan which does not require SEPA review will be considered a major binding site plan if, in the director’s determination, the scope, scale, size or impact of the proposal requires additional review and a public hearing. (Ord. 2011-017 § 2; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.24.030 Preapplication conference required. 

A preapplication conference shall be required for all applications for binding site plan approval consistent with the provisions of Chapter 20.01 SMC. Information for a preapplication conference shall be submitted consistent with the requirements of SMC 17.12.015. (Ord. 98-005 § 4)




17.24.040 Application. 

Any person with an ownership interest or permission of the owners desiring approval of a binding site plan shall submit the application materials required in SMC 17.12.020(A). (Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.24.050 Fees. 

Application fees shall be paid consistent with SMC Chapter 20.05, Fee Schedule. (Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.24.060 Distribution of plans. 

If in the opinion of the planning department the application contains sufficient data to determine approval or disapproval they shall affix a file name or number and date of receipt to the application, forward copies of the preliminary site plan to the appropriate agencies and officials, and notice the project consistent with the requirements of SMC Title 20, Land Use and Development. (Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.24.070 Notice of hearing. 

The planning department shall provide for notice of the public hearing consistent with the requirements of SMC Title 20, Land Use and Development. (Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.24.080 Hearing. 

In addition to any relevant evidence received from the general public or the parties involved, the city engineer shall evaluate and determine the engineering accuracy of the proposed binding site plan, including but not limited to the proposed street system, the proposed sewage disposal system, the proposed storm drainage system and the water supply system. The planning department shall evaluate and determine the proposal’s conformance with the comprehensive plan and all zoning requirements. The public works department shall evaluate the adequacy of utility system improvements and capacity. (Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.24.090 Design regulations. 

The city council shall not approve applications for binding site plan approval unless it is demonstrated by the applicant that each of the following criteria has been met or shall be met:

A. Each use of the land resulting from the adoption of the binding site plan conforms with the comprehensive plan and with zoning regulations, including lot coverage, setbacks, building heights, off-street parking requirements, landscaping buffering and permitted uses within zoning districts;

B. Adequate provisions for on- and off-site circulation and connection with the surrounding road net have been proposed, consistent with adopted city standards;

C. Curb, gutter, sidewalk, trail connections, transit stops, streets, storm drainage, sanitary sewer lines, water lines and other utilities will be installed at the expense of the applicant and meet city specifications and applicable ordinances and the city engineer has certified or approved the proposed plans for the construction;

D. The applicant has provided, if necessary, easements to the city to accommodate the establishment of municipal utilities;

E. Private property necessary for public use as street rights-of-way have been dedicated to the city by an acceptable deed of dedication or by preparing a plat to be recorded;

F. A bond has been posted to ensure completion of those unconstructed improvements required consistent with the criteria found in this chapter;

G. Adequate public facilities are provided as required by the adopted capital facilities plan; these facilities may include, but are not necessarily limited to, parks, playgrounds, schools, open spaces, transit stops, and trails and trail connections;

H. All requirements of the environmentally sensitive areas and wetlands sections of the SMC and the State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA) have been met;

I. No development shall occur which causes a flooding hazard, and until any development occurring within an identified floodplain has been properly mitigated;

J. The pubic interest will be served by the proposal;

K. All the requirements of Chapter 58.17 RCW have been met; and

L. All proposed project phasing schedule shall meet the requirements contained in SMC 17.20.090. (Ord. 2005-022 § 6; Ord. 2004-015 § 6; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.24.100 Preliminary approval and authorization for land divider.

Preliminary approval of the binding site plan by the city council, consistent with the provisions of SMC Title 20, shall constitute authorization for the applicant and/or project proponent to develop the required facilities and improvements in strict accordance with state laws and the standards contained in this title. (Ord. 2005-022 § 7; Ord. 2004-015 § 7; Ord. 2004-013 § 1; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.24.110 Expiration. 

The approval given to a binding site plan shall expire within three years following approval unless a proposed final plan, in proper form, is submitted to the city planning department; provided, however, that an extension of time, not to exceed one year, may be granted by the city council upon the recommendation of the planning director. Only two such extensions shall be granted. However, any extension of time may require additional review and additional conditions of approval, if in the determination of the city council such review or conditions are required. (Ord. 2005-022 § 8; Ord. 2004-015 § 8; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.24.120 Final binding site plan – Requirements. 

The proposed binding site plan shall be submitted in triplicate, including a photo-reproducible mylar copy. Each binding site plan shall consist of one or more pages, each 18 inches wide by 24 inches long, clearly and legibly drawn.

The perimeter of the binding site plan shall be depicted with heavier lines than appear elsewhere on the plan. The scale shall be 50 feet to one inch, unless a different scale is required by the city engineer. A margin of at least one-half inch shall be left around each sheet.

Every final binding site plan shall include an accurate map of the land based on a complete survey consistent with the requirements of this title. The final plan shall contain, but not be limited to the following information:

A. All section, township, municipal and county lines lying within or adjacent to the binding site plan shall be illustrated;

B. A description of all corners necessary to determine the exterior boundaries of the binding site plan and showing bearing and distance ties to a minimum of two monument corners of record which were used for the survey;

C. The boundary of the binding site plan complete with bearing to the nearest one second and lineal dimensions to the nearest one-hundredth of a foot. The location of all proposed building sites located within the boundaries of the binding site plan; provided, that the building sites locations need only be staked, not surveyed and monumented;

D. The length of all straight lines, and the radii, length of arcs and central angles of all curves;

E. The location, width, centerline, ownership and name and number of all streets within and adjoining the binding site plan; the location of all required improvements, including but not limited to street lights, utilities, fire hydrants, parking areas, sidewalks and trails etc.;

F. The location, width, and descriptions of all easements shall be illustrated by broken lines;

G. A statement identifying the purpose and permitted uses for all common areas other than streets;

H. Dedications to the public or easements granted to the city and/or the lot owners shall be clearly indicated on the face of the final plan;

I. A notice to title shall be included on the face of the plan which indicates that city approval of the binding site plan does not automatically dedicate the use of water, sewer, stormwater, solid waste disposal or other utilities of the city, unless specifically provided for in the preliminary plat approvals, or in an approved development agreement. Potential purchasers of the property should be advised to contact the city for information regarding assessments and fees for utility services;

J. The name and project number of the binding site plan as assigned by the city, a bar scale, north arrow and date of preparation, including revision dates;

K. A legal description of the land contained with the binding site plan;

L. A signed statement by the registered land surveyor who prepared the binding site plan, attesting that it is a true and correct representation of the lands surveyed;

M. The following statement shall be placed verbatim on the face of the plan: “No portion of this binding site plan may be altered, amended, deleted, added to or changed in any manner except by application of amendment to the city of Sequim”;

N. A statement of approval by the city engineer;

O. A statement of approval by the county health officer (if septic facilities are proposed);

P. A statement as to the ownership and maintenance agreements governing any proposed common areas. This statement shall reference all lot owners’ agreements which are filed concurrently;

Q. Every plan filed for record must contain a certificate giving the full and correct description of the divided lands as they appear on the binding site plan, including a statement that the plan has been made with the free consent and in accordance with the desires of the owners. This statement shall be signed and acknowledged by a notary public;

R. A signed statement by the director of the department of community development that the binding site plan has been established consistent with the requirements and conditions of the approved preliminary binding site plan, and that all of the conditions thereof have been met and the plan as established is consistent with all applicable city land controls;

S. A signed statement from the Clallam County treasurer that all taxes have been paid in advance on all property included in the binding site plan;

T. A space for the county auditor to sign the plan for recording purposes;

U. A signed copy of the lot owners’ association bylaws, and articles of incorporation, if applicable; and

V. A recent (30-day period) title report specific to the subject property which shows all persons having ownership interest in the property. (Ord. 2011-017 § 2; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.24.130 Final binding site plan survey requirements. 

The survey shall be performed in full compliance with the Survey Recording Act, Chapter 58.09 RCW, RCW 58.17.160(3) and 58.24.040. (Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.24.140 Final binding site plan approval and filing.

A binding site plan shall be approved if the city council finds that the following requirements have been satisfied:

A. The binding site plan is determined to be in conformance with this chapter and contains the signatures and approvals of all of the required officials; and

B. All required on-site and off-site improvements have been installed, and approved by the city, and all outstanding conditions of the preliminary binding site plan approval have been satisfied.

Development permits for on-site buildings and structures (excepting those required to accommodate utility infrastructure) may not be issued until the final binding site plan has been filed by the applicant for the record with the county auditor. (Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.24.150 Performance bonds in lieu of required improvements.

Performance bonds may be accepted in lieu of required improvements for a binding site plan consistent with the requirements of this title. (Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.24.160 Development in conformity with the final binding site plan.

Following final approval of a binding site plan pursuant to the requirements of this chapter, any and all development and use of the land to which the plan pertains shall be in conformity with all conditions and requirements of final approval. Development undertaken pursuant to the conditions and requirements of an approved binding site plan shall be established consistent with the requirements of all other applicable city and state codes. (Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.24.170 Amendment.

Repealed by Ord. 2016-010. (Ord. 2011-017 § 2; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


Chapter 17.25 VACATION AND ALTERATION OF FINAL PLATS

Sections:

17.25.010    Purpose.

17.25.020    Administration.

17.25.030    Procedure.

17.25.040    Requirements for a complete application.

17.25.050    Criteria for approval.

17.25.060    Time limitation for final decision.

17.25.070    Recording.


17.25.010 Purpose.

A. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and allow vacation or alteration of approved final plats and approved binding site plans. It does not allow modification or revision of preliminary plats or preliminary binding site plans. The procedure for vacation of plats does not apply to the vacation or alteration of any plat of state-granted tide or shore lands.

B. When the vacation application is specifically for a city street, the procedures for street vacations in Chapter 35.79 RCW shall be utilized for the street vacation. When the application is for the vacation of the plat or binding site plan together with the roads/streets, the procedure for vacation in this chapter shall be used, but vacations of streets subject to RCW 35.79.035 may not be made under this procedure.

C. Nothing in this chapter is intended to conflict with Washington State law, Chapter 58.17 RCW as now enacted or hereafter amended. If any portion of this chapter conflicts with state law, state law shall control. (Ord. 2016-010 § 2 (Exh. A))


17.25.020 Administration.

The director of the department of community development, or designee, is authorized and directed to administer the provisions of this chapter. The authority to approve, approve with conditions or deny proposed plat and binding site plan vacations or alterations is granted to the city council after a public hearing. (Ord. 2016-010 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-017 § 2)


17.25.030 Procedure.

The following steps shall be followed in the processing of vacation or alteration applications:

A. SMC 20.01.130, Submission and acceptance of application – Determination of completeness – Additional information and project revisions;

B. SMC 20.01.140, Application review – Notice of application – Referrals;

C. SMC Title 16, Environment;

D. Determination of Consistency. SMC 20.01.140(B)(10), Application review – Notice of application – Referrals, and SMC 20.01.170, Application review – Scope of review;

E. SMC 20.01.190, Notice of public hearing (see also additional public hearing notice below);

F. SMC 20.01.100, Type B and Type C-1 and C-2 procedures – Quasi-judicial decisions – Process overview;

G. SMC 20.01.200, Procedures for public hearings;

H. SMC 20.01.230, Final decision; and

I. SMC 20.01.240, Appeals.

Additional Notice of Public Hearing. In addition to the notice provided above, the city shall provide notice of an application for vacation or alteration to all owners of property within the subdivision (excluding the owners of property submitting the application), and as provided for in RCW 58.17.080 and 58.17.090. The notice shall establish the date of the public hearing. (Ord. 2016-010 § 2 (Exh. A))


17.25.040 Requirements for a complete application.

The following materials shall be submitted to the city for a complete application:

A. Vacation Application.

1. Date, name, address and telephone number of the applicant and/or property owner;

2. The reason(s) for the proposed vacation;

3. Signatures of all parties having an ownership interest in the subdivision or that portion of the subdivision proposed to be vacated;

4. If the subdivision or binding site plan is subject to restrictive covenants which were filed at the time of the approval of the subdivision, and the application for the vacation would result in the violation of a covenant, the application shall include an agreement signed by all parties subject to the covenants, which provides that the parties agree to terminate or alter the restrictive covenants to accomplish the purpose of the vacation of the subdivision or portion thereof;

5. Acknowledgment that if any street is included in the application for a vacation, that the applicant shall be required to pay the amount contemplated in RCW 35.79.030, if the vacation is granted;

6. A copy of the approved plat or binding site plan sought to be vacated, together with all plat or binding site plan amendments recorded since the date of the original approval;

7. A recent title report for each property affected by the vacation, confirming that the title of the lands as described and shown in the proposed vacation area is in the name of the owner(s) signing the application;

8. If the vacation is for a portion of the subdivision or binding site plan, the applicant must demonstrate that the partial vacation will not violate the terms of subdivision or binding site plan approval or this chapter;

9. Electronic version of all submittal documents on optical disc, flash drive or downloadable from FTP site, in either Adobe PDF or Microsoft Word format; and

10. An application fee.

B. Alteration Application.

1. Date, name, address and telephone number of the applicant and/or property owner;

2. The reason(s) for the proposed alteration;

3. Signatures of the majority of those persons having an ownership interest in the lots, tracts, parcels, sites or divisions in the subdivision proposed to be altered;

4. If the subdivision or binding site plan is subject to restrictive covenants which were filed at the time of the approval of the subdivision or binding site plan, and the application for the alteration would result in the violation of a covenant, the application shall contain an agreement signed by all parties subject to the covenants, providing that the parties agree to terminate or alter the relevant covenants to accomplish the purpose of the alteration of the subdivision or binding site plan;

5. A copy of the proposed plat sought to be altered, together with all plat amendments recorded;

6. A recent title report for each property affected by the vacation, confirming that the title of the lands as described and shown in the proposed vacation area is in the name of the owner(s) signing the application;

7. If the alteration is for a portion of the subdivision or binding site plan, the applicant must demonstrate that the alteration will not violate the terms of subdivision or binding site plan approval or this chapter;

8. Electronic version of all submittal documents on optical disc, flash drive or downloadable from FTP site, in either Adobe PDF or Microsoft Word format; and

9. An application fee. (Ord. 2016-010 § 2 (Exh. A))


17.25.050 Criteria for approval.

A. Vacation Criteria.

1. Vacation. The plat or binding site plan vacation may be approved, approved with conditions or denied after a written determination, with findings and conclusions, is made whether the public use and interest will be served by the vacation. If any portion of the land contained in the subdivision or binding site plan was dedicated to the public for public use and benefit, such land, if not already deeded to the city, shall be deeded to the city as a condition of approval, unless the city decision-maker shall make findings that the public use would not be served in retaining title to those lands. Easements established by a dedication are property rights that cannot be extinguished or altered without the approval of the easement owner or owners, unless the plat, binding site plan or other document creating the dedicated easement provides for an alternative method or methods to extinguish or alter the easement.

2. Street Vacation. When the vacation application is specifically for vacation of a city street, the city’s street vacation procedures (and/or the procedures in Chapter 35.79 RCW) shall be utilized. When the procedure is for the vacation of a plat or binding site plan together with the streets, the vacation procedure in this chapter shall be used, but vacation of streets may not be made that are prohibited under RCW 35.79.035 or the city’s street vacation ordinance.

3. Title to Vacated Property. Title to the vacated property shall vest with the rightful owner as shown on the county records. If the vacated land is land that was dedicated to the public, for public use other than a road or street, and the legislative authority has found that retaining title to the land is not in the public interest, title thereto shall vest with the person(s) owning the property on each side thereof, as determined by the legislative authority. When the road or street that is to be vacated is contained wholly within the subdivision or binding site plan and is part of the boundary of the subdivision or binding site plan, title to the vacated road or street shall vest with the owner(s) of property contained within the vacated subdivision or binding site plan.

B. Alteration Criteria. The alteration may be approved, approved with conditions or denied after a written determination, with findings and conclusions, is made whether the public use and interest will be served by the alteration. If any land within the alteration area is part of an assessment district, any outstanding assessments shall be equitably divided and levied against the remaining lots, parcels or tracts, or be levied equitably on the lots resulting from the alteration. If any land within the alteration contains a dedication to the general use of persons residing within the subdivision, such land may be altered and divided equitably between the adjacent properties. (Ord. 2016-010 § 2 (Exh. A))


17.25.060 Time limitation for final decision.

A vacation or alteration application shall be approved, approved with conditions or denied within 120 days after a complete application has been submitted, unless the applicant consents in writing to an extension of such time period. (Ord. 2016-010 § 2 (Exh. A))


17.25.070 Recording.

After approval of the alteration or vacation, the city shall order the applicant to produce a revised drawing of the approved alteration or vacation of the short plat, final plat or binding site plan. The council shall authorize the mayor to sign the approved short plat or final plat, and then the city shall file it with the county auditor at the applicant’s cost, to become the lawful plat of the property (or to vacate the previously approved plat). The director of the department of community development shall sign the approved binding site plan and arrange for filing with the county auditor at the applicant’s cost. (Ord. 2016-010 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-017 § 2)


Chapter 17.26 PHASED DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

Sections:

17.26.010    Purpose.

17.26.020    Applicability.

17.26.030    Phasing plan required.

17.26.040    Approval.

17.26.050    Final plat approval.

17.26.060    Bonding.

17.26.070    Development agreements.


17.26.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to facilitate the establishment of larger, more complex projects with significant infrastructure requirements by establishing a procedure which allows applications proposed consistent with the requirements of this title to complete infrastructure and other improvements in phases. Proposed phasing plans shall be reviewed and adopted in a manner which ensures that each phase is self-sufficient and is not dependent on subsequent phases to fulfill infrastructure requirements and other conditions of approval. Phased development which is approved consistent with the requirements of this title may proceed with a minimum of additional review, unless otherwise specified in this chapter. (Ord. 2010-015 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.26.020 Applicability. 

Phased development plans may be considered for those proposed projects which meet the following requirements:

A. The proposed project includes 10 or more lots or tracts; and

B. The proposed project includes a land area of two acres or greater. (Ord. 2010-015 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.26.030 Phasing plan required.

Applications for subdivision or binding site plan approval which propose to complete the required infrastructure improvements in phases shall include a preliminary phasing plan. A final phasing plan which incorporates all required conditions of approval and details infrastructure improvements and sequencing of the phases shall be submitted prior to any ground disturbing activities.

A. Preliminary phasing plans shall be submitted concurrently with the land use application. Preliminary phasing plans shall include the following information:

1. Illustrative maps for each proposed phase which clearly mark in heavy lines the boundaries of the subject phase, label the phase alphabetically (to avoid confusion with lot numbers), and depict roads, lots, infrastructure, easements, dedications and open space which are included within the subject phase. The plan shall also illustrate those proposed improvements which mitigate impacts associated with the unbuilt portions of the project which are not located within the boundaries of the subject phase. Previously established phases, including roads, lots, infrastructure, easements, dedications, and open space, should be shown on the map shaded or gray-scaled. All phasing maps shall be drawn at the same scale.

2. A narrative description or table which describes each phase and its associated improvements. In addition, the narrative or table shall demonstrate that each phase would comprise a “stand-alone” development which, should no subsequent phases be constructed, would meet or exceed the standards of this title and all other conditions of approval. The narrative should also describe the proposed timeline for completion of the entire project and any proposals to bond for required unbuilt or yet-to-be-constructed improvements.

B. The final phasing plan shall be submitted to the planning department prior to any ground disturbing activity, and shall include the following:

1. Illustrative maps for each proposed phase which clearly mark in heavy lines the boundaries of the subject phase, label the phase alphabetically (to avoid confusion with lot numbers), and depict roads, lots, infrastructure, easements, dedications and open space which are included within the subject phase. The plan shall also illustrate those proposed improvements which mitigate impacts associated with the unbuilt portions of the project which are not located within the boundaries of the subject phase. Previously established phases, including roads, lots, infrastructure, easements, dedications, and open space, should be shown on the map shaded or gray-scaled. All phasing maps shall be drawn at the same scale. The final phasing plan map should be drawn at the same scale as the preliminary plat map.

2. The final narrative description or table which describes each phase and its associated improvements. The final narrative shall also include the proposed timeline for completion of the entire project and any proposals to bond for required unbuilt improvements. (Ord. 2010-015 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.26.040 Approval.

The city council shall review and approve phasing plans only if the phasing plan does not erode the intent of the criteria for approval of the subdivision or binding site plan. In addition, phasing plans shall be reviewed to ensure that they meet or exceed the following criteria:

A. Each proposed phase shall provide no less than a proportionate fair share of required open space, recreation facilities, and/or dedications for public use concurrent with development. In cases where construction of a proportionate fair share improvement is not feasible or would result in incomplete facilities which do not mitigate the impacts of the phase, construction of the entire improvement shall be required;

B. All required off-site improvements which mitigate impacts associated with the subject phase shall be completed prior to final approval of that phase;

C. All phases shall be required to be stand-alone. No proposed prior phase shall be dependent on the completion of subsequent phases to be consistent with any required approvals and/or conditions, including, but not limited to: the looping of roads and utilities; the provision of fire flow; and the mitigation of transportation, recreation and/or public services impacts. Landscaping and parking improvement shall be provided within each phase as required;

D. Phases shall be constructed in the manner approved in the phasing plan to ensure orderly and planned development. Phases shall be planned to ensure the efficient construction of adjacent future phases (those phases immediately next to the subject phase, sharing a common boundary line), and to ensure that phased development does not allow for leapfrog development;

E. Infrastructure improvements which are required to serve the entire project may be constructed within a nonadjacent phase; and

F. Phasing plan timelines shall be approved only if they propose to establish all requirements of plat approval for the entire project within the time periods set out in SMC 17.20.080, unless the project is subject to a valid and fully executed SMC 17.26.070 development agreement. (Ord. 2010-015 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2005-022 § 9; Ord. 2004-015 § 9; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.26.050 Final plat approval.

Statutory time periods associated with final plat approval of successive project phases shall commence upon completion of the preceding project phase. All project phases shall be completed within the time period set out in SMC 17.20.080 unless the project is subject to a valid and fully executed SMC 17.26.070 development agreement. The preliminary plat of subsequent project phases shall automatically expire and become void if the applicant fails to timely file for approval of the final plat pursuant to SMC 17.20.080, unless the city council determines that a request for extension pursuant to SMC 17.20.080 shall be granted, if such an extension is available. Any extension granted under SMC 17.20.080 shall be subject to any added conditions as may be required by the city council. (Ord. 2010-015 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.26.060 Bonding.

Bonding for phased developments may be approved consistent with the requirements of SMC 17.64.020. (Ord. 2010-015 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.26.070 Development agreements.

The city council is authorized to enter into development agreements pursuant to Chapter 36.70B RCW. The decision to enter into a development agreement is entirely within the discretion of the city council, and this section in no way guarantees that the council will agree to enter into a development agreement. This section represents the minimum provisions that every development agreement must contain, but nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit additional provisions or conditions as may be appropriate for each development agreement.

A. Development agreements shall be limited to a maximum term of 10 years, unless the project will provide all of the following benefit(s), then the development agreement term is limited to a maximum of 20 years:

1. Economic development;

2. Environmental restoration;

3. Affordable housing;

4. Improved traffic/pedestrian circulation;

5. Increased access to public infrastructure; and

6. Additional public facilities.

Development agreements with a term longer than 10 years shall be based upon substantial written evidence that the project will provide the benefits outlined in subsections (A)(1) through (6) of this section. This evidence must be provided to the planning department before a staff recommendation for a development agreement with a term greater than 10 years is submitted to the city council.

B. All development agreements must contain a provision stating that the city planning department shall review the project for new, changed, or additional conditions every three years after the first five years after preliminary plat approval. For those projects receiving preliminary plat approval between June 10, 2010, and December 31, 2014, the city planning department shall review the project for new, changed, or additional conditions every three years after the first seven years after preliminary plat approval.

1. At each subsequent review specified in this subsection B, any additional conditions imposed shall apply to the remaining, incomplete portions of the project. Conditions shall apply until the next review, at which time new, changed, or additional conditions may be imposed that will supersede, prospectively, conditions from the previous review.

2. Such review(s) shall continue until the project is complete and has received final plat approval under RCW 58.17.170.

3. RCW 58.17.033 applies only to the first phase of a phased development agreement. An application for a phased development intended to receive any final plat approvals after the time requirement of SMC 17.20.080 shall treat each subsequent phase as a new application for division of land for purposes of applying RCW 58.17.033. Notwithstanding this provision, if the legislative body finds that a change in conditions is necessary to prevent a serious threat to the public health or safety in the subdivision, such conditions may be imposed.

C. All development agreements shall contain a provision stating that the development must comply with the most current public infrastructure requirements, including impact fees, in place at the time the site construction application is submitted for that phase.

D. All development agreements must contain a provision stating that the development must comply with all current plumbing and building codes in place at the time of building permit application for that phase.

E. All development agreements must contain a provision stating that nothing in the development agreement shall be construed as to relieve a project from compliance with all state and federal laws as enacted or amended.

F. All development agreements shall reserve the city’s authority to impose new or different regulations at any time to the extent required due to a serious threat to public health and safety.

G. All development agreements must be approved by the city attorney as to form before being presented to the city council. (Ord. 2010-015 § 1 (Exh. A))


Chapter 17.28 GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS

Sections:

17.28.010    Purpose.

17.28.020    Subdivision and site design – Site analysis recommended.

17.28.025    Subdivision and site design – Performance standards.

17.28.030    Trees.

17.28.040    Landscape design.

17.28.050    Open space and recreation.


17.28.010 Purpose.

Good subdivision design is critical to the establishment of a functional and attractive development which minimizes adverse impacts to the environment and ensures that the project will be an asset to the community. To promote this purpose, all subdivisions and/or site plans shall conform to the standards contained in this chapter. These standards have been designed to assist in the development of a well-planned and constructed subdivision without adding unnecessarily to development costs. (Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.28.020 Subdivision and site design – Site analysis recommended.

A site analysis of the proposed subdivision and/or binding site plan project location and surrounding properties should be made to ensure that all of the natural and constructed characteristics of the site are considered in the preparation of the preliminary plat. The purpose of the site analysis is to assist the applicant in the preparation of the preliminary plat by identifying constraints and opportunities found on-site. Preparation of the site analysis, prior to preapplication conference, can provide substantial assistance in facilitating project review. The site analysis may include text and/or may be indicated graphically on a scaled base map. The site analysis should include:

A. General Site Context. The general site context includes adjacent land use patterns, circulation systems, population characteristics, ecological and hydrographic systems of region, area economy, nearby projects and their effects on the site.

B. Physical, Historical and Cultural Data. The physical, historical and cultural data associated with the site and adjacent land, usually comprised of the following:

1. Geology and soil, including soil types found on the site and their depth, any identified areas of fill, and any portions of the site which are located within aquifer recharge areas.

2. Water, including bodies of water found on or adjacent to the site, the drainage pattern of the site and surrounding areas, the depth to the water table, the availability of on- or off-site water supplies, and the location of the site or the surrounding area within a floodplain.

3. Topography, including the topographic pattern of land forms found on the site and in the immediate area, any unique topographic features found on the site, and the location and inclination of slopes found on the site and in the surrounding area.

4. Plant and animal communities, including the pattern of plant cover and the location of any unique or rare specimens on-site or in the surrounding community.

5. Manmade structures, including existing buildings, road and path networks, and the location and condition of utilities on-site or in the surrounding area.

6. Visual qualities, including the character and relationship of visual spaces, viewpoints or vistas on-site or as seen from the site, and potential focal points on-site or as seen from the site.

7. Use, including the nature and location of current land uses on-site and in the immediate area, an assessment of who is participating in the existing uses, property ownership patterns, existing on-site easements, existing zoning, and the applicability of subdivision and other regulations. (Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.28.025 Subdivision and site design – Performance standards.

A. Structures and infrastructure shall be located, to the maximum extent practicable, in a manner which preserves the natural features of the site, avoids environmentally sensitive areas and wetlands, and minimizes adverse impact and alteration of natural features.

B. The following specific areas shall be preserved as undeveloped open space as required by applicable codes and plans:

1. Wetlands and environmentally sensitive areas including streams, stream corridors, ravines, geologically hazardous areas, wildlife habitat areas and shorelines, as defined by the city of Sequim wetlands and environmentally sensitive areas ordinances and the city of Sequim shoreline management master plan.

2. Lands located within floodplains, as defined by the Sequim Municipal Code. If any portion of the land within the boundary of a preliminary plat or approved record of survey is subject to flood or inundation or is in a flood control zone, consistent with Chapter 86.16 RCW, that portion of the subdivision shall have the written approval of the Department of Ecology before the city council shall hear the final plat.

3. Development shall be laid out to avoid adversely affecting groundwater and aquifer recharge, to reduce cut and fill, to avoid unnecessary impervious surfaces, to prevent flooding, to provide adequate access to all lots and sites, and to mitigate adverse impacts relating to shadow, glare, traffic, odors and drainage on neighboring properties. (Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.28.030 Trees.

A. Every reasonable effort shall be made to preserve existing trees.

B. If preservation of the existing trees would enhance the appearance of the subdivision, or prevent erosion and other negative environmental effects, the city may impose tree cutting restrictions on trees eight inches in diameter or larger. Such restrictions shall be noted on the face of the final plat and shall run with the land. (Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.28.040 Landscape design.

A. Reasonable landscapings should be provided at the site entrances, in public areas, and adjacent to buildings. The type and amount of landscaping shall be allowed to vary consistent with the type of development and the requirements of the zoning district. 

B. Landscaping materials shall be those which best serve the intended function, and shall be appropriate for the soil and other environmental conditions of the site. Drought-tolerant, low water plant materials shall be encouraged. 

C. The successful establishment and long-term maintenance of landscaping features shall be addressed. (Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.28.050 Open space and recreation.

Major subdivision, minor subdivision and binding site plan developments shall be required to provide open space designed to provide active recreational facilities to serve the residents of the development. Undeveloped open space shall be designed to preserve important site amenities and environmentally sensitive areas. These requirements are for privately owned open spaces and recreational areas only and shall not be dedicated to the city. General city park requirements are met through the payment of park impact fees as adopted by the city council.

A. Minimum Requirements. Open spaces shall be provided proportionally to anticipated impacts associated with the proposed subdivision.

1. Minor subdivisions located in residential zones which provide standard yards and setbacks consistent with the zoning code shall be determined to have provided adequate open space.

2. Major subdivisions located in residential zoning districts shall provide a minimum of 10 percent open space, at least half of which shall be designed for active recreational uses. Excepting where open space is set aside to protect critical areas as required by the SMC, open space requirements shall not exceed 20 percent of the proposed project area. Easements for trails, excepting those trails constructed in lieu of sidewalks, may be considered as meeting the active recreational open space requirements.

3. Binding site plan developments containing five or more dwelling units shall provide a minimum of 10 percent open space which may provide for either passive and/or active open space, and which may include required landscaped areas, stormwater detention facilities, irrigation ditches and easements, and other environmentally sensitive area open spaces. Easements for trails, excepting those trails constructed in lieu of sidewalks, may be considered as meeting the open space requirements.

4. Proposed open space areas designed for active recreational use shall be concentrated in large areas so as to be functionally usable.

5. Active open space parcels shall be conveniently located in relation to the dwelling units they are intended to serve.

B. Improvements to Open Space Dedications.

1. Improvements to active open space dedications may be required to mitigate the anticipated on-site recreational needs of the proposed development.

2. Improvements shall seek proportionality in the character of the open space and the intended active recreational use, and the cost of the recreational facilities.

3. Whenever practicable, undeveloped open space should be left in its natural state. Enhancement may be allowed to provide approved trails, to thin and remove diseased trees, and to enhance vegetation or to provide view corridors.

C. Exceptions to the Standards. The city council or planning director, as applicable, may permit minor deviations from the open space standards when it can be determined that:

1. The objectives of these standards may be met without strict adherence to the open space requirements; and/or

2. Due to the existing conditions found on the tract of land or facilities proposed, strict adherence to these standards would be unreasonable.

D. Deed Restrictions. Any lands dedicated for open space purposes shall contain appropriate nonamendable covenants and deed restrictions, approved by the city, ensuring that:

1. The open space will not be further subdivided in the future;

2. The use of the open space will continue in perpetuity for the purpose specified; and

3. Appropriate provisions will be made for the maintenance of designated open space areas.

4. Said covenants and restrictions shall contain authorization for city enforcement.

E. Open Space Ownership. The form of ownership of the land proposed for open space purposes shall be selected by the applicant, subject to approval of the city. Forms of ownership may include, but are not necessarily limited to, the following:

1. Ownership by quasi-public entities or jurisdictions, conditioned upon their acceptance;

2. Ownership by homeowner, condominium owner or cooperative associations or organizations;

3. Ownership by individual lot owners, if the open space is wholly located within one tract or lot; or

4. Ownership by a shared or undivided interest of all property owners within the subdivision. (Ord. 2010-014 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 98-005 § 4)


Chapter 17.32 STREET DESIGN STANDARDS

Sections:

17.32.010    Conformity to roadway functional classification system.

17.32.020    Relation to adjoining street system.

17.32.030    Arterials and intersections.

17.32.040    Local roads.

17.32.050    Minimum widths.

17.32.060    Topography.

17.32.070    Full width streets.

17.32.080    Existing streets.

17.32.090    Private streets.

17.32.100    Vertical curves.

17.32.110    Two access points required.

17.32.120    Grades.

17.32.130    Centerlines.

17.32.140    Storm management.

17.32.150    Access to arterials and collectors.

17.32.160    Easements.

17.32.170    Sidewalks.

17.32.180    Street name signs.

17.32.190    Street lighting.


17.32.010 Conformity to roadway functional classification system.

A. The proposed street system of any subdivision shall conform to the roadway functional classification system as adopted by the Sequim comprehensive plan.

B. In order to provide the most advantageous development of the proposed subdivision and adjacent area, the subdivision shall provide for the continuity of streets and utilities and shall conform to the standard drawings included in the City of Sequim Streets and Utilities Development Regulations (SUDR).

C. Streets shall be constructed consistent with the minimum street design standards identified in the City of Sequim SUDR Detail SQM-R1A, R1B, R2A, R2B and R2C. (Ord. 2006-019 § 3; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.32.020 Relation to adjoining street system.

A. The proposed street system shall extend existing streets at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the required minimum width.

1. When existing streets are determined by the public works director to be wider than the required width, and safety concerns can be met, the developer may be permitted to provide for a transition between the “over-wide” street and the new street.

B. Streets shall intersect at right angles, or as nearly so as possible.

C. Intersections of streets shall be designed so as to avoid “dog-legs.” The minimum distance between intersections shall be 125 feet unless a different distance is approved by the city engineer.

D. All streets, curbs, trails and sidewalks shall be improved to the full width of the dedication continuing from intersection to intersection. On streets where the dedication does not continue from intersection to intersection, the improvements shall be continuous from intersection to subdivision boundary. On streets where a proposed subdivision adjoins an existing subdivision or existing street dedication in midblock and the existing subdivision or existing street dedication is unpaved, the subdivider shall be responsible for paving that portion of the street within the existing subdivision or street dedication to the next intersection.

E. All dead-end streets or alleys shall terminate in a cul-de-sac having a minimum right-of-way diameter of 100 feet with a 90-foot paved portion. Length of the cul-de-sac shall not exceed 400 feet and shall be measured to the center of the cul-de-sac. Turnarounds may be utilized if designed consistent with WSDOT standards. (Ord. 2006-019 § 3; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.32.030 Arterials and intersections.

Streets intersecting with minor arterials shall be held to a minimum, subject to review and approval by the public works director. (Ord. 2006-019 § 3; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.32.040 Local roads.

Local roads shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be minimized. (Ord. 2006-019 § 3; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.32.050 Minimum widths.

A variety of right-of-way and improvement widths are required to address the range of development types and their traffic generation, consistent with the requirements identified in the City of Sequim SUDR Details SQM-R1A, R1B, R2A, R2B and R2C. Widths greater than the minimum widths may be required. In steep hillside areas, the right-of-way width, street widths and sidewalk requirements shall be reviewed and shall be developed as recommended by the appropriate city departments. (Ord. 2006-019 § 3; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.32.060 Topography.

The placement of streets and lots in relation to topography shall be considered in order to minimize filling, grading or other alterations of existing conditions. (Ord. 2006-019 § 3; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.32.070 Full width streets.

All streets shall be platted at full width, and no boundary streets at less than full width in accordance with the City of Sequim SUDR Details SQM-R1A, R1B, R2A, R2B and R2C. (Ord. 2006-019 § 3; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.32.080 Existing streets.

Whenever existing opened or undeveloped streets adjacent to or within a tract are of inadequate width, additional right-of-way shall be provided at the time of subdivision. (Ord. 2006-019 § 3; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.32.090 Private streets.

Private streets are only allowed in gated communities, and the following criteria shall be met:

A. Overall city-wide circulation would not be adversely impacted;

B. Every subdivision shall provide at least one access to a publicly dedicated street. See SMC 17.32.110;

C. There shall be no privately owned parcels or rights-of-way which landlock, deny or control access to, or create unrestricted/uncontrolled access to the street system;

D. Public pedestrian access shall be provided by trails or sidewalks;



E. A maintenance agreement for the private street is recorded, consistent with Chapter 17.64 SMC;

F. All private streets shall meet all requirements of public streets; and

G. The subdivision is designed to be a gated community with a human or electronically controlled gate with immediate access provided to all city, garbage, emergency and other official vehicles. (Ord. 2007-002 § 2; Ord. 2006-019 § 3; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.32.100 Vertical curves.

All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves as required for sight distance by the city engineer and in conformance with AASHTO and WSDOT standards. (Ord. 2006-019 § 3; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.32.110 Two access points required.

Each subdivision must have at least two points of access, except for those minor subdivisions or short plats with four or fewer lots. For subdivisions with more than four and up to 30 lots, the two points of access may be combined if separated by a minimum 10-foot-wide landscape area and encompass two 20-foot-wide drive lanes. Subdivisions that would create single street access to more than 30 lots must be provided with two separate points of access placed a distance apart equal to not less than one-half of the length of the maximum overall diagonal dimension of the property, measured in a straight line between accesses. If the required separation distance is not possible, the applicant will have a right to seek a variance in accordance with Sequim Municipal Code and heard by a hearing examiner. After considering fire district safety recommendations, one point of access may be approved for subdivisions of less than 10 lots where insufficient land area is available for two access points. (Ord. 2018-001 § 1; Ord. 2010-016 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2006-019 § 3; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.32.120 Grades.

Street grades shall conform in general to the terrain and shall be consistent with AASHTO and WSDOT standards. Street grades shall be such as to provide natural surface drainage of storm water regardless of the presence or absence of storm sewers. The intent of this section is to avoid creating depressions or inverts which will flood in flash storms and for which storm sewers are inadequate. (Ord. 2006-019 § 3; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.32.130 Centerlines.

Street pavement centerlines shall coincide with the centerline of the right-of-way where practical. (Ord. 2006-019 § 3; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.32.140 Storm management.

Streets shall have storm provisions for stormwater management and control consisting of the proper size pipe and catch basins or open ditch, consistent with the requirements of SMC Title 13, Division V, Stormwater Management. (Ord. 2006-019 § 3; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.32.150 Access to arterials and collectors.

Lots adjacent to arterials shall be laid out so as to provide access to streets other than arterials. Lots adjacent to collector streets shall be laid out so as to avoid direct access to the collector, if an access road can be provided. A waiver of direct access shall be required as a condition of approval. If the project proponent presents proof that direct access to such lots from collector streets is essential to facilitate the development of the subject property, and can provide a turnaround on the affected lots to prevent backing out onto collector streets, the city council or director of community development, where applicable, may permit direct access. (Ord. 2011-017 § 2; Ord. 2006-019 § 3; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.32.160 Easements.

Areas occupied by road-access easements shall not be included in the computation of the minimum area or the minimum width requirement of the lot. (Ord. 2006-019 § 3; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.32.170 Sidewalks.

All arterials and collector streets except those located within R-I zones shall have sidewalks with a minimum width of six feet in residential areas or eight feet in commercial or mixed use areas. In any situation where the director of community development, school district, city engineer, public works director or other reviewing agency recommend sidewalks to serve the public interest or obviate a potential safety hazard, the city council or director of community development, as applicable, may require sidewalks to be installed.

A. Off-street walkway systems and/or trails may be considered in lieu of sidewalks as required by this section.

B. Sidewalks shall be located on the public right-of-way contiguous to the property line to prevent interference or encroachment by fencing, walls, hedges, or other planting or structures. Wider sidewalks may be required to match existing development, along arterials and major and minor collectors, and to meet public health and safety concerns. (Ord. 2011-017 § 2; Ord. 2006-019 § 3; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.32.180 Street name signs.

A. Street name signs shall be placed at all intersections within or abutting the subdivision. Such signs shall be of a standard type as approved by the city public works director.

B. The subdivider shall reimburse the city for the cost of the street name signs and the installation necessary in the subdivision.

C. Street names shall be approved by the public works, fire and police departments to prevent duplication and facilitate efficient emergency response. (Ord. 2006-019 § 3; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.32.190 Street lighting.

Additional street lighting may be required by the public works director to address issues of public health and safety. (Ord. 2006-019 § 3; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


Chapter 17.36 BLOCK DESIGN STANDARDS

(Repealed by Ord. 2006-019)


Chapter 17.40 LOT DESIGN STANDARDS

Sections:

17.40.010    Lot requirements.


17.40.010 Lot requirements.

A. Arrangement. Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to street lines or radial to curved street lines.

B. Minimum Size. The size of the lots shall meet the minimum area and width requirements of the applicable zoning classification and shall be appropriate for the type of development and use contemplated.

C. Every lot shall abut a public or private street.

D. Width of lots at the building line shall conform to the requirements of the zoning code.

E. Lots, except corner lots, having frontage on two streets, should be avoided.

F. Lots which are bordered by two more or less parallel streets shall be permitted access to only one of these streets.

G. Property Corners at Intersections. All lot corners at intersections of dedicated public rights-of-way shall have a minimum radius of 25 feet or shall be concentric with the curb radius.

H. Corner lots for residential use may be required to be platted wider than interior lots to provide the front yard requirements on the side street as prescribed by the zoning code. (Ord. 98-005 § 4)


Chapter 17.43 INNOVATIVE LOT DESIGN STANDARDS

(Repealed by Ord. 2007-010)


Chapter 17.44 MANUFACTURED HOME PARK DESIGN STANDARDS

Sections:

17.44.010    General requirements and standards.


17.44.010 General requirements and standards.

The standards for residential subdivisions shall also apply to manufactured home park subdivisions when lots in such subdivisions are to be sold, unless other standards are specifically approved by the city. Applications for manufactured home park subdivisions may be considered consistent with the innovative lot design standards of Chapter 17.43 SMC. (Ord. 98-005 § 4)


Chapter 17.48 IMPROVEMENTS

Sections:

17.48.010    Curbs, gutters and paving.

17.48.020    Street lighting.

17.48.030    Sidewalks – Pedestrian walkways – Urban trails.

17.48.040    Fire protection facilities.

17.48.050    Utilities.

17.48.060    City acceptance.


17.48.010 Curbs, gutters and paving.

Curbs, gutters and paving shall be constructed consistent with the requirements in the City of Sequim Streets and Utilities Development Regulations. (Ord. 2006-019 § 5; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.48.020 Street lighting.

A. All street light wiring, conduit and service connections shall be located underground. Street light spacing shall take existing trees, structures, landscaping, streetscaping, natural features and irrigation ditches into consideration.

B. The design of street lighting shall be approved by the city engineer. The city may adopt specific standards for street lighting types, location and heights. All street lighting shall be fully shielded and downward facing. (Ord. 2006-019 § 5; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.48.030 Sidewalks – Pedestrian walkways – Urban trails.

Sidewalks, pedestrian ways or trails and trail connections shall be installed to provide continuity between pre-existing pedestrian improvements located in or adjacent to the subject subdivision.

All requirements for sidewalks, pedestrian walkways, and/or urban trails shall be installed or an appropriate performance bond or guarantee established consistent with the requirements of Chapter 17.64 SMC prior to a final approval. (Ord. 2006-019 § 5; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.48.040 Fire protection facilities.

A. Adequate facilities for fire protection purposes shall be provided.

B. Except when otherwise permitted by the city, fire hydrants shall be spaced at distances not to exceed 600 feet in residential areas and 300 feet in all other areas.

C. All proposed water lines shall be sufficient to provide the minimum flow as determined by the International Fire Code in addition to other consumptive uses.

D. Where fire hazards exist, the city may require the removal of flammable vegetation from an area used as a fire break around or within a subdivision. (Ord. 2006-019 § 5; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.48.050 Utilities.

A. New Utilities.

1. Where telephone, electric and cablevision utilities are not existing in a proposed subdivision and additional utility construction is required, all new utility construction shall be located underground. Underground utilities shall be placed in such a manner and at a depth which permits the planting of trees.

2. Those utilities, including all service connections, which are to be located beneath paved surfaces shall be installed as approved by the public works department. Such installation shall be completed and approved prior to the application of any surface material.

B. Water Mains.

1. The subdivider shall install water mains as shown on plans and documents as approved by the public works director and the city engineer. The minimum size for trunk lines shall be 10 inches unless a larger size is required to meet fire flow requirements.

2. When water mains are required through or adjacent to a property other than the proposed subdivision or binding site plan development, the applicant shall install fire hydrants every 1,000 feet. The applicant shall be required to install Ts in the required water main at 500-foot intervals to facilitate the future installation of fire hydrants when property adjoining the required water main is subdivided or developed. The developer shall obtain easements, to be dedicated to the city of Sequim, through property other than his own.

C. Sanitary Sewers.

1. Standards. The sanitary sewer system shall be designed and installed in accordance with city and state standards and under the supervision of the department of public works.

2. The provisions of Chapter 13.102 SMC, Service Extension Review Process, shall apply to all proposed subdivisions and binding site plans. The standards and requirements of that chapter shall supersede the standards and requirements of this section, where applicable. (Ord. 2006-019 § 5; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.48.060 City acceptance.

City acceptance of all utilities and street improvements established as a condition of subdivision approval shall be required. The owner and/or contractor shall provide the following information to the city prior to acceptance of any utility and/or street improvements:

A. As-built drawings in paper and compatible electronic format;

B. A two-year warranty on constructed improvements (see SMC 17.64.010(B));

C. A two-year maintenance guarantee (see SMC 17.64.010(B)) in a form acceptable to the city attorney; and

D. Easements and dedications necessary to ensure continued city maintenance and operation of the subject facilities. Easements shall not be less than 20 feet in width and shall be configured and located as to extend five feet at each side beyond the centerline of the outermost utility. Additional width shall be provided where necessary to accommodate utilities, utility structures, and utility pole bracing. The city council and/or planning director, as applicable, may require evidence of approval by the public utility company of the proposed easement width. Where an easement occurs on a side lot and adjacent to a driveway, there shall not be less than 10 feet of clearance between the easement line and the extreme projection of the building structure. (Ord. 2010-005 (Exh. A); Ord. 2006-019 § 5; Ord. 98-005 § 4)


Chapter 17.56 MONUMENTS

Sections:

17.56.010    Generally.


17.56.010 Generally.

A. Monuments shall be set at the centerline intersections of all public streets within a plat, and at the centerline intersections of all public streets abutting the plat if not already monumented. Monuments shall be a minimum two-inch brass cap in concrete in a standard monument case.

B. Plat boundaries and lot corners shall be set with one-half inch diameter minimum magnetic markers 18 inches long, flush with the ground and with a surveyor’s identification cap at all corners and at major angle points in the lot and plat boundaries.

C. Monuments shall be placed in conformance with the city’s centerline and vertical control program. (Ord. 98-005 § 4)


Chapter 17.64 GUARANTEES

Sections:

17.64.010    Completion – Maintenance guarantee.

17.64.020    Performance bonds.

17.64.030    Protection and repair of existing improvements.

17.64.040    Site repair and cleanup required.


17.64.010 Completion – Maintenance guarantee.

A. A final plat and/or final binding site plan will not be considered for approval unless the applicant has completed, or guaranteed to complete, all required improvements within a reasonable period consistent with approved working drawings and specifications, and has guaranteed to maintain the improvements until they are accepted by the city. The guarantee of completion and maintenance must provide that the applicant will reimburse the city for any maintenance work which is required consistent with this chapter upon failure of the applicant to perform such work after receiving due notice from the city. This guarantee must be by at least one of the three methods established in SMC 17.64.020 and is in addition to requirements of subsection B of this section. Only one method of plat completion guarantee can be applied for each specific improvement. The plat completion guarantee and the warranty in subsection B of this section may be combined in the same document. Roadway and utility construction must be completed prior to granting of a final plat and/or final binding site plan and are not subject to guarantees.

B. Warranty Against Defects in Labor and Material. A maintenance bond, or other acceptable surety, is required from the owners of a plat or binding site plan to warrant all required improvements, either installed or to be installed, against defects in labor and material for a period of 24 months after acceptance by the city. See also SMC 17.48.060(B) and (C). The surety must be submitted with the final plat application or final binding site plan, and must be 15 percent of the estimated value of the improvements, as determined by the public works director. The maintenance bond or surety is in addition to any warranty or surety provided to guarantee the installation of required improvements. The city attorney must approve the form, sufficiency and manner of execution of the maintenance bond, or other surety, prior to the approval of the final plat or final binding site plan. Upon the termination of the warranty period, the public works director will authorize the release of the maintenance bond by written notice to the person or entity posting the guarantee and to the surety. (Ord. 2020-007 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 2010-005 (Exh. A); Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.64.020 Performance bonds.

A. The applicant may post a performance bond prepared in a form approved by the city attorney and/or underwritten by a surety company only for above ground work and infrastructure such as sidewalks, landscaping, and lighting. The amount of the bond must be not less than 125 percent of the final estimate of cost of the improvement as estimated by the city engineer. There can be no reduction in the amount of that portion of the bond applying to a particular improvement. The bond must list the exact work to be performed by the applicant and shall specify that all of the deferred improvements be completed within the time established by the city. If no time is established, then improvements must be completed not later than two years after approval of the final plat by the city council. The bond will be held by the city administrative services director.

B. The applicant may deposit a cash bond with the city in accordance with a specific escrow agreement approved by the city attorney only for above ground work and infrastructure such as sidewalks, landscaping, and lighting, and in an amount not less than 125 percent of the final estimate of cost of the improvement as estimated by the city engineer.

There can be no reduction in the amount of that portion of the bond applying to a particular improvement. The bond must list the exact work that will be performed by the applicant and must specify that all of the deferred improvements be completed within the time established by the city; if no time is established, then not later than two years after approval of the final plat by the city council. The maximum time limit to defer improvements is two years after the approval of the final plat or final binding site plan by the city council. The bond will be held by the city administrative services director.

C. The applicant may elect to complete one or more improvements prior to approval of the final plat or final binding site plan. Where the applicant elects to guarantee completion of only above ground work and infrastructure such as sidewalks, landscaping, and lighting by this method, approval of the final plat or final binding site plan is contingent upon certification by the city engineer and public works director that the improvement has been completed in accordance with drawings and specifications, that the inspection reports are favorable and the guarantee has been provided to cover the cost of maintenance of the improvement. (Ord. 2020-007 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 2010-005 (Exh. A); Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.64.030 Protection and repair of existing improvements.

The applicant and applicant’s contractors and suppliers are responsible for ensuring that existing improvements and city property are not damaged, rendered less useful, or rendered unsightly by the operations of applicant or applicant’s contractors or suppliers. This provision is intended to include damage or nuisance with respect to the land, improvements or landscaping of the city; damage to existing streets, sidewalks, curbs and gutters by passage thereover of equipment or trucks or by excavation for any purpose; the spillage or tracking of earth, sand or rock onto existing streets, sidewalks, curbs and gutters; the washing by stormwater of earth or sand onto streets, sidewalks, curbs and gutters or into catch-basins; damage to water mains, sanitary sewers, culverts or storm sewers. In order to reduce or localize the possibility of damage to streets by heavy trucking, the city will instruct the applicant which streets to use for access to the development, and the applicant will be responsible for enforcing this instruction. The applicant must make provisions to prevent earth or sand washing onto sidewalks, streets, curbs and gutters or into catch-basins. The city in its sole discretion may require applicant to post a bond either prior to the commencement of construction or after construction is in process to guarantee repair of damages or abatement of nuisances caused by applicant or applicant’s contractors or suppliers. Expenses incurred by the city in repairing damages, cleaning streets, catch-basins and sewers may be deducted from the posted bond. (Ord. 2020-007 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 98-005 § 4)


17.64.040 Site repair and cleanup required.

Prior to release of any bonds, and/or prior to final plat and/or final binding site plan approval, the city will require that all construction equipment not in use for individual site development be removed from the site, all spoils or construction debris be removed, final grading of all common areas be completed and that all exposed surfaces be seeded. (Ord. 2020-007 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 98-005 § 4)


Title 18 ZONING

Chapters: 

18.01    Statutory Authorization and Purpose

18.02    Relationship of Zoning Code to Other Ordinances and Plans

18.08    Definitions

18.16    Establishment of Districts

18.18    Overlay Districts

18.20    Purposes of Districts

18.22    Development Standards

18.24    Design Standards

18.30    Master-Planned Overlay

18.33    Business and Employment Districts

18.35    Planned Residential Developments

18.40    Repealed

18.44    Bulk and Dimensional Requirements

18.46    Landscaping Standards

18.48    Off-Street Parking

18.50    Electric Vehicle Infrastructure

18.56    Essential Public Facilities and Special Property Uses

18.57    Downtown Districts

18.58    Sign Code

18.59    Accessory Uses and Structures

18.60    Conditional Uses

18.61    Wireless Communication Facilities

18.61A    Eligible Facilities Modifications

18.62    Mobile Home and Manufactured Home Parks

18.64    Nonconforming Conditions, Uses and Structures

18.65    Mobile Food Service Vendor

18.66    Accessory Dwelling Units

18.67    Home Occupations

18.68    Temporary Activities

18.69    Day Care Facilities

18.70    Repealed

18.72    Variances

18.80    Critical and Environmentally Sensitive Areas Protection

18.84    Annexations

18.88    Amending the Zoning Ordinance and the Comprehensive Plan

18.90    Violations, Enforcement and Remedies


Chapter 18.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION AND PURPOSE

Sections:

18.01.010    Statutory authorization.

18.01.020    Purpose.


18.01.010 Statutory authorization.

This title shall be known and cited as the city of Sequim zoning code, SMC Title 18. This title is adopted under the authority of Chapters 35A.11, 35A.63, and 36.70A RCW. (Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


18.01.020 Purpose. 

This title is adopted as the official land use control for the city of Sequim, to:

A. Promote the public health, safety and general welfare.

B. Direct the future growth and development of the city, consistent with the goals, purposes, and objectives of the city of Sequim comprehensive plan, adopted December 23, 1996, Ordinance 96-032.

C. Provide the economic, social and aesthetic advantages resulting from the orderly planned use of land and utility resources within the city.

D. Provide definite and precise official land use regulations for the development of public and private property within the city. (Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


Chapter 18.02 RELATIONSHIP OF ZONING CODE TO OTHER ORDINANCES AND PLANS

Sections: 

18.02.010    Relationship of zoning code to other ordinances and plans.

18.02.020    Comprehensive plan.

18.02.030    Sequim shoreline management master program.

18.02.040    Other ordinances and plans.


18.02.010 Relationship of zoning code to other ordinances and plans.

The zoning code provides standards for the use and development of land located in the city of Sequim. (Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


18.02.020 Comprehensive plan.

The comprehensive plan and any adopted subarea plans are established by state statute to be the basic source of reference when evaluating development proposals. Consistent with the requirements of Chapters 35A.11, 35A.63, and 36A.70 RCW, all development regulations must implement and be subordinate to the policies and standards of the comprehensive plan. The city of Sequim zoning code is a regulation containing prescriptive and performance standards that are in conformance with policies and standards of the comprehensive plan. Strict adherence to the rules, procedures, and standards established herein is required. (Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


18.02.030 Sequim shoreline management master program.

In areas of jurisdictional overlap, the provisions of the zoning code shall be subordinate to the policies and performance standards contained in the Sequim shoreline master program (as amended), excepting that regulations contained within the zoning code that are more stringent than those found in the shoreline master program shall prevail. (Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


18.02.040 Other ordinances and plans.

The provisions of other adopted city of Sequim ordinances and plans shall be subordinate to the prescriptive standards of the zoning code. Other ordinances and plans that may be applicable are available from the city. (Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


Chapter 18.08 DEFINITIONS

Sections: 

18.08.010    Purpose.

18.08.020    Definitions.


18.08.010 Purpose.

The purpose of the definitions provided below is to define those words and terms that have a specialized meaning and/or may be used in an unfamiliar way for the purposes of this title. In addition, the following definitions, where deemed necessary, include examples or clarifications that will assist in the understanding of the terms and in the application and enforcement of the zoning code. 

The following definitions will pertain to the regulations, processes, and standards contained within this title only. Definitions found in other adopted titles, ordinances, resolutions, codes, and/or regulations will be subordinate in meaning to the definitions contained herein in applying the provisions of this title. (Ord. 2020-004 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 2014-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


18.08.020 Definitions.

For the purposes of this title, certain words are defined as follows: Words in the present tense include the future tense; words in the singular will include the plural; the word “will” is mandatory; the word “should” indicates that which is recommended but not required; the word “may” is permissive. 

Each definition below will be considered a subsection of this code section pursuant to RCW 35A.13.190. 

All words in this title will have their plain and ordinary meaning unless otherwise defined hereinbelow:

A.

“Access road” means a road that links homes and properties to the larger road system. 

“Accessory” means a use, activity, structure or part of a structure that is subordinate and incidental to the main activity or structure on the subject property.

“Accessory dwelling unit (ADU)” means a second dwelling unit added to, created within, or detached from an existing single-family detached dwelling for a family member, by blood or by marriage only, to use as a completely independent or semi-independent unit with provisions for cooking, eating, sanitation and sleeping.

“Accessory structure” means a subordinate structure detached from but located on the same lot as the principal structure, the use of which is incidental and accessory to that of the principal structure and will not create a nuisance or hazard.

“Accessory use” means a use that is located on the same lot and incidental to a principal use.

“Adjacent” means a lot or parcel of land that shares all or part of a common lot line with another lot or parcel of land. Properties separated by public rights-of-way are not considered adjacent.

Affordable Housing. Where the term “affordable” is used it refers to the federal definition of affordability in place up to the year 2002; annual housing costs will not exceed one-third of a family’s annual income. When establishing affordability standards for moderate to extremely low income families and individuals the latest median income levels established for Clallam County by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development continue to be used.

Under the definition of “affordable,” the following categories would apply:

	Extremely Low:	0 – 30% of area median income (AMI)

	Very Low:	31 – 50% of AMI

	Low and Moderate:	51 – 80% of AMI

	Moderate:	81 – 120% of AMI

“Agricultural processing (heavy)” means facilities and uses associated with high-intensity agricultural activities such as grain elevators, stockyards, feed lots, commercial slaughterhouses, rendering plants or other similar uses.

“Agricultural processing (light)” means facilities and uses associated with agricultural activities such as dairy processing, packaging, storage, freezing and canning for commercial distribution when not associated with agricultural lands.

“Agriculture” means the commercial production of horticultural, viticultural, floricultural, dairy, apiary, vegetable, or animal products or of berries, grain, hay, straw, turf, seed, Christmas trees not subject to the excise tax imposed by RCW 84.33.100 through 84.33.140, or livestock and that has long-term commercial significance for agricultural production. Agriculture does not include the production or processing of marijuana plants.

“Airports” or “airfields” means any area of land designed and set aside for the landing and takeoff of aircraft, including all necessary facilities for the housing and maintenance of aircraft.

“Alcohol beverage sales (packaged)” means stores selling primarily alcohol beverages, usually under state license.

“Alley” means a public or private way permanently reserved as a secondary, but not primary, means of access to abutting property.

“Alteration” means any change, addition, or modification in construction or occupancy.

“Alteration, structural” means any change in the supporting members of a building or structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders.

“Amateur radio” means the noncommercial operation and use of broadcast and/or radio transmission facilities for public or private uses. No provision of this title will fail to conform to the limited preemption entitled “Amateur Radio Preemption, 101 FCC 2nd 952 (1985)” issued by the Federal Communications Commission.

“Antenna” means any system of wires, poles, rods, reflecting discs, or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of electromagnetic waves external to or attached to the exterior of any building.

“Aquaculture” means the cultivation of fish, shellfish, and/or other aquatic animals or plants, including the incidental preparation of these products for human use.

“Aquifer” means a geologic stratum containing ground water that can be withdrawn and used for human purposes.

“Arterial” means a road that carries inter-regional and interlocal vehicular traffic. Arterials provide the highest degree of mobility and limited access to local property. Access is primarily limited to traffic from other arterials and collectors; however, some direct access to abutting properties may occur in certain situations.

1. “Major arterial” means roads which convey traffic along corridors to areas of a high density of commercial or industrial activity. Major arterials emphasize mobility and de-emphasize access.

2. “Minor arterial or secondary arterial” means roads which link activity centers and convey traffic onto major arterials. Minor arterials provide both mobility and access.

“Auditorium” means a large room or building used for meetings, lectures, public performances, concerts, and other events.

“Available public facilities” indicates that facilities or services are in place or that a financial commitment has been made to provide the facilities or services within a specified time. In the case of transportation, the specified time is six years from the time of development.

B.

“Bakeries, retail” means those businesses which produce and sell baked goods for the purpose of on-site consumption or retail sales. Baked goods may be produced on site or purchased from a wholesale bakery for resale. Incidental retail sales of packaged goods, foods and beverages, and associated retail are included.

“Bakeries, wholesale” means those businesses which produce and sell baked goods for the purpose of wholesale sales. Incidental retail sales of baked goods are included.

“Banks and financial institutions” means those businesses engaged in the provision of financial services including the provisions of financial services for individuals and corporations, such as banks, credit unions, saving and loans, mortgage and brokerage agencies, and saving and investment consultants. Provision of “drive-through” services may be allowed consistent with traffic safety concerns.

“Barbers and beauty shops” means those businesses operated by a state-licensed barber or beautician, which provide personal hygiene services to individuals including hair care, manicures, and pedicures. Other personal care services allowed by state license may be offered. Incidental sale of hair and beauty products is allowed.

“Bars and taverns” means any premises wherein alcoholic beverages are sold at retail for consumption on the premises and minors are excluded therefrom by law. It should not mean a premises wherein such beverages are sold in conjunction with the sale of food for consumption on the premises and the sale of said beverages comprises less than 25 percent of the gross receipts.

“Basement” means that portion of a building that is partly or completely below grade as defined by the International Building Code (IBC), current version.

“Battery charging station” means an electrical component assembly or cluster of component assemblies designed specifically to charge batteries within electric vehicles, which meets or exceeds any standards, codes, and regulations set forth in Chapter 19.28 RCW and consistent with rules adopted under RCW 19.27.540. 

“Battery electric vehicle (BEV)” means any vehicle that operates exclusively on electrical energy from an off-board source that is stored in the vehicle’s batteries, and produces zero emissions or pollution when stationary or operating.

“Battery exchange station” means a fully automated facility that will enable an electric vehicle with a swappable battery to enter a drive lane and exchange the depleted battery with a fully charged battery through a fully automated process, which meets or exceeds any standards, codes, and regulations set forth by Chapter 19.27 RCW and consistent with rules adopted under RCW 19.27.540. 

“Bed and breakfast inns” means a residential dwelling unit which is constructed as, or partially or entirely converted into, an overnight lodging facility where rooms and breakfasts are provided, where the operator of the inn will live on the premises or in adjacent premises full-time.

“Best management practices” means a physical, structural, or managerial practice which has gained general acceptance for its ability to prevent or reduce environmental impacts.

“Boarding house” means an establishment with lodging for five or more persons where meals are regularly prepared and served for compensation and where food is placed on the table family style, without service or ordering of individual portions from a menu.

“Boat building and repair (commercial)” means any business established for the purposes of building and repairing boats. Building and repair of a single boat for use of the property owner, renter, or lessee will not be considered commercial boat building and repair.

“Boat marinas” means those facilities established for the purpose of providing rental slips and storage for commercial and pleasure marine craft. Incidental uses allowed at a marina facility may include fuel sales, marine sewage disposal, facility management offices and meeting spaces.

Bog. See “Critical areas.”

“Buffer or buffer zone” means a neutral area between two areas of concern of sufficient width and quality to ensure that activities on one property do not negatively impact the other.

“Building” means any structure used or intended for the supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy (UBC, 1994). When a use is required to be within a building, or where special authority granted pursuant to this title requires that a use will be entirely within an enclosed building, then the term “building” means one so designed and constructed that all exterior walls of the structure will be solid from the ground to the roof line, and will contain no openings except for windows and doors which are designed so that they may be closed, and required exhaust and ventilation ducting.

“Building line, front” means the line, parallel to the property line, that passes through the point of the principal building nearest the front lot line.

“Building official” means a duly appointed officer of the city of Sequim who administers and enforces the Sequim Municipal Code (SMC), International Building Code (IBC), current version, and other relevant codes.

“Bulk and dimensional” measures the spatial, four-dimensional limitations of a site, including height, width, depth, and coverage.

“Bus stations and terminals” means those public and private stations and terminals which serve the regional transportation needs of the community, including accessory uses such as cafes, gift stores and lockers, intended for the use of travelers. Transit stops are not considered bus stations and terminals.

C.

“Campground” means an area or tract of land on which accommodations for temporary occupancy are located or may be placed, including cabins, tents, and major recreational equipment, and which is primarily used for recreational purposes and retains an open air or natural character.

“Capacity” means the measure of ability to provide a required level of service for a public service.

“Car wash” means a drive-through facility, automated, attended or coin-operated, for the purposes of washing vehicles.

“Cemetery” means land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including columbariums, crematories, mausoleums, and mortuaries when operated in conjunction within the boundaries of such cemetery.

“Charging levels” means the standardized indicators of electrical force, or voltage, at which an electric vehicle’s battery is recharged. The terms 1, 2, and 3 are the most common EV charging levels, and include the following specifications:

1. Level 1 is considered slow charging.

2. Level 2 is considered medium charging.

3. Level 3 is considered fast or rapid charging or DC fast charge.

Level 1 is present in homes and businesses and typically operates on a 15- or 20-amp breaker on a 120-volt alternating current (AC) circuit and standard outlet.

Level 2 is expected to become the standard for home and public charging and typically operates on a 40-amp to 100-amp breaker on a 208- or 240-volt AC circuit.

Level 3 is primarily for commercial and public applications (e.g., taxi fleets and charging along freeways) and typically operates on a 60-amp or higher dedicated breaker on a 480-volt or higher three-phase circuit with special grounding equipment. Note that the term “Level 3” is recommended to identify the increased power need in a numerical fashion (i.e., “3”), but the Level 3 charging level is also sometimes referred to as “DC fast” charging and “rapid” charging (see definition of “rapid or DC fast charging station”). 

“Church or place of religious worship” means a building or buildings intended for religious worship including ancillary activity and improvements such as schools providing part-time religious education in association with religious services, assembly rooms, kitchen, reading room, recreation hall and may include a residence for church staff. For the purposes of this title, schools being operated for primarily nonreligious education, and those portions of churches or places of religious worship which house such schools, will not be considered churches or places of religious worship.

“City” means the city of Sequim, a code city. (RCW 36.70A.030)

“Clearing” means the destruction or removal of vegetation, ground cover, shrubs and trees, including, but not limited to, root material removal and/or topsoil removal. Clearing includes grubbing.

“Clinic” means a building designed and used for the diagnosis and treatment of human outpatients excluding overnight care facilities.

“Collective garden” means the growing, production, processing, transportation, and delivery of cannabis, by qualifying patients, for medical use, as set forth in Chapter 69.51A RCW, and subject to the following conditions:

1. No more than 10 qualifying patients may participate in a single collective garden at any time;

2. A collective garden may contain no more than 15 plants per patient up to a total of 45 plants;

3. A collective garden may contain no more than 24 ounces of usable cannabis per patient up to a total of 72 ounces of usable cannabis;

4. A copy of each qualifying patient’s valid documentation, including a copy of the patient’s proof of identity, must be available at all times on the premises of the collective garden; 

5. No usable cannabis from the collective garden is delivered to anyone other than one of the qualifying patients participating in the collective garden;

6. A collective garden may contain separate areas for growing, processing, and delivering to its qualified patients; provided, that these separate areas must be physically part of the same premises, and located on the same parcel or lot. A location utilized solely for the purpose of distributing cannabis will not be considered a collective garden; and

7. No more than one collective garden may be established on a single tax parcel.

“Collector road” means a road that carries local traffic from access roads to the arterial road system. Direct access to abutting properties, while not ideal, is more appropriate than onto an arterial because of lower traffic volumes and speeds.

“Commercial use, general” means an activity that provides merchandise or services for the consumption of the community-at-large through retail and/or wholesale outlets.

“Commercial use, neighborhood” means commercial uses whose primary functions are to serve a limited geographic market area intending to enhance a neighborhood or limited residential market.

“Communication relay or transmission facilities” means telephone, telegraph, television, radio, cable, commercial broadcasting, microwave, transmission or retransmission facilities and substations, and any other communication conveyance for commercial purposes.

“Community center” means an assembly place, structure, area, or other facility used for and providing fraternal, social, and/or recreational programs generally open to the public and designed to accommodate and serve significant segments of the community.

“Comprehensive plan” means the city of Sequim comprehensive plan, as may be amended.

“Conditional use” means a use that would not be permitted outright generally, without restriction, throughout the zoning district but which, if conditioned as to number, area, location, or relation of development or use with respect to the surrounding uses, would not be detrimental to public health, safety, or general welfare.

“Condominium” means an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common with other purchasers in a portion of a parcel of real property, together with a separate interest in space in a residential building, such as an apartment, and may include a separate interest in other portions of such real property.

“Construction yard” means a facility for the storage of construction-related materials and equipment.

“Convenience store” means any commercial establishment offering for sale prepackaged food products, household items, and other goods commonly associated with the same and having a gross floor area of less than 5,000 square feet.

“Convenience store, neighborhood” means a commercial establishment offering basic goods and services for sale that does not have gas pumps located on the premises and has a limited square footage of less than 2,000 square feet.

“Correctional institute” means a facility established for the detention and incarceration of convicted criminals, or court-ordered juveniles.

“Critical areas” means areas which include the following areas and ecosystems: 

1. Wetlands;

2. Areas with a critical recharging effect on aquifers used for potable water;

3. Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas;

4. Frequently flooded areas; and

5. Geologically hazardous areas. (RCW 36.70A.030)

D.

“Day care facility” means an agency or person regularly providing care for a group of children for periods of less than 24 hours. Includes the following subcategories as defined by Chapter 35.63 RCW:

1. “Family day care home” means a day care home for the care of 10 or fewer children located in the family dwelling of the provider. The home will meet Washington State child day care licensing requirements. For the purposes of this title, family day care homes will be considered a home business.

2. “Day care center” provides for the care of 13 or more children. If located in a private family residence, the portion where the children have access must be separate from the family living quarters, or that portion where the children have access must be exclusively used for their care during the hours that the child day care is operating.

“Density” means a measure of the intensity of development, generally expressed in terms of dwelling units per acre or in terms of population (i.e., people per acre).

“Development” means any change in use, enhancement of use, or extension of the use of the land, including, but not limited to, land disturbing activities, structural development, including construction, installation or expansion of a building or other structure; creation of impervious surfaces; Class IV general forest practices that are conversions from timber lands to other uses; subdivisions, short subdivisions and binding site plans, as defined in RCW 58.17.020, as well as redevelopment of an already developed site.

“Development regulations” means any controls placed on development or land use activities by a county or city, including, but not limited to, zoning ordinances, subdivision ordinances, and binding site plan ordinances.

“Development standards” means a set of requirements establishing parameters to be followed in site and/or building design and development.

“Domestic water systems” means any system providing a supply of potable water which is deemed adequate pursuant to RCW 19.27.097 for the intended uses of a development. (WAC 365-195-210)

“Drainage” means the collection, conveyance, containment and/or discharge of surface and stormwater runoff.

“Drainage control” means a pipe, swale, natural feature or manmade improvement for the purpose of carrying and/or retaining drainage.

“Dry cleaners and laundries” means facilities which provide services for the cleaning of clothing and household items. Laundries include coin-operated laundries.

“Dwelling, multifamily” means a building used for occupancy by two or more families living independently of each other and providing separation as per the UBC.

“Dwelling, single-family, detached” means a residential building containing not more than one dwelling unit entirely surrounded by setbacks on the same lot.

“Dwelling unit” means one or more rooms physically arranged so as to create an independent housekeeping establishment for occupancy by one family with separate toilets and facilities for cooking and sleeping.

E.

“Easement” means a covenant which grants or restricts a specific right of use.

“Electric scooters and motorcycles” means any two-wheeled vehicle that operates exclusively on electrical energy from an off-board source that is stored in the vehicle’s batteries and produces zero emissions or pollution when stationary or operating. 

“Electric vehicle charging station – private” means an electric vehicle charging station that is (A) privately owned and has restricted access (e.g., single-family home, multifamily parking, executive parking, religious facility patrons, patients of a medical clinic/hospital, patients of a dental clinic, designated employee parking) or (B) publicly owned and restricted (e.g., fleet parking with no access to the general public). 

“Electric vehicle charging station – public” means an electric vehicle charging station that is (A) publicly owned and publicly available (e.g., park and ride parking, public library parking lot) or (B) privately owned and publicly available (e.g., shopping center parking, nonreserved parking in multifamily parking lots). 

“Electric vehicle infrastructure” means structures, machinery, and equipment necessary and integral to support an electric vehicle, including battery charging stations, rapid charging stations, and battery exchange stations. 

“Electric vehicle parking space” means any marked parking space that identifies the use to be exclusively for the parking of an electric vehicle. 

“Electric vehicle waiting space” means an off-street parking space where electric vehicles, plug-in hybrid electric vehicles, electric scooters, and electric motorcycles wait to use a public electric vehicle charging station.

Emergency Shelter. See “Group home, other.”

“Enhancement” means alteration of an existing resource to improve or increase its characteristics and processes without degrading other existing functions.

“Equestrian facility” means a facility that provides boarding and training services for horses, which may include barns, pastures, corrals, and riding trails.

“Erosion” means the wearing away of the earth’s surface as a result of the movement of wind, water, or ice.

“Espresso stands (drive-through)” means a retail business which offers primarily coffee beverages (hot or cold) and related merchandise to the traveling public.

“Espresso stands (sidewalk)” means a retail business which offers primarily coffee beverages (hot or cold) and related merchandise and is established in a cart or other portable structure.

“Essential public facilities,” mandated by the GMA, include airports, public educational facilities, state and regional transportation facilities, state and local correctional facilities, and other facilities of a state or regional scope. For the purpose of this title, wastewater reuse facilities will be considered to be essential public facilities.

F.

“Facade” means the exterior wall of a building exposed to public view or that wall viewed by persons not within the building.

“Facility” means the physical structure or structures in which a service is provided.

“Family” means an individual or two or more persons related by blood or marriage, or a group of not more than 12 persons (excluding servants) living together as a single housekeeping unit and doing their cooking on the premises, as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding house or rooming house or hotel.

“Farm or farmland” is a parcel or parcels of land, in one or more ownerships, that is used primarily for the commercial, soil-dependent cultivation of agricultural crop production and/or for the raising of livestock. The term “one ownership” will include an individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, association, or two or more having a joint or common interest in the land.

“Fence” means an artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination of materials erected to enclose or screen areas of land.

“Fire area” means the floor area, in square feet, used to determine the required fire flow.

“Fire flow” means the flow rate of a water supply, measured at 20 psi residual pressure, that is available for fire fighting.

“Fire flow requirement” means the requirement for all buildings to meet the UFC for minimum required fire flow and flow duration for buildings.

“Fitness center” means facilities offering the use of exercise equipment for public use, and services such as, but not limited to, expertise and instruction for fitness training, and aerobics classes.

“Floor area, gross” means the sum of the areas of all of the floors of a building, including areas used for human occupancy in basements, attics, and penthouses, as measured from the exterior faces of the walls, but not including cellars, unenclosed porches, or attics not used for human occupancy, or any floor space in accessory buildings or in the main building intended and designed for the parking of motor vehicles in order to meet the parking requirements of this code, or any such floor space intended and designed for accessory heating and ventilating equipment. It will, however, include the horizontal area at each floor level devoted to stairwells and elevator shafts.

“Floor area ratio” is determined by dividing the gross floor area of all buildings on a lot by the area of that lot.

“Frontage” means that side of a lot abutting on a street or public or private right-of-way and ordinarily regarded as the front of the lot.

Funeral Home. See “Undertaking establishment.”

G.

“Garage, private” means a building for the private use of the owner or occupant of a principal building situated on the same lot of the principal building for the storage of motor vehicles with no facilities for mechanical service or repair of a commercial or public nature.

“Gas station” means a facility which provides fuel for automobiles. Gas stations may include limited service facilities for the provision of emergency repairs, and retail sales of auto-related supplies and equipment. Facilities which combine convenience stores and fast food will be required to locate where those uses are permitted.

“Geologically hazardous areas” means areas that, because of the susceptibility to erosion, sliding, earthquake, or other geological events, are not suited to the siting of commercial, residential, or industrial development consistent with public health or safety concerns. (RCW 36.70A.030)

“Government buildings” means those buildings which are owned and operated by a government agency for the purpose of conducting government business.

“Grade” means the lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of ground, paving or sidewalk within the area between the building and the property line or, when the property line is more than five feet from the building, between the building and a line five feet from the building at any point around the building.

“Grading” means the physical manipulation of the earth’s surface and/or drainage pattern in preparation for an intended use or activity.

Grandfathered Use. See “Nonconforming land use or grandfathered use.”

“Grocery stores” means retail stores selling primarily food and household goods.

“Group home for the functionally disabled” means a dwelling shared by 13 or more functionally disabled persons, including resident staff, who live together as a single housekeeping unit and in a long-term, family-like environment in which staff persons provide care, education, and participation in community activities for the residents with the primary goal of enabling the residents to live as independently as possible in order to reach their maximum potential, which complies with the provisions of Chapters 74.29 and 74.39 RCW.

“Group home, other” means a dwelling shared by 13 or more persons, including resident staff, who live together as a single housekeeping unit and in a long-term, family-like environment in which staff persons provide alcohol or drug treatment and rehabilitation, transitional supervision, emergency shelter, care, education, and participation in community activities for the residents. Group homes for drug and alcohol treatment, transitional supervision, and emergency shelter with less than 13 residents are permitted as single-family homes.

“Growth Management Act (GMA)” means the Growth Management Act as enacted in 1990 and amended by the state of Washington (Chapter 36.70A RCW).

H.

“Habitat” means the place or type of site where a plant or animal naturally or normally lives and grows.

“Hardware stores” means retail stores which sell tools and equipment used in the building, maintenance and repair of homes and businesses.

“Hazardous substance” means any material, substance, product, commodity, or waste, regardless of quantity, which exhibits any of the characteristics or criteria of hazardous waste as described in rules adopted under Chapter 70.105 RCW.

“Hazardous waste” means those solid wastes designated by 40 CFR Part 261, and regulated as hazardous waste by the United States EPA. Any discarded, useless, unwanted, or abandoned radioactive or nonradioactive substances, including but not limited to certain pesticides, or any residues or containers of such substances which are disposed of in such quantity or concentration as to pose a substantial hazard to human health, wildlife, or the environment because such wastes or constituents or combinations of such wastes:

1. Have short-lived toxic properties that may cause death, injury, or illness or have mutagenic, teratogenic, or carcinogenic properties; or

2. Are corrosive, explosive, flammable, or may generate pressure through decomposition or other means; or

3. Will persist in a hazardous form for several years or more at a disposal site; or

4. Present a significant environmental hazard and may be concentrated by living organisms through a food chain or may affect the genetic make-up of man or wildlife; or

5. Are highly toxic to man or wildlife.

“Hazardous waste, moderate risk” means any “solid waste” that exhibits the characteristics of a hazardous waste but is exempt per Chapter 173-303 WAC of the State Dangerous Waste Regulations, due to the fact that it is a household hazardous waste per WAC 173-303-071(3)(c) or conditionally exempt small quantity generator waste per WAC 173-303-070(8).

“Hazardous waste, moderate risk waste treatment and storage facilities” means a staffed and dedicated location with secondary waste containment that is specifically built at a permanent fixed site for the purpose of collecting, treating, recycling, exchange, storage and/or transfer of moderate risk waste.

“Hazardous waste treatment and storage facilities” means facilities which treat and/or store hazardous wastes through such means as containers (such as barrels or drums), above ground and underground tanks, and waste piles and surface impoundments that will be cleaned up and not closed as landfills. Hazardous waste treatment and storage facilities are those facilities which require an interim or final status permit pursuant to Dangerous Waste Regulations, WAC 173-303-240. These regulations apply to hazardous waste generators who produce 2.2 pounds or more of dangerous waste per month.

“Health club” means an establishment that provides exercise facilities such as running, jogging, aerobics, weight lifting, court sports, body building, martial arts, dancing, and swimming, as well as locker rooms, showers, massage rooms, tanning salon, saunas and related accessory uses.

“Height” means the vertical distance above a reference datum measured to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof or the average height of the highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof. The reference datum will be selected consistent with the requirements as described in the International Building Code. 
[IMAGE]


“Home occupation” means a clearly accessory and secondary use of a dwelling unit for gainful employment involving the manufacture, provision, or sale of goods and/or services. Synonymous with “Home business.”

“Hospitals and sanitariums” means any facility specializing in giving clinical, temporary, and emergency services of a medical or surgical nature to human patients and injured persons, and licensed by state law to provide facilities and services in surgery, obstetrics, and general medical practice including overnight and extended stays.

“Hotel” means a facility offering transient lodging accommodations on a daily rate to the general public and may include additional services, such as restaurants, meeting rooms, and recreational facilities. (See “Transient accommodations.”)

“Household” means all persons who occupy a housing unit which is intended as separate living quarters and having direct access from the outside of the building or through a common hall. The occupants may be a single family, one person living alone, two or more families living together, or any other group of related or unrelated persons who share living arrangements. (U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census)

I.

“Impervious surface” means a non-vegetated surface area which either prevents or retards the entry of water into the soil mantle as under natural conditions prior to development. A non-vegetated surface area which causes water to run off the surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate of flow from the flow present under natural conditions prior to development. Common impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, walkways, patios, driveways, parking lots or storage areas, concrete or asphalt paving, gravel roads, packed earthen materials, and oiled, macadam or other surfaces which similarly impede the natural infiltration of stormwater. Open, uncovered retention/detention facilities will not be considered as impervious surfaces for the purposes of determining whether the thresholds for application of minimum requirements are exceeded. Open, uncovered retention/detention facilities will be considered impervious surfaces for purposes of runoff modeling.

“Incidental food service” means the on-site retail sale of meals and nonalcoholic beverages that provides an accessory service to a single primary use.

“Industrial park” means a facility which is designed as a coordinated environment for a variety of industrial and related activities, and will be developed and/or controlled by a single management entity with special attention given to traffic, parking, utility needs, aesthetics, and compatibility with surrounding properties. Industrial parks will have appropriate master plans and/or covenants, conditions, and restrictions as required.

“Industrial use” means any activity that is involved in the production, processing, manufacturing, fabrication, or assembling of goods and materials, including the storage of material used in the industrial process, including warehousing, wash down facilities, blacksmithing, welding, wholesale bakery, recycling facilities and distribution centers.

“Industrial use, heavy” means a use engaged in the basic processing and manufacturing of materials or products predominantly from extracted or raw materials, or a use engaged in storage of or manufacturing processes using flammable or explosive materials, or storage or manufacturing processes that potentially involve hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions.

“Industrial use, light” means a use engaged in manufacturing, typically having low impacts on the environment, in which articles are either produced, assembled, finished and/or packaged from prepared materials made at another location, or raw materials, such as premilled wood, paper, wool, textiles, leather, cork or semiprecious metals or stones. For the purposes of this definition, light industrial uses will include the canning or bottling of food or beverages for human consumption using a mechanized assembly line, and printing plants. The incidental storage, sales and distribution of products manufactured on site will be permitted.

“Infrastructure” means facilities, utilities and services needed to sustain industry, residential, and commercial activities.

“Intensity” means a measure of land use activity based on use, mass, size and impact, relative to adjacent land uses, locally and regionally.

J.

“Junk” means scrap or abandoned metal, paper, building material and equipment, bottles, glass, appliances, abandoned household goods, rags, rubber, motor vehicles, and parts thereof.

K.

“Kennel” means an establishment in which five or more dogs more than six months old are, for compensation, housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained, or sold.

L.

“Laboratories for research and testing” means a building or group of buildings in which are located facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing, or experimentation, but not facilities for the manufacture or sale of products, except as incidental to the main purpose of the laboratory.

“Land use” means a description of how land is being, or is to be, used or occupied.

“Landfill” means a disposal site employing an engineering method of disposing of solid wastes in a manner that minimizes environmental hazards by spreading, compacting to the smallest volume, and applying cover material over all exposed waste at the end of each operating day.

“Landscaping” or “landscape parkways” means the combination of natural elements such as trees, shrubs, groundcovers, vines, or other living organic and inorganic materials which are installed for purposes of creating an attractive and pleasing environment, screening unsightly views, reducing environmental impacts (including treatment of stormwater runoff), and filtering matter from the air.

“Lock and gunsmiths” means retail and service business engaged in the sale and repair of locks, keys, guns, and incidental retail.

“Lot” means a designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be used, developed or built upon as a unit.

“Lot area” means the total horizontal area within the boundary lines of a lot.

“Lot, corner” means a lot at the junction of and fronting on the intersection of two or more streets.

“Lot coverage” means the total ground coverage of all buildings or structures on a site measured from the outside of external walls or supporting, but not to include at-grade, off-street parking lots; deck areas; terraces; swimming pools; pool deck areas; walkways; roadways; and driveways.

“Lot depth” means the horizontal length of a straight line drawn from the midpoint of the front property line to the midpoint of the rear property line.

“Lot, flag” means a lot with access provided to the bulk of the lot by means of a narrow corridor.

“Lot, interior” means a lot fronting on one street.

Lot Line, Front. Any property line of a lot which abuts a public street, private street or dedicated vehicular access easement is considered a frontage and will meet the minimum front yard setback requirements of this code. On a corner lot, or lot bounded by more than one public or private street or dedicated easement, the “front lot line” will be the lot line providing principal access from the adjacent street.

“Lot line, rear” means the property line of a lot that is most opposite or most distant from the designated front lot line and that does not intersect any front lot line. In the case of a triangular lot, it means a line 10 feet in length within the lot parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line. In the event that the front lot line is curved, then the rear property line will be assumed to be a line tangent to the front property line at its midpoint.

“Lot line, side” means any lot line that is not a front or rear lot line, or any lot line that intersects a front lot line.

“Lot of record” means a lot whose existence, location, and dimensions have been legally recorded or registered in a deed or a plat.

“Lot, substandard” means a lot or parcel of land that has less than the required minimum area or width as established by the zone in which it is located; and provided, that such lot or parcel was of record as a legally created lot on the effective date of this title.

“Lot, through” means a lot having its front and rear yards each abutting on a street, alley or right-of-way.

“Lot width” means the horizontal distance between side lot lines, measured at the required front setback line, or in an irregularly shaped lot, the dimension across the lot at the building line.

“Low impact development” (LID) means a stormwater and land use management strategy that strives to mimic pre-disturbance hydrologic processes of infiltration, filtration, storage, evaporation and transpiration by emphasizing conservation, use of on-site natural features, site planning, and distributed stormwater management practices that are integrated into a project design.

“Lumber yards” means facilities for the storage and sale, retail and wholesale of primarily wood building products.

M.

“Manufactured housing” means a factory assembled structure intended solely for human habitation installed on a permanent foundation with running gear removed and connected to utilities on an individual building lot.

“Manufactured housing park” means a parcel of land under single ownership that has been planned and improved for the placement of manufactured housing for dwelling purposes.

“Marina” means a facility that may include areas for storing, servicing, fueling, berthing, securing and launching of private pleasure craft, including the sale of fuel and incidental supplies for the boat owners, crews, and guests.

“Master planned community” means a self-contained and fully integrated development intended to provide a mix of uses to provide jobs, housing and services to residents, including protecting critical areas and preserving significant areas in open space.

“Master planned resort” means a self-contained and fully integrated development in a setting of significant natural amenities that includes short-term visitor accommodations associated with a range of developed on-site indoor or outdoor recreation facilities. It may also include permanent residential uses as an integrated part of the overall resort development. (WAC 365-195-210)

“Medium-speed electric vehicle” means a self-propelled, electrically powered four-wheeled motor vehicle, equipped with a roll cage or crush-proof body design, whose speed attainable in one mile is more than 25 miles per hour but not more than 35 miles per hour and which otherwise meets or exceeds the federal regulations set forth in 49 CFR 571.500.

“Mini-storage” means a facility which provides storage spaces on a rental basis for the storage of domestic goods.

“Mitigation” means the process of avoiding, reducing, or compensating for the environmental impact(s) of a proposal. (WAC 197-11-768)

“Mixed use” means development that combines two or more different land uses on the same lot or contiguous lots in the same zone, such as retail uses and residential uses.

“Mobile home” means a factory-assembled structure intended solely for human habitation and equipped with the necessary service connections and made so as to be readily movable as a unit on its own running gear. It is without a permanent foundation and is a single-wide unit.

“Mobile home park” means a tract of land designed and maintained under a single ownership of unified control where two or more spaces or pads are provided solely for the placement of mobile or manufactured housing for residential purposes, with or without charge.

“Motel” means a building or group of detached buildings designed or used primarily for providing sleeping accommodations for automobile travelers and having a parking space adjacent to a sleeping room. (See “Transient accommodations.”)

Mother-in-Law Apartment. See “Accessory dwelling unit (ADU).”

“Multifamily residential development” means developments containing buildings with two or more residential dwelling units. Multifamily residential developments are those that are designed and intended for residential occupancy in multifamily structures regardless of the type of building or ownership in which such use occurs. Examples include, but are not limited to, townhouses, duplexes, multiplexes, condominiums, apartment houses, boarding houses, and lodging houses. Accessory dwelling units (i.e., mother-in-law and accessory apartments) will not be considered multifamily residences.

“Multimodal” means two or more modes or methods of transportation such as bicycling, driving an automobile, walking, bus transit, equestrian and pedestrian trail, or rail.

N.

“Neighborhood electric vehicle” means a self-propelled, electrically powered four-wheeled motor vehicle whose speed attainable in one mile is more than 20 miles per hour and not more than 25 miles per hour and which conforms to federal regulations under Title 49 CFR Part 571.500.

“Nonconforming land use or grandfathered use” means a use or activity that was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of the comprehensive plan but fails by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the comprehensive plan.

“Nonelectric vehicle” means any vehicle not defined as an electric vehicle. 

“Nursery, landscaping material” means a business which offers retail and wholesale sales of landscaping materials including plant materials, gardening supplies, and building materials. Plant materials may be grown on site or purchased wholesale.

“Nursing homes and congregate care facilities” means those facilities which provide for the residential care of ambulatory and non-ambulatory patients, and which include assisted living facilities.

O.

“Office” means a structure that generally houses a business, government, professional, medical or financial institution for the nonresident needs of individuals, groups or organizations.

“Off-street parking” means any space specifically allocated to the parking of motor vehicles that is not located within a public right-of-way, a travel lane, a service drive, or any easement for public use.

“Open space” typically implies a landscape that is primarily unimproved. Open space may include critical areas; wooded areas; parks; golf courses; trails; privately owned nature reserves; abandoned railroad lines; utility corridors; certain low impact development facilities; and other vacant rights-of-way.

“Open space, greenbelts” means a planned open space that may include both improved and unimproved landscaping.

“Open space, multifamily” means the usable and unusable space around and between buildings of a multiple dwelling unit development.

“Outdoor storage, commercial and/or industrial” means the keeping, in an unroofed area, of any goods, junk, material, merchandise, or vehicles, in the same place for more than 24 hours.

“Overlay district” means a specially designated zoning district containing additional standards and requirements, which is applied on top of a basic zoning classification.

P.

“Parcel” means a continuous quantity of land in the possession of or owned by, or recorded as the property of, the same person or persons.

“Park, playgrounds, golf courses, recreation centers, swimming pools; public and private” means those facilities consisting of open space or enclosed space developed for the use of the general public and reserved for recreational, educational, entertainment, gathering or scenic purposes.

“Parking, shared” means the development and use of parking areas on two or more separate properties for joint use by the businesses on those two or more properties used for parking.

“Parking space” means an area which is improved, maintained and used for the sole purpose of temporarily accommodating a motor vehicle that is not in use.

“Pawn shops and secondhand stores” means retail businesses which sell used merchandise on a consignment basis, or outright.

“Performance standards” means criteria that are established and must be met before a particular use will be permitted. These measures are designed to guide development of property and include, but are not limited to, open space requirements, water and wastewater requirements, buffer zones, screening, size and height limits for buildings, noise, vibration, glare, heat, air or water contaminants, and traffic.

“Permitted use” means any use authorized or permitted alone or in conjunction with another use in a specified zoning district and subject to the limitations and regulations of that zoning district.

“Pervious surface” means a surface material that allows stormwater to infiltrate into the ground. Examples include lawn, landscape, pasture, native vegetation areas, and permeable pavements.

“Pharmacy, dispensing” means a retail or wholesale establishment which sells drugs by prescription, and may include sales of over-the-counter medications and incidental health-related products.

“Photographic studio” means an establishment for the purpose of taking pictures and developing film and film-related products, including printing. May include incidental retail sales of photography-related supplies, equipment and products.

“Planned unit development” means a development of land that is under unified control and is planned and developed as a whole in a single development operation or programmed series of development stages. Planned unit developments may include predetermined combinations of residential, commercial and industrial uses within the project area. The development may include streets, circulation ways, utilities, buildings, open spaces, and other site features and improvements.

“Plant nursery” means any lot used to raise trees, shrubs, flowers, and other plants for sale or for transplanting.

“Plat” means a map or plan, especially of a piece of land divided into building lots.

“Plug-in hybrid electric vehicle (PHEV)” means an electric vehicle that (A) contains an internal combustion engine, and also allows power to be delivered to the drive wheels by an electric motor; (B) is able to recharge its battery by connecting to the grid or other off-board electrical source; and (C) has the ability to travel short distances (typically 10 miles or more) powered all, or substantially all, by electricity. 

“Plumbing shops and yards” means facilities engaged in the wholesale and retail sale of plumbing and building supplies.

“Principal building” means a building in which the primary use of the lot in which the building is located is conducted.

“Principal use” means the main use of land or structures, as distinguished from a secondary or accessory use.

“Printing, publishing and reproduction establishments” means establishments for the purpose of producing printed materials, including newspapers, books and advertising material. These establishments may include self-service reproduction facilities, and include incidental sales.

“Private gymnasiums, fitness centers, tanning salons, dance studios, body building and martial arts studios” means private recreational facilities or health clubs offering classes or memberships.

“Public facilities” includes streets, roads, highways, sidewalks, street and road lighting, traffic signals, domestic water systems, storm and sanitary sewer systems, parks and recreational facilities, and schools. (RCW 36.70A.030)

“Public services” means services provided by a public agency which include fire protection and suppression, law enforcement, public health, education, recreation, environmental protection and other governmental services. (RCW 36.70A.030)

Public Utilities. See “Utilities or public utilities.”

Q.

Reserved.

R.

“Radio, television and small electronic repair and services” means service establishments which primarily provide repair and service of household appliances and consumer electronics. Incidental sales of parts and used equipment allowed.

“Radio, television broadcasting stations” means facilities for the production and broadcasting of radio and television programming.

“Rapid or DC fast charging station” means an industrial grade electrical outlet that allows for faster recharging of electric vehicle batteries through higher power levels, which meets or exceeds any standards, codes, and regulations set forth by Chapter 19.28 RCW and consistent with rules adopted under RCW 19.27.540. 

“RCW” means Revised Code of Washington.

“Recreation center” means a place designed and equipped for the conduct of sports, leisure time activities and other customary and usual recreational activities.

“Recreational facility” means any development designed and intended for day use and/or overnight recreational uses, operated as a business, or as part of a business, and/or operated by a nonprofit organization or public entity, including amusement parks, picnic areas and campgrounds.

Recreational Vehicle. For the purposes of this title, all recreational vehicles will be licensed by the state of Washington or other comparable jurisdiction as a vehicle. In addition, mobile homes will not be considered to be recreational vehicles.

“Recreational vehicle park” means any lot or lots upon which two or more recreational vehicle sites are located, established, or maintained for temporary occupancy by recreational vehicles of the general public as temporary living quarters for recreation or vacation purposes.

“Recreational vehicle park, seasonal” means those recreational vehicle parks that are approved for stays of no more than 180 days (cumulative) within any calendar year.

“Recreational vehicle park, transient” means those recreational vehicle parks approved for transient stays of not more than 30 consecutive days. These parks are “tourist oriented” and usually have recreation and other facilities.

“Recycling collection point” means a location that serves as a neighborhood drop-off point for temporary storage of recoverable resources.

“Recycling facilities” means any lot, lots, or portions thereof, or building or structure, commercially used for the storage, collection, processing, purchase, or sale of wastepaper, rags, scrap metal, or other scrap or discarded goods, and recyclable materials. Excluded from this definition will be areas used for the storage of materials or objects accumulated by the manufacturer as an integral part of the manufacturing process, and noncommercial recycling centers or substations established for the collection of materials for transport to a commercial recycling facility.

“Recycling, high intensity” means a facility that is not a junkyard and in which recoverable resources, such as newspapers, magazines, books, and other paper products; glass; metal cans; and other products, are recycled, reprocessed, and treated to return such productions to a condition in which they may again be used for production.

“Recycling, low-intensity” means an incidental use that serves as a neighborhood drop-off point for temporary storage of recoverable resources. No processing of such items would be allowed. This facility would generally be located in a shopping center parking lot or in other public/quasi-public areas, such as in churches and schools.

“Recycling plant” means a facility that is not a junkyard and in which recoverable resources, such as newspapers, magazines, books, and other paper products; glass; metal cans; and other products, are recycled, reprocessed, and treated to return such products to a condition in which they may be used again for production.

“Research laboratory” means a building or group of buildings in which are located facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing, or experimentation, but not facilities for the manufacture or sale of products, except as incidental to the main purpose of the laboratory.

“Residential hotels” means hotels which provide fully furnished apartments or rooms for longer temporary stays, usually not to exceed six months, and which are located and designed consistent with hotels. For the purpose of this code, residential hotels will be considered to be hotels.

“Resort” means a facility which includes hotels or motels that serve as a destination point for visitors, and generally provides recreational facilities for persons on vacation and provides self-contained personal services customarily furnished at hotels, including the serving of meals.

“Restaurant” means an establishment that serves food and beverages primarily to persons seated within the building, such as cafes, tea rooms, buffet diners, and diners.

“Restaurant, drive-in” means a restaurant where food or beverages are sold primarily for consumption by customers in motor vehicles.

“Restaurant, fast food” means an establishment that offers quick food service, which is accomplished through a limited menu of items already prepared and held for service, or prepared, fried, or griddled quickly, or heated in a device such as a microwave oven, and where orders are not generally taken at the customer’s table, and food is generally served in disposable wrapping or containers. Fast food restaurants may include both drive-in and sit down services.

“Retail sale” means the sale of merchandise, services, or commodities for use or consumption by the immediate purchaser and not meant for resale.

“Retail store” means business engaging in the sale of merchandise, services, or commodities for use or consumption by the immediate purchaser and not meant for resale, including department stores and drug stores.

“Right-of-way” means land owned by a government or an easement for a certain purpose over the land of another, used for a road, ditch, electrical transmission line, pipeline, or public facilities such as utility or transportation corridors.

“Road or vehicular rights-of-way” means a specific right-of-way dedicated or conveyed for a public or private road including the adjoining area designated for road expansion or utility purposes as specified by recorded easements, recorded ownership instruments, or dedications.

“Road, private” means a right-of-way or easement allowing vehicular ingress and egress established as a separate tract for the benefit of certain, adjacent properties, not including private driveways.

“Road, public” means all public rights-of-way reserved or dedicated for street traffic.

“Rooming house” means a building that is the primary residence of the owner and in which rooms are provided, by the owner, for compensation, to three or more adult persons not related by blood, marriage, or adoption to the owner.

S.

“Sanitary sewer systems” means all facilities, including approved on-site disposal facilities, used in the collection, transmission, storage, treatment or discharge of any waterborne waste, whether domestic in origin or a combination of domestic, commercial or industrial waste. (WAC 365-195-210)

“Satellite dish antenna” means a round, parabolic antenna intended to receive signals from orbiting satellites and other sources. Noncommercial dish antennas are defined as being less than four meters in diameter. Commercial dish antennas are typically those larger than four meters and typically used by broadcasting stations.

“School, private or parochial” means a building whose primary use is as a facility where instruction is given to persons of any age to enhance their knowledge or skills, not including buildings where instruction is given primarily on religious matters. For the purposes of this title, buildings belonging to churches but used primarily for the education of children ages five to 18, Monday through Friday, will be considered schools.

“School, public” means a building whose primary use is as a facility where instruction is given to young persons to enhance their knowledge or skills, owned and operated by a public school district.

“Screening” means the method by which a view of one site from another adjacent site is shielded, concealed, or hidden, utilizing techniques that include fences, walls, hedges, berms, or other such features.

“Self-service storage facility” means a building consisting of individual, small, self-contained spaces that are leased or owned for the storage of business and household goods or contractors’ supplies, typically not including hazardous or flammable materials.

“SEPA (State Environmental Policy Act)” requires state agencies, local governments and other lead agencies to consider environmental factors when making most types of permit decisions, especially for development proposals of a significant scale. As part of the SEPA process, EIS may be required to be prepared and public comments solicited. (Chapter 43.21C RCW)

“Service station” means facilities and premises where the primary use is the retail supply and dispensing of motor fuels, lubricants, batteries, tires, and motor vehicle accessories, and may include the minor mechanical service and repair of motor vehicles.

“Setback” means the minimum distance from the road right-of-way line or any other lot line to the nearest projection of a structure placed on the property, excluding eaves of less than 24 inches.

“Sewer” means the closed pipe which carries raw sewage from a home or business to a treatment facility.

“Shopping center” means a grouping of commercial/retail facilities on a single lot with common parking facilities.

“Shoreline Management Act” means state rules which detail the local requirements necessary to protect the state shorelines. (Chapter 90.58 RCW and WAC 173-14-030(1))

“Shoreline master program (SMP)” means the comprehensive use plan and related use regulations which are mandated by the Shoreline Management Act, and used by local governments to administer and enforce the permit system for shoreline management. The city’s master program includes establishment of a jurisdiction for applicability of the program for all lands within 200 feet of Sequim Bay.

“Shorelines” means all of the water areas of the state, including reservoirs and their associated uplands, together with the lands underlying them, except those areas excluded under RCW 90.58.030(2)(d). (RCW 90.58.030(2)(d) and Chapters 173-18, 173-19 and 173-22 WAC)

“Sign” means a structure or device designed or intended to convey information to the public in written or pictorial form.

“Sign painting and manufacture” means a facility for the production and sale of signs.

“Silviculture” means improvements or activities associated with the growing, cultivation, and/or harvesting of forest products. Silviculture uses not associated with silviculture processing as defined herein will be exempt from the provisions of this title.

“Silviculture processing” means facilities and uses associated with high-intensity silviculture activities such as commercial chippers and sawmills, and other similar uses.

“Single-family residence” means a dwelling unit intended for occupancy by one immediate family. For the purposes of this title, an apartment integrated within a dwelling unit and used by a member of the family will not be considered to be a separate dwelling unit.

“Site plan” means a plan, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with complete dimensioning the boundaries of a site and the location of all buildings, structures, uses, and principal site development features proposed for a specific parcel of land.

“Solid waste” means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid and semisolid wastes, including, but not limited to, garbage, rubbish, ashes, industrial wastes, swill, demolition and construction wastes, abandoned vehicles or parts thereof, and recyclable materials. (RCW 70.95.030)

“Special needs housing” means all housing that is designed for 13 or more individual or family members who require supportive social services in order to live independently or semi-independently, including emergency, transitional and permanent housing. Special needs groups include, but are not limited to, the homeless, elderly, AIDS victims, single parents, runaway and homeless youth, severely physically handicapped, mentally and emotionally disturbed, chronically mentally ill, developmentally disabled, farm workers (migrant labor households) and persons with substance abuse problems.

“Sports facilities (stadiums)” means facilities constructed to allow spectators to view athletic events with or without a fee (including, but not limited to, football, soccer, or basketball).

Stadiums. See “Sports facilities (stadiums).”

“Story” means that portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, the space between such floor and the ceiling above it. A basement will be counted as a story if its ceiling is over six feet above the average level of the finished ground surface adjoining the exterior walls of such story, or if it is used for business or dwelling purposes.

“Structure” means that which is built or constructed. A structure is an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner, which requires an approval.

“Subdivision” means the division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two or more lots, plats, sites, or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development. 

T.

“Temporary activity” means any short-term use, activity, event or improvement to property that is nonpermanent in nature, character, or operation, is not defined as a primary land use, and is permitted only for a specified duration.

“Through traffic” means traffic traveling along a right-of-way through a specific area to a destination beyond that area.

“Tower” means a structure situated on a nonresidential site that is intended for transmitting or receiving television, radio, or telephone communications, excluding those used exclusively for dispatch communications.

“Transient accommodations” means a building or group of buildings in which lodging or lodging and meals are provided for transient guests for compensation, including cabins, resorts, hotels, motels, hostels, and campgrounds. For the purposes of this title, “transient” will be defined as being not more than 30 consecutive days’ duration.

“Truck stops/recreational vehicle travel centers” means a facility that provides fuel and travel services for long haul trucking, travel trailers, recreational vehicles and the general traveling public. These facilities include fuel sales, sanitary waste disposal sites for recreational vehicles, and truck stop/recreational vehicle travel center development. These facilities may include supporting uses such as convenience stores, smaller restaurants and limited transient accommodations providing that they are secondary uses, and are supportive of the primary function of providing fuel. Truck stops/recreational vehicle travel centers may be developed on several parcels with separate ownerships; however, a single binding site plan will be required to ensure that the facility is established in a coordinated manner to minimize adverse transportation impacts due to conflicting land uses.

U.

“Undertaking establishment” means a building or part thereof used for human funeral services and containing space and facilities for: 

1. Embalming and the performance of other services used in the preparation of the dead for burial;

2. The performance of autopsies and other surgical procedures; 

3. The storage of caskets, funeral urns, and other related funeral supplies; 

4. The storage of funeral vehicles; and 

5. Spaces for conduction of funeral services, but will not include facilities for cremation.

“Urban growth area” means those areas designated by a county pursuant to RCW 36.70A.110.

“Urban level of facilities and services” means those services defined as “urban governmental services” with levels of service as defined within the capital facilities element of the Sequim comprehensive plan.

“Use” means any legal activity pursued on a piece of property, with or without any improvements.

“Utilities” means fixed improvements, including structures and facilities, that convey, generate, transmit or distribute power, gas, oil, water, sewage, surface drainage or communication signals.

“Utilities or public utilities” means facilities serving the public by means of an integrated system of collection, transmission, distribution, and processing through more or less permanent physical conditions between the facility of the serving entity and the premises of the customer. Included are systems for the delivery of natural gas, electricity, telecommunications services, and water for the disposal of sewage. (WAC 365-195-210)

V.

“Variance” means approval to deviate from the requirements or procedures of this title.

“Vehicle repair and service” means facilities and premises where the primary use is the retail supply and dispensing of lubricants, batteries, tires, and motor vehicle accessories, and includes the mechanical service and repair of motor vehicles.

“Vehicle sales, repair and service” means facilities and premises where the primary use is the retail sale of vehicles, including cars, trucks, farm vehicles, and boats and includes the supply and dispensing of lubricants, batteries, tires, motor vehicle accessories, and includes the mechanical service and repair of motor vehicles.

“Veterinary hospital” means any facility specializing in giving clinical, temporary, and emergency services of a medical or surgical nature to animals, especially domestic animals, and licensed by state law to provide such facilities and services.

W.

“WAC” means Washington Administrative Code.

“Warehouse/warehousing” means terminal facilities used for handling freight for redistribution.

“Wholesale sales” means the sale of materials, services, or merchandise, primarily for the purpose of resale, manufacture, or remanufacture.

“WSDOT” means Washington State Department of Transportation.

X.

Reserved.

Y.

“Yard” means a required type of setback on a lot adjoining a lot line.

“Yard, front” means a required setback extending across the full width of a lot lying between front lot line to the front building line in depth. Front yard width will be measured at right angles to the front of the lot.

“Yard, rear” means a required setback extending across the full width of a lot and lying between the rear lot line and the nearest line of the building. Rear yard depth will be measured at right angles to the rear of the lot.

“Yard, side” means a required setback lying between the side of a lot line and the nearest line of the building and extending from the front yard to the rear yard, or in the absence of either of such front or rear yards, to the front or rear lot lines. Side yard widths will be measured at right angles to side lines of the lot.

Z.

“Zero lot line” means the location of a building on a lot in such a manner that one or more of the building’s sides rest directly on a lot line. A written agreement with the adjacent property owners will be submitted with a building permit application.

“Zone” means a mapped area to which a uniform set of regulations applies. The city of Sequim official zoning map describes the extent and boundaries for the zones described within this title.

“Zoning” means the process by which a county or municipality legally controls the use of property and physical configuration of development upon tracts of land within its jurisdiction. (Ord. 2020-004 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2015-012 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2014-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2014-003 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2013-001 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2012-002 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 2006-016 § 1; Ord. 2000-007 § 1; Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


Chapter 18.16 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS

Sections: 

18.16.010    Establishment of zoning districts.

18.16.020    General use provisions.

18.16.030    Official zoning map.

18.16.040    Boundaries – Attesting regulations.

18.16.050    Boundary interpretation.


18.16.010 Establishment of zoning districts. 

For the purposes of this title and to carry out these regulations, the city of Sequim hereby designates 19 classes of districts, and the specifically permitted and conditional uses described and tabulated in Chapter 18.20 SMC. (Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


18.16.020 General use provisions.

Except as herein after provided, and except where modified by the provisions of the shoreline master program:

A. Any building, structure, premises or land shall be used or occupied for only the uses permitted in the zoning district in which such building, structure, premises, or land or part thereof is located, and then only after applying for and securing all permits and licenses required by law and city ordinances.

B. Any building, structure, premises or part thereof, shall be erected, raised, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, or altered only for the purpose of accommodating the uses permitted in the zoning district in which such building, structure, or premises is located, and then only after applying for and securing all permits and licenses required by law and city ordinances. 

C. Any building, structure or portion thereof hereafter erected shall not exceed the bulk, dimensional and/or height limits established for the district wherein such building or structure is located.

D. Any building or structure hereafter built, enlarged or moved on a lot shall conform to the area regulations of the district in which such building or structure is located.

1. No lot area now existing or hereafter established shall be so reduced or diminished that the yards, open spaces or total lot area be made smaller than required by this title.

2. No yard or other open space established for any existing or proposed building or structure shall be considered as part of a yard or open space of another building or structure.

3. No yard shall include any premises dedicated, reserved or set aside for street purposes except as provided in this chapter. No yard shall include any land condemned for or upon which notice of condemnation has been given for public purposes.

4. A building and an accessory building shall be construed to mean the main building and its subordinate building on the same lot. (Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


18.16.030 Official zoning map. 

The locations and boundaries of the zoning districts shall be shown on the map entitled “The Official Zoning Map, City of Sequim, Washington.” The official zoning map and all notations, references, and amendments thereto and other information shown thereon are hereby made a part of this title, just as if the information set forth on the map were fully described and set out herein. “The Official Zoning Map, City of Sequim, Washington” attested by the signatures of the city council and the city clerk, with the seal of the city affixed, shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk, and copies shall be available for inspection by the public in the office of the director of the department of community development. (Ord. 2011-017 § 2; Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


18.16.040 Boundaries – Attesting regulations. 

The boundaries of such districts are as shown upon “The Official Zoning Map, City of Sequim, Washington,” which is hereby adopted. The provisions of this title are attested by the signatures of the city council and the city clerk, with the seal of the city affixed, and shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. Copies shall be available for inspection by the public. (Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


18.16.050 Boundary interpretation. 

Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any zone shown upon the zoning map, the following rules shall apply:

A. Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerline of streets or alleys or lot lines, such lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.

B. Where one or more boundaries intersect a lot, the location of such boundary shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on said zoning map and the respective portions of the parcel shall be subject to the respective zones except as provided in subsection (D) of this section.

C. Where a public street is officially vacated or abandoned, the area comprising such vacated street or alley shall acquire the classification of the property to which it reverts.

D. Whenever a zone boundary line passes through a lot of record which existed prior to the passage of this title the entire lot of record may be used in accordance with the provisions of the least restrictive of the two zones; provided, that more than 50 percent of the lot of record is located within the least restrictive of the two zones. For the purposes of boundary interpretation the zones shall be classified in terms of restriction as follows (least restrictive to most restrictive): M-II, M-I, MU, C-III, C-II, C-I, R-III, R4-8, R-I(S), R-I(LS), PF, B.

E. The location of a zone boundary line passing through unplatted property shall be defined solely by the legal description contained in “The Official Zoning Map, City of Sequim, Washington,” adopted with this title. (Ord. 2016-007 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2013-008 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


Chapter 18.18 OVERLAY DISTRICTS

Sections:

18.18.010    Purpose.

18.18.020    Application of regulations.

18.18.025    Repealed.

18.18.030    Establishment.


18.18.010 Purpose.

Overlay districts are established to protect, maintain, and enhance the unique physical and cultural resources and character of the city. (Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


18.18.020 Application of regulations.

Property located within an overlay district as defined in this chapter and shown on the official overlay maps of the city is subject both to the underlying regulations which are applicable to the zoning district and to any additional requirements imposed concurrent with the establishment of an overlay district. In any case where the regulations of the overlay district conflict with those provisions of the underlying zone, the overlay district provisions shall prevail. (Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


18.18.025 Planned unit developments.

Repealed by Ord. 2012-012. (Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


18.18.030 Establishment. 

Proposed overlay districts shall be established by ordinance. The city council, after receiving a recommendation from the planning commission, shall have final decisionmaking authority over the establishment of an overlay district. Approved overlay districts shall become new chapters of SMC Title 18, Zoning. (Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


Chapter 18.20 PURPOSES OF DISTRICTS

Sections:

18.20.010    Establishment of districts.

18.20.015    Unlisted uses – Similar use determination.

18.20.020    Application of the permitted use groups in zone Tables 18.20.040 through 18.20.150.

18.20.030    Permitted use definitions for zone Tables 18.20.040 through 18.20.150.

18.20.040    Agriculture conservancy – AC zone table.

18.20.050    Single-family residence R4-8 zone table.

18.20.060    Neighborhood business – NB zone table.

18.20.070    Community business – CB zone table.

18.20.080    Regional commercial – RC zone table.

18.20.090    Downtown – DD, DMU-I/II zone table.

18.20.100    Highway commercial – HC zone table.

18.20.110    Heavy commercial/warehouse – HC/W zone table.

18.20.120    Repealed.

18.20.130    Lifestyle district – LD zone table.

18.20.140    Repealed.

18.20.150    Planned resort community – PRC zone table.


18.20.010 Establishment of districts.

For the purposes of this title, the city is divided into zones as provided hereafter.

	District Type	Zone Classification	Zoning Map Symbol

	Agricultural	Agriculture Conservancy	AC

	Residential	Single-Family Residence	R4-8

	Commercial	Neighborhood Business	NB

	Community Business	CB

	Regional Commercial	RC

	Highway Commercial	HC

	Heavy Commercial/Warehouse	HC/W

	Light Industrial	High Tech Light Industrial	HTLI

	Mixed or Planned Development	Lifestyle District	LD

	Economic Opportunity Area	EOA

	Planned Resort Community	PRC

	Downtown	Downtown Core	DC

	Downtown Mixed Use – I	DMU-I

	Downtown Mixed Use – II	DMU-II

(Ord. 2017-012 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2016-007 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2013-008 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2010-012 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 2009-046 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 2006-016 § 2; Ord. 2005-028 § 1; Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


18.20.015 Unlisted uses – Similar use determination.

A. Any use defined in SMC 18.20.030 (as amended) or 18.08.020 such as “collective garden” that is not listed as a permitted, conditional, or special use in a zone is prohibited. Whenever a proposed use is not listed as a permitted, conditional or special use in any zone and is not defined in SMC 18.08.020, it may be permitted in a zone if the director of community development determines it is a use similar to a listed use(s) in the same permitting category within that zone.

B. The applicant shall make requests for a similar use determination in writing. The determination shall be processed as a Type A-1 director of the department of community development’s decision as set forth in the procedures in Chapter 20.01 SMC.

C. The director of the department of community development shall issue a decision in writing that considers:

1. The scale, bulk, intensity, traffic generation, parking demand, relationship to surroundings, and other environmental and operational factors which influence and/or define the nature of the proposal;

2. The similarity of the unlisted use in nature and magnitude of activity to listed uses;

3. Whether the unlisted use activities are within the types of categorical use groupings allowed in the zone; and

4. Whether the use is consistent with the scale of service area that is expressed in the intent statement for the zone in which the use is proposed.

D. Any unlisted use determined to be similar to a listed use(s) shall be subject to all standards, requirements and permitting processes to which the listed use is subject.

E. The director of the department of community development shall notify the council of a pending similar use determination including a copy of the proposed findings and conclusions at least 14 days prior to the determination and shall consider council comments prior to making the final determination. If the director of the department of community development is unable to make an appropriate similar use association within any zone classification, the director of the department of community development shall forward the application in subsection B of this section to the city council for possible code amendment. (Ord. 2017-012 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2015-012 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-017 § 2; Ord. 2011-012 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.20.020 Application of the permitted use groups in zone Tables 18.20.040 through 18.20.150.

Each of the zone district tables (SMC 18.20.040 through 18.20.150) lists “Permitted Uses” that are presented as major groups of land use activities, e.g., “Residential, Detached” and “Regional Retail.” These are general use classifications that are defined in greater detail below (SMC 18.20.030, Permitted use definitions for zone Tables 18.20.040 through 18.20.150). In cases where there is disagreement in the application of these use provisions to a submittal for a permit, the applicant may make a written request to the community development manager for a formal determination of permitted use. The request for a determination must include an analysis of use and development characteristics that demonstrate that the proposed use is appropriate for the zone district and consistent with the goals and policies of the comprehensive plan. At a minimum, this analysis includes:

A. The scale, bulk, intensity, traffic generation, parking demand, relationship to surroundings, and other environmental and operational factors which influence and/or define the nature of the proposal;

B. The similarity of the unlisted use in nature and magnitude of activity to listed uses;

C. Whether the unlisted use activities are within the types of categorical use groupings allowed in the zone;

D. Whether the use is consistent with the scale of service area that is expressed in the intent statement for the zone in which the use is proposed; and

E. The operational relationship of the proposed use to those described in the land use district as presented in goals and policies of the comprehensive plan.

This administrative determination may be appealed in conformance with procedures set forth in Chapter 20.01 SMC. (Ord. 2017-012 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2017-006 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2016-015 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 2016-007 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2012-002 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 2011-012 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-003 § 1 (Att. 3); Ord. 2010-012 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 2006-016 § 3; Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


18.20.030 Permitted use definitions for zone Tables 18.20.040 through 18.20.150.

A

“Agriculture production, low impact” means farming, including plowing, tillage, cropping, installation of best management practices, seeding, cultivation, livestock pasturing, or harvesting for the production of food or fiber products, but not including commercial logging and timber harvesting and not including agricultural processing. Low impact agricultural production is agricultural activity within an urban area that is managed to minimize impact to surrounding urban uses, particularly residences.

C

“Communication facilities and towers” means any structure designed for transmitting or receiving television, radio, data, communication, or other electromagnetic signal via antenna, satellite, or other means, including associated structures to house equipment.

E

“Education and training, vocational” means instruction of technical and industrial advances, procedures, design, assembly and other information and skill topics associated with creating new ideas or products or improving existing ideas and products.

H

“Health care” means diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of health issues in a wide range of facilities including hospitals, medical laboratories and clinics, and professional offices providing medical treatment.

“Heavy commercial/warehouse” means delivery of goods and/or services that have large-scale wholesale and warehouse characteristics and that may include delivery of off-site services and incidental on-site retail. Examples are plumbing, electrical, paint and roofing contractor; consumer fuel sale and distribution; and cabinet sales and assembly/installation (but excluding manufacture of product from raw materials). The permitted warehouse use includes mini-storage warehouses.

I

“Institution” means civic, public or semi-public activity in one or more buildings that is in a central location to provide access to the entire community to provide services generally accessible to all residents. Examples include a college branch campus, cultural center, and museums.

M

“Manufacturing, light” means industrial use that involves the fabrication and/or assembly of products from components delivered to the site and is conducted entirely within a structure that is designed to preclude impacts of noise, odor, particulates, and light/glare to surrounding uses and properties. Warehouse use that is directly associated with the primary industrial use is incidental to the primary use.

P

“Public facilities and services” means government facilities and services that meet the communities’ needs for health, safety, and welfare, including water systems, waste water systems, transportation, parks, lighting, community centers, civic centers, fire stations, police stations, libraries, sanitation facilities, and schools. Major public facilities are those buildings that are of a larger scale and intensity of occupancy of their surrounding land uses such as water and waste water plants, police and fire stations, schools, and community centers; and large parks and other activity sites that generate noise, traffic, and light not typical of their surroundings. Minor public facilities are those activities, with or without buildings, that pose limited impact to their urban surroundings due to their limited scale and levels of activity such as water booster stations, sewer lift stations, and mini-parks.

R

“Religious place of worship” means a building for public worship by a congregation or membership including church, chapel, cathedral, temple, synagogue, mosque, and other place of organized worship by an established group of religious or spiritual purpose. A place of worship does not include structures used exclusively for residential, educational, recreational or other uses not associated with worship.

“Research and development” means research and development of innovative ideas or products in technology-intensive fields, including development and construction of prototype products. Activities are performed totally inside a building meeting design standards for visual character and landscaping and mitigating all noise, odor and lighting impacts to surrounding properties. Warehouse activity as storage for research and development activities is incidental to the primary use.

“Residence, attached” means multiple dwelling units physically attached to other dwelling units in one or more structures. Types of attached residences include apartments, townhouses, duplexes, two-unit homes, triplexes, three-unit homes, condominium buildings and all structure types that have two or more dwelling units, regardless of whether owner-occupied or rented.

“Residence, detached” means single dwelling units not physically connected to other living units, generally occupied by one family unit as an owner or renter; may also allow accessory living unit and/or home occupation under limitations. Types of detached residences include houses, manufactured homes, and cottage housing.

“Restaurants” are a food-service use that has both retail and personal service characteristics. For the purposes of this chapter, restaurants are defined as a retail use with regulatory distinction related to whether the use has drive-through, take-out, and/or on-premises dining elements.

“Retail, community” means a commercial enterprise that provides goods and associated services directly to the consumer when the goods are available for immediate purchase and removed from the premises by the purchaser, and the intended consumer is a resident of the greater community that relies on Sequim for regular retail purchases. Community retail includes all activities of neighborhood retail plus retail activities that are larger in scale and/or more specialized in nature to serve all retail purchase needs of area residents such as supermarkets, major appliance sales, flooring and window covering sales, auto parts, garden nursery/landscape supply, home medical equipment, and sporting goods.

“Retail, convenience” means a small-scale, commercial enterprise that provides goods directly to the consumer when the goods are available for immediate purchase and removed from the premises by the purchaser and the location and property design are oriented to automobile traffic. Fuel dispensing is included as a retail transaction. Convenience retail is not a substitute for neighborhood retail as it is limited in size and location to serve a visiting or traveling consumer at interchanges along a major highway.

“Retail, neighborhood” means a commercial enterprise that provides goods and associated services directly to the consumer when the goods are available for immediate purchase and removed from the premises by the purchaser and the intended consumer is a resident of the neighborhood in which the business is located. The market of neighborhood retail is a subarea of the larger community, and most customers live or work within two miles and a five-minute drive. Examples of common uses include delicatessen, bakery, and similar food shops; pet shops; hardware stores; book, clothing, and music sales; art gallery, home decoration, arts and crafts; wine and spirits; and grocery stores of neighborhood scale. Neighborhood retail does not include businesses that exist to serve the entire community or region, whether by the scale of their property, by marketing and sales beyond the neighborhood, or transactions that rely on truck delivery.

“Retail, regional” means a commercial enterprise that provides goods and associated services directly to the consumer when the goods are available for immediate purchase and removed from the premises by the purchaser and the intended market capture area is the entire county and beyond. Regional retail includes shopping malls, retail-warehouse (“big box”) stores, new car sales, home improvement centers, superstores, nationally-marketed “chain” retail and service businesses, and community retail and services.

S

“Services, personal and professional” means work done for others, predominantly on the premises of the business, by someone trained and engaged in the work as a career to provide assistance rather than a made product to individuals, business, industry, government and other enterprise and customer. Typical personal/professional services include certified public accounting, real estate sales, engineering, architecture/planning, consulting, medical and dental outpatient care, legal advice, life insurance sales, beauty salons and barbers. Services in the community business and more intensive zone districts may have drive-through activity consistent with auto-oriented locations. Mini-storage warehouse is a large-scale service use that serves the greater community, and by its size and physical characteristics is specified as a service use in specified, community-serving retail zones.

T

“Transient lodging” means accommodations for transient occupancy of limited duration that are operated as a business enterprise to meet the lodging needs of tourists, business travelers, and other short-term visitors. Typical facilities include motel, hotel, motor inn, and extended-stay inn. Facilities may include conference centers, recreation facilities, and food-service operations as common uses incidental to the primary lodging use.

“Travel services” means businesses or offices that provide assistance or information to transient visitors, whether for tourism, business, or other activity accessed by travelers at the primary accesses to the city from a major highway. Common activities are visitor and tourism information center and tour and activity agencies and businesses. (Ord. 2017-012 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2016-015 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 2015-012 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2014-003 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2012-002 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 2011-012 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-003 § 1 (Att. 3); Ord. 2005-028 § 2; Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


18.20.040 Agriculture conservancy – AC zone table.

	Zone Intent: To maintain agricultural use for the long-term benefits to a growing urban community as open space and for food production on any parcel that is preserved in perpetuity by public ownership or easement to maintain agricultural use.

	 

	Permitted Uses	Size Limitations	General Development Standards

	Maximum Height	Minimum Front Yard	Minimum Side/Rear Yard	Maximum Lot Coverage	Required Parking	Site Requirements

	Agriculture Production, Low Impact	None	50'	10'	Side: 20' but 50' if adjacent to R zone

Rear: 20' but 50' if adjacent to R zone	Not applicable as site development is limited by conservancy agreement	None	Per conservancy agreement

	Public Facilities and Services	Major: same as agriculture

Minor: 20'	Fencing per SMC 18.24.140

	Communication Facilities/Towers (see Chapter 18.61 SMC for wireless communications)	150'	2 times the height of a tower, antenna, dish; 50' for all other facilities

	Accessory Uses and Structures: see Chapter 18.59 SMC

	Conditional Uses: none

	Notes: These tables are intended to replace zoning and bulk and dimensional standards only. References to other SMC titles or chapters are for illustrative purposes only. Specific requirements may vary and depend upon the project submitted.

(Ord. 2017-012 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2012-002 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


18.20.050 Single-family residence R4-8 zone table. 

	Zone Intent: The R4-8 zoning district is to provide land for districts of detached, single-family homes within the city. The R4-8 zone provides for consistency and predictability in the character of single-family neighborhoods. New subdivisions shall provide a minimum of four dwelling units per net acre.

	 

	Permitted Uses	Lot Size Standard	General Development Standards

	Maximum Height	Minimum Front Yard	Minimum Side/Rear Yard	Maximum Lot Coverage	Required Parking	Site Requirements

	Residences (Detached)	Min. lot size – 5,400 sf

Max. lot size – 14,500 sf*	25', except 18' in central height district (see Notes below)	15'	Side: 6' each side; or 12' one side only if zero-lot-line development

Rear: 15'	40% lots 10,000 sf and larger; increases by 0.4% for each 100 sf lot area less than 10,000 sf	2 spaces/residence	Site plan review per Chapter 18.22 SMC

	Public Facilities and Services	None	25' or as determined by conditional use permit	Major: as determined by major CUP

Minor: 20'	See SMC 18.48.050	Site plan review per Chapter 18.22 SMC; fencing per SMC 18.24.140

	Communication Facilities/Towers (see Chapter 18.61 SMC for wireless communications)	None	150'	2 times the height of a tower, antenna, dish; 50' for all other facilities	None	Fencing per SMC 18.24.140

	Accessory Uses and Structures: See Chapter 18.59 SMC	Accessory Dwelling Unit: See Chapter 18.66 SMC

	Home Occupation: See Chapter 18.67 SMC	 

	Conditional Uses:

Major: parks other than mini-parks; public schools; libraries; community centers; police and fire stations; power substations; cemeteries

Minor: mini-parks; minor public facilities

	Notes: These tables are intended to replace zoning and bulk and dimensional standards only. References to other SMC titles or chapters are for illustrative purposes only. Specific requirements may vary and depend upon the project submitted.
[IMAGE]


Regulation of building heights is related to these policies of the Sequim Comprehensive Plan: Land Use Chapter LU 3.2.4, 3.2.5, and 3.2.7. Also see SMC 18.08.020, Definitions, and the illustration here for method of measurement of building height.

* A subdivision may create one remainder lot large enough to be further subdivided in the future, based on the minimum lot size requirements of the applicable residential zone, and the remainder lot shall not prevent a future subdivision from occurring that meets all of the city’s lot dimensional requirements and density.

(Ord. 2018-006 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2017-012 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2016-015 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 2012-013 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2012-002 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 2011-012 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-003 § 1 (Att. 3); Ord. 2005-028 § 3; Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


18.20.060 Neighborhood business – NB zone table.

	Zone Intent: The NB zone is to allow retail sales and services routinely needed by neighborhood residents in locations that are convenient to access by walking and offer the potential to grow as mixed-use neighborhood centers including attached-unit residential development.

	 

	Permitted Uses	Size Limitations (Max. gsf)	General Development Standards

	Maximum Height	Minimum Front Yard	Minimum Side/Rear Yard	Maximum Lot Coverage	Required Parking	Site Requirements

	Neighborhood Retail	25,000 (grocery store);  7,000 all others	35'	0'; and not more than 10'	Side: 10' but 20' if adjacent to R zone

Rear: 10' but 20' if adjacent to R zone	As determined to meet stormwater management (Chapter 13.104 SMC), parking, and landscape requirements (Chapter 18.22 SMC and SMC 18.24.130)	1 space per 300 sf

1 space per 500 sf Depends on facility (see Chapter 18.48 SMC)	Site and design review per Chapters 18.22 and 18.24 SMC

Fencing per SMC 18.24.140

	Services, Personal and Professional	6,000

	Residence, Attached	 	15'	0' but 10' if adjacent to R zone

	Public Facilities and Services (minor only)	As determined by minor CUP

	Communication Facilities/Towers (see Chapter 18.61 SMC for wireless communications)	None	< 30' for tower/antenna/dish; otherwise, 35'	Setback from all property lines is 1.5 times the height of any tower/antenna/dish; otherwise, same as retail	None

	Accessory Uses and Structures: See Chapter 18.59 SMC

	Conditional Uses:

Major: bars and taverns

Minor: mini-parks; bed and breakfast inns (three to six guest rooms); espresso stands (drive-through)

	Notes: Parking allowed inside and rear yard only. District is pedestrian-oriented with limited drive-through uses allowed.

Neighborhood restaurants: Music and other performance entertainment are allowed indoors as an incidental activity; provided, that no amplification equipment or technology is employed in the performance.

These tables are intended to replace zoning and bulk and dimensional standards only. References to other SMC titles or chapters are for illustrative purposes only. Specific requirements may vary and depend upon the project submitted.

(Ord. 2017-012 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2016-015 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 2012-002 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 2011-012 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-003 § 1 (Att. 3); Ord. 2009-046 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


18.20.070 Community business – CB zone table.

	Zone Intent: Provide residents centralized access to retail businesses and services, primarily along Washington Street on either side of downtown, that meet community-wide needs; create a complementary mix of community-serving retail, personal and professional services, public facilities, and transient lodging; ensure each development is a good neighbor to adjacent uses and districts, particularly single-family neighborhoods.

	 

	Permitted Uses	Size Limitations	General Development Standards

	Maximum Height	Minimum Front Yard	Minimum Side/Rear Yard	Maximum Lot Coverage	Required Parking	Site Requirements

	Community Retail	60,000 gsf maximum	35'	10'	Side: 0' but 20' if adjacent to R zone

Rear: 10' but 20' if adjacent to R zone	As determined to meet stormwater management (Chapter 13.104 SMC) and landscape requirements (Chapter 18.22 SMC and SMC 18.24.130)	Depends on use and/or facility (see Chapter 18.48 SMC)	Site plan per Chapter 18.22 SMC and design review per Chapter 18.24 SMC

Fencing per SMC 18.24.140

	Services, Personal and Professional

	Transient Lodging

	Religious Places of Worship

	Public Facilities and Services	Major: same as retail

Minor: 0' but 10' if adjacent to R zone

	Communication Facilities/Towers (See Chapter 18.61 SMC for wireless communications)	< 65'	1.5 times the height of any tower/antenna/dish; otherwise, same as retail	None

	Accessory Uses and Structures: See Chapter 18.59 SMC

	Conditional Uses:

Major: public facilities, major; day care centers (more than 12 charges); towers, antennas (including amateur radio) and supporting structures 65 feet or more, other than wireless communications facilities

Minor: public facilities, minor; bars and taverns

	Notes: Marijuana retail sales are allowed in the community business zone provided the site meets the minimum separation standards from specific uses as specified in RCW 69.50.369 and associated sections in Chapter 314-55 WAC. These tables are intended to replace zoning and bulk and dimensional standards only. References to other SMC titles or chapters are for illustrative purposes only. Specific requirements may vary and depend upon the project submitted.

(Ord. 2017-012 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.20.080 Regional commercial – RC zone table.

	Zone Intent: Allow retail and service uses, primarily “big box” stores and national retailers that serve the regional market that includes the entire North Olympic Peninsula. Provide regional residents convenient access at a highway interchange to major retailers including warehouse-format retail, home improvement center, superstore, new car dealership, and associated “pad” retail and service uses.

	 

	Permitted Uses	Size Limitations	General Development Standards

	Maximum Height	Minimum Front Yard	Minimum Side/Rear Yard	Maximum Lot Coverage	Required Parking	Site Requirements

	Regional Retail	None	35'	10'	Side: 0' but 20' if adjacent to R zone

Rear: 10' but 20' if adjacent to R zone	As determined to meet stormwater management (Chapter 13.104 SMC), parking, and landscape requirements (Chapter 18.22 SMC and SMC 18.24.130)	Depends on specific use and facility (see Chapter 18.48 SMC)	Site plan per Chapter 18.22 SMC and design review per Chapter 18.24 SMC

Fencing per SMC 18.24.140

	Services, Personal and Professional

	Transient Lodging

	Public Facilities and Services	Major: same as retail

Minor: 0' but 20' if adjacent to R zone

	Communication Facilities/Towers (see Chapter 18.61 SMC for wireless communications)	< 65' for tower/antenna/dish; otherwise, 35'	Setback from all property lines is 1.5 times the height of any tower/antenna/dish; otherwise, same as retail	None

	Accessory Uses and Structures: See Chapter 18.59 SMC

	Conditional Uses:

Major: public facilities, major; towers, antennas (including amateur radio) and supporting structures 65 feet or more, other than wireless communications facilities

Minor: public facilities, minor; bars and taverns; day care, more than 12 charges

	Notes: These tables are intended to replace zoning and bulk and dimensional standards only. References to other SMC titles or chapters are for illustrative purposes only. Specific requirements may vary and depend upon the project submitted.

(Ord. 2017-012 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.20.090 Downtown – DD, DMU-I/II zone table.

	Intent of These Zones: The downtown zones implement the 2011 downtown plan that fosters the growth of a central, residential neighborhood as well as furthers the legacy of a central place for commerce, culture, community events, and other uses and activities enjoyed by the Sequim community, surrounding region, and visitors. These zones allow a wide range of uses and encourage a mix of work, living, and recreation within the heart of the city.

	 

	Permitted Uses	Size Limitations	General Development Standards

	Maximum Height	Minimum Front Yard	Minimum Side/Rear Yard	Maximum Lot Coverage	Required Parking	Site Requirements

	Note to User: Please see Chapter 18.57 SMC, Downtown Districts, for use and development regulations for the downtown core (DC), downtown mixed use-I (DMU-I), and downtown mixed use-II (DMU-II) zones.

	Accessory Uses and Structures: See Chapter 18.59 SMC

(Ord. 2017-012 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.20.100 Highway commercial – HC zone table.

	Zone Intent: Meet the needs of tourists and other transient visitors by providing a range of lodging, restaurants, and tourist service facilities such as fuel stations at the primary accesses to the city at US 101 interchanges.

	 

	Permitted Uses	Size Limitations	General Development Standards

	Maximum Height	Minimum Front Yard	Minimum Side/Rear Yard	Maximum Lot Coverage	Required Parking	Site Requirements

	Convenience Retail	8,000 gsf	30'	20'	Side: 10' but 20' if adjacent to R zone

Rear: 20' but 30' if adjacent to R zone	As determined to meet stormwater management (Chapter 13.104 SMC), parking, and landscape requirements (Chapter 18.22 SMC and SMC 18.24.130)	Depends on specific use and facility (see Chapter 18.48 SMC)	Site plan per Chapter 18.22 SMC and design review per Chapter 18.24 SMC

Fencing per SMC 18.24.140

	Travel Services	None

	Transient Lodging	50'

	Public Facilities and Services	30'	Major: same as retail

Minor: 5' but 15' if adjacent to R zone

	Communication Facilities/Towers (see Chapter 18.61 SMC for wireless communications)	< 65' for tower/antenna/dish; otherwise, 35'	Setback from all property lines is 1.5 times the height of any tower/antenna/dish; all others, same as convenience retail	None

	Accessory Uses and Structures: See Chapter 18.59 SMC

	Conditional Uses:

Major: antennas (including amateur radio) 65 feet or more and supporting structures, other than wireless communications facilities

Minor: minor public facilities

	Notes: This is an auto-oriented district and retail and service drive-through uses, both primary and incidental, are permitted. These tables are intended to replace zoning and bulk and dimensional standards only. References to other SMC titles or chapters are for illustrative purposes only. Specific requirements may vary and depend upon the project submitted.

(Ord. 2017-012 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.20.110 Heavy commercial/warehouse – HC/W zone table.

	Zone Intent: The HC/W zone allows heavy commercial and warehouse uses for business activities that are incompatible with the community’s predominant residential uses and other commercial activities, yet still necessary functions within a small city.

	 

	Permitted Uses	Size Limitations	General Development Standards

	Maximum Height	Minimum Front Yard	Minimum Side/Rear Yard	Maximum Lot Coverage	Required Parking	Site Requirements

	Heavy Commercial	None	35'	10'	Side: 10' but 20' if adjacent to R zone

Rear: 10' but 30' if adjacent to R zone	As determined to meet stormwater management (Chapter 13.104 SMC) and landscape requirements (Chapter 18.22 SMC and SMC 18.24.130)	Depends on specific use and facility (see Chapter 18.48 SMC)	Site plan per Chapter 18.22 SMC and design review per Chapter 18.24 SMC

Fencing per SMC 18.24.140

	Wholesale/Warehouse

	Public Facilities and Services (minor)	10' for side and rear

	Communication Facilities/Towers (see Chapter 18.61 SMC for wireless communications)	< 65'	1.5 times the height of a tower/antenna/dish; 30' for all other facilities	None

	Accessory Uses and Structures: See Chapter 18.59 SMC

	Conditional Uses:

Major: public facilities, major; towers, antennas 65 feet or more (including amateur radio) and supporting structures (other than wireless communications facilities)

Minor: public facilities, minor

	Notes: Retail showroom and sales are incidental activities if accessory to a primary use to heavy commercial. These tables are intended to replace zoning and bulk and dimensional standards only. References to other SMC titles or chapters are for illustrative purposes only. Specific requirements may vary and depend upon the project submitted.

(Ord. 2017-012 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.20.120 High-tech light industrial – HTLI zone table.

Repealed by Ord. 2019-002. (Ord. 2017-012 § 1 (Exh. A))




18.20.130 Lifestyle district – LD zone table.

	Zone Intent: Promote growth of lifestyle options for seniors in a neighborhood setting that provides a broad range of housing types, services, mobility options and healthcare facilities to support “living-in-place” through the many stages of senior life.

	 

	Permitted Uses	Size Limitations	General Development Standards

	Maximum Height	Front Yard Setbacks	Minimum Side/Rear Yard	Maximum Lot Coverage	Required Parking	Site Requirements

	Residence, Detached and Attached	None	40' attached;

25' detached	0' min.;

20' max.	6' each side; 10' rear

6' each side; or 12' one side only if zero lot line development rear 10'	As determined to meet stormwater management (Chapter 13.104 SMC), parking, and landscape requirements (Chapter 18.22 SMC and SMC 18.24.130)	Depends on use and facility (see Chapter 18.48 SMC)	Site plan per Chapter 18.22 SMC and design review per Chapter 18.24 SMC

Fencing per SMC 18.24.140

	Health Care	50'	30'	Side: 20' but 50' if adjacent to R zone

Rear: 20' but 50' if adjacent to R zone

	Office, Personal and Professional	10,000 gsf	30'	0' min.;

15' max.	Side/rear: 10' but 15' next to residential

	Retail/Service	6,000 gsf

	Public Facilities and Services	None	30' or per CUP	As determined by CUP	Major: as per CUP

Minor: 5' but 15' if adjacent to R use

	Communication Facilities/Towers (see Chapter 18.61 SMC for wireless communications)	< 65'	1.5 times the height of a tower, antenna, or dish	None	Fencing per SMC 18.24.140

	Accessory Uses and Structures: See Chapter 18.59 SMC

	Conditional Uses:

Major: public facilities, major; towers, antennas 65 feet or more (including amateur radio) and supporting structures (other than wireless communications facilities)

Minor: public facilities, minor

	Notes: Distribution of permitted and conditional uses and application of tailored development standard are subject to any subarea plan for the lifestyle district adopted by the city council as directed by the comprehensive plan and provided for in Chapter 18.30 SMC, Master-Planned Development. In the interim, the use regulations and standards of this table apply. These tables are intended to replace zoning and bulk and dimensional standards only. References to other SMC titles or chapters are for illustrative purposes only. Specific requirements may vary and depend upon the project submitted.

(Ord. 2018-006 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2017-012 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.20.140 Economic opportunity area – EOA zone table.

Repealed by Ord. 2019-002. (Ord. 2017-012 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.20.150 Planned resort community – PRC zone table.

	Zone Intent: Enable the realization of a planned resort community that includes a mix of year-round and seasonal residences, tourist accommodations and the commercial and other uses to serve them, utilizing a subarea planning process to tailor specific uses and standards.

	 

	Permitted Uses	Size Limitations	General Development Standards

	Maximum Height	Front Yard Setbacks	Minimum Side/Rear Yard	Maximum Lot Coverage	Required Parking	Site Requirements

	Note: This zone classification is subject to the master-planned zone classification and procedures of SMC 18.30.027 that specify that until a subarea plan is adopted for a PRC, the provisions of SMC 18.20.050 apply.

(Ord. 2017-012 § 1 (Exh. A))


Chapter 18.22 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

Sections:

18.22.010    Purpose.

18.22.020    Buffers.

18.22.030    Sidewalks.

18.22.040    Grading, tree retention and general site repair.

18.22.050    Industrial use.

18.22.060    Multifamily residential.

18.22.070    Commercial uses.

18.22.075    Mini-storage and self storage facilities.

18.22.080    Mixed use.


18.22.010 Purpose. 

Development standards are established to ensure compatibility of uses permitted within the city and to ensure the protection of the public health, safety and general welfare. (Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


18.22.020 Buffers. 

All uses located within the city shall be subject to the following development standards, as applicable:

A. Buffers Required Between Zoning Districts. All commercial and mixed uses permitted in “C,” “MU” and “RDP” classified zones having a common boundary with an established residential property or with any portion of a residential zoning district shall establish and maintain along such common boundaries a buffer area of trees, shrubs, and/or berming. The buffer shall be no less than eight feet wide. The effect of the buffer shall be to partially screen and provide visual relief as measured at eye level from the adjacent residential properties to the commercial or mixed use. Existing plantings and/or topographic and/or natural features that meet or exceed this standard may be considered in lieu of new buffer construction. The retention of existing natural buffer features is preferred. Screening and buffering shall be encouraged within areas between permitted uses.

1. Buffer Design. Arrangements of plantings in buffers shall partially obscure at eye level the view from residential properties to the adjacent commercial and/or mixed use. Where possible, existing plant material should be preserved and/or enhanced. Possible arrangements include planting in parallel, serpentine, or broken rows. If planted berms are proposed, the minimum top width shall be four feet, and the maximum side slope shall be 2:1. A combination of plantings and fences may be permitted in the buffer area.

2. Planting Specifications. Plant materials shall be sufficiently large and planted in such a fashion that a year-round screen of at least eight feet in height shall be produced within two sequential growing seasons. All plantings shall be installed according to accepted horticultural standards.

3. Maintenance. Plantings shall be maintained in a manner appropriate for the specific plant species through the initial growing seasons. Dead and dying plants shall be replaced during the next growing season, and shall be subject to the subsequent replacement for the next two sequential growing seasons occurring chronologically from the above referenced date of planting. Buffer areas shall be maintained and kept free of all debris, rubbish, weeds, and tall grass. (Ord. 2009-046 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


18.22.030 Sidewalks. 

Sidewalks shall be established consistent with the following standards:

A. Sidewalks To Be Constructed in Commercial and Mixed Use Districts. If the street grade has been previously approved by the public works director, or if the curbs and gutters are currently in place along the access road abutting the subject property, then any new construction or remodel of the primary structure of that property for all uses permitted within any commercial or mixed use district shall require the property owner to provide and fully develop sidewalks along the entire frontage of the subject property in compliance with the sidewalk construction standards of this chapter prior to issuance of a building permit for said construction.



B. Minimum Sidewalk Development Standards. Sidewalks shall be established consistent with adopted City of Sequim Streetscape Standards. The standards contained within SMC Title 17, Subdivisions, and the Public Works Handbook and/or to match existing adjacent sidewalks. Where sidewalk depths are inconsistent a transition area shall be provided to avoid hazardous conditions. (Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


18.22.040 Grading, tree retention and general site repair. 

Where reasonable and practicable, all development shall be designed in a manner which maintains existing natural features and grade, significant trees and/or other landscape features, and restores features damaged during development consistent with Comprehensive Plan Policies ENV 3, ENV 4, OSR 11 through 14. The following standards shall be considered:

A. Where practicable, natural grades and significant natural features found on-site shall be incorporated into the overall design of the project.

B. Existing significant individual trees and groups of trees should be preserved, where possible.

C. The disturbance of required open space areas should be minimized during development and restored prior to project completion. (Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


18.22.050 Industrial use.

Industrial uses shall be subject to the following development standards:

A. Arc welding, acetylene torch cutting or similar processes shall be performed so as not to be visible at eye level from any adjacent properties.

B. The storage and handling of flammable liquids, liquefied petroleum, gases and explosives shall comply with rules and regulations falling under the jurisdiction of the fire marshal, the laws of the state and other local ordinances. Bulk storage of inflammable liquids below ground shall be located no closer to the property line than the greatest dimension (diameter, length, or height) of the tank consistent with the requirements of the Uniform Fire Code.

C. Provisions shall be made for necessary shielding or other preventative measures against interference occasioned by mechanical, electrical and nuclear equipment uses or processes with electrical apparatus in nearby buildings, or land uses.

D. Liquid and solid wastes, and the storage of animal or vegetable waste that attract insects or rodents or otherwise creates a health hazard shall be prohibited. Outside storage of waste products shall be screened, at eye-level, from view from adjacent properties. (Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


18.22.060 Multifamily residential.

The following multifamily development standards are intended to provide guidance for establishment and better integration of multifamily residences into the community consistent with the requirements of comprehensive plan policies.

A. Orientation. Multifamily developments shall be designed to orient to public or private streets and to provide pedestrian and vehicular connections to existing nearby neighborhoods. The following standards shall be considered:

1. A modified street grid system where all buildings in a project front on an internal street or other access shall be developed. Where no public streets exist, a modified grid street system shall be created within the project.
[IMAGE]


2. Each building shall be provided with direct pedestrian access from a street fronting the building and from established parking areas to the multifamily dwellings and to the existing neighborhoods.

B. Off-Street Parking. Impacts associated with multifamily dwellings can be reduced by providing adequate on-site parking and by designing and locating parking lots, carports, and garages to support the residential qualities of the neighborhood consistent with comprehensive plan policies. The following off-street parking standards shall be considered:

1. Parking areas shall be located behind or under buildings where practicable, and access shall be provided to such parking areas from alley-type driveways. If street access to parking areas is necessary, the number of access points shall be limited.

a. The number of driveways and curb cuts shall be minimized.

b. Driveways shall be shared (where possible) within a development.

2. Large parking areas shall be divided into smaller areas separated by buildings or landscaping.

3. Parking shall be configured to be less visible from surrounding streets.

4. Driveways and parking areas shall include landscaping and/or berming.

5. Parking areas shall be screened when abutting single-family residences or zones, with landscaping or fencing.

6. Parking lots adjacent to street frontage shall be limited to 30 percent of the street frontage.

7. Parking aisles shall be separated from site circulation routes.
[IMAGE]


8. Parking lots shall be designed to be in conformance with ADA (Americans with Disabilities Act) regulations.

C. Resident Services. New development and redevelopment shall have adequate provisions for residential services including mailboxes, garbage and recycling pickup, transit stops, and walkways and parking area lighting. The following resident service standards shall be considered:

1. Adequate safe pedestrian walkways shall be established to residential services.

2. Street lighting shall be provided along walkways adjacent to and within the multifamily development. Lighting shall minimize glare, and shall be downward facing and fully shielded.

3. Security lighting shall be provided in parking and play areas.

4. Lighting shall be directed away from neighboring properties to minimize glare.

5. Garbage, maintenance and recycling facilities should be screened.
[IMAGE]


6. Pedestrian access to nearby transit stops shall be provided along public rights-of way.

7. Pedestrian connections to adjacent development shall be provided, where practicable, in public rights-of-way, or along designated walking and bike trail corridors.

8. Pedestrian walkways shall be designed to be in conformance with ADA (Americans with Disabilities Act) regulations.

D. Open Space and Recreation. These standards are for privately owned open spaces and recreational areas only and shall not be dedicated to the city. General city off-site park requirements are met through the payment of park impact fees as adopted by the city council. Usable open space and recreation areas within developments shall be required within multifamily residential developments containing five or more dwelling units. The following open space and recreation standards shall be considered:

1. For individual projects less than five units which are not part of a larger development plan, open space may be provided through the establishment of individual yards for each unit. This shall include as applicable duplexes, triplexes and four-plexes.

2. Where a multifamily residential project consists of a total of five or more dwelling units, in any configuration, shared or common usable open space shall be provided in addition to any other open spaces or protected areas. Shared or common usable open spaces shall include landscaped areas and active or passive recreation opportunities for the residents.

3. Minimum Area Required. Each multifamily project comprised of five or more dwelling units shall provide a minimum of 200 square feet of usable open space for each dwelling unit in the project. A portion of the usable open space may be required to provide for active recreational uses, as described in subsection (D)(4) of this section.

4. Play Space for Children. Multifamily residential projects comprised of five or more dwelling units that are anticipated by their type and anticipated residency to accommodate families shall provide a safe play space for children. Projects that are established solely for the occupancy of adults shall not be required to establish play spaces. Such uses may be congregate care facilities, senior only (over 55) housing developments, and adults only developments, as permitted by law. The required play space shall address the following standards:

a. Play spaces shall include play equipment which is manufactured and installed in conformance with the safety standards of the American Play Equipment Industry, or other adopted standards.

b. Play equipment shall not be located on a slope greater than four percent in any direction.

c. Play spaces shall not include driveways, parking areas, required landscaping areas or porches, balconies or overhangs.

d. Play spaces may be established within side and rear yard setbacks, excepting that no play space shall be located within 10 feet of any road, driveway or alleyway, parking area, or adjacent single-family resident or single-family residential zone without the provision of fences or buffers.

e. To maximize the personal safety of children resident in the development, play spaces shall be located so as to provide maximum visibility from surrounding multifamily dwelling units and be connected by pedestrian walkways and lighted.

f. Play space should be adequately sized and equipped to be roughly proportional to the anticipated recreational impact.

5. The provision of usable open space, play spaces, and/or recreational spaces within a multifamily development of five or more units may be phased concurrent with the approval of a phasing plan consistent with the requirements of this code; provided, that each phase shall include usable open space and play spaces (if required) established in proportion to the size and impacts of each phase.

E. Modulation of Building Facades, Staggering Entries, and Roofing. See Chapter 18.24 SMC (Design Standards) for detailed standards.

F. Landscaping. Landscaping within a project shall have a common design theme that takes into account the existing scale and style or landscaping found in surrounding development patterns. The following landscaping standards shall be considered:

1. Multifamily residential developments shall include usable open space and landscaping.

2. Landscaping should separate buildings from pavement or walkways.

3. Street trees shall be provided along public streets and rights-of-way.

4. Landscaping should be easily maintained after the initial growth period. A maintenance plan to ensure the successful establishment and maintenance of landscaping may be required.

5. Landscaping for multifamily residential developments shall meet all other applicable landscaping requirements contained in this title. (Ord. 2010-014 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


18.22.070 Commercial uses. 

The following commercial development standards are intended to provide guidance for the establishment of commercial uses, and to better integrate commercial development into the community consistent with Comprehensive Plan Policies LUP-11 through 16.

A. Off-Street Parking. All off-street parking standards of this title shall be met.

B. Site Planning. Commercial development shall be designed to accommodate safe ingress and egress, pedestrian and vehicular circulation, and visibility of the commercial uses. The following standards shall be considered:

1. Adequate stacking or vehicle queuing room at driveways and street intersections shall be provided, based on engineered traffic studies and calculations.

2. Where practicable, shared access and circulation should be provided to minimize vehicular curb cuts.

3. Commercial developments should inhibit the use of on-site circulation and parking areas as “cut-throughs.”

4. Buildings should be separated from pavement with landscaping and/or walkways.

5. Landscaped setbacks between roads and parking shall be provided.

6. Where practicable, service vehicle accesses and parking areas should be separated from customer parking and circulation.

7. Outside storage shall be screened from view from public roads and neighboring properties.

8. Where practicable, established trees shall be preserved and incorporated into site landscaping.

9. Off-site traffic controls, devices, or improvements, including traffic lights, intersection improvements, and/or turning lanes shall be installed, as required by the city engineer.

10. Parking areas shall be designed to be in conformance with all applicable ADA (Americans with Disabilities Act) regulations.

C. Public Services. Public services required for commercial development include garbage and recycling pickup, transit stops, pedestrian circulation and walkways, and street and area lighting. The following commercial public service standards shall be considered:

1. Adequate safe pedestrian walkways shall be established to commercial uses.

2. Street lighting shall be provided along walkways adjacent to and within the commercial development. Lighting shall not create glare, and shall be downward facing and/or shielded.

3. Security lighting shall be provided in parking and service areas.

4. Lighting shall be directed away from neighboring properties.

5. Garbage, recycling, and maintenance facilities shall be screened.

6. Pedestrian access to nearby transit stops shall be provided.

7. Pedestrian connections to adjacent developments shall be provided.

8. Pedestrian walkways shall be designed to be in conformance with all applicable ADA (Americans with Disabilities Act) regulations. (Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


18.22.075 Mini-storage and self storage facilities.

The following development standards are intended to provide additional guidance for the establishment of mini-storage and self storage in the zoning districts where they are allowed and to better integrate such development into the community consistent with the Comprehensive Plan.

A. All of the development standards for commercial uses apply to mini-storage and self storage facilities when they are located within zoning districts in which they are allowed. 

B. Site Planning. The following standards will be considered when reviewing applications to locate mini-storage and self storage facilities in the zoning districts where they are allowed:

1. Where possible, offices, retail storefronts, and other appropriate mixed uses associated with mini-storage and self service storage facilities should be established adjacent to developed street frontages.

2. Off-site views of loading and/or access doors to the storage unit facilities must be minimized.

3. Security fencing must not be located within 20 feet of the primary street frontage. Security fencing should be located behind street-fronting buildings.
[IMAGE]


4. Outside storage of recreational vehicles and boats must be screened from view from public roads and neighboring properties.

C. Use and Operation. Mini-storage and self service storage facilities located adjacent to residential districts should establish hours of operation consistent with adjacent, permitted businesses. Hours of operation should not extend beyond 10:00 p.m. nor occur prior to 7:00 a.m. (Ord. 2018-006 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 98-004 § 2(B))


18.22.080 Mixed use.

Mixed use developments that are compatible with existing land uses, encourage pedestrian access, and provide an efficient use of land shall be encouraged consistent with the comprehensive plan. Mixed use developments include those developments where different uses are proposed on the same parcel. Mixed use developments shall be designed in accordance with the following development standards: 

A. Mixed use development shall be established through the approval of an application for a binding site plan that specifies uses, lot divisions and infrastructure improvements, or a subdivision application consistent with the requirements of the binding site plan and subdivision sections of this code.

B. Commercial land uses located within a mixed use development shall be established consistent with the standards for commercial development established by this chapter.

C. Industrial land uses located within a mixed use development shall be established consistent with the standards for industrial development established by this chapter.

D. Proposed dissimilar land uses located within a mixed use project shall ensure appropriate separation and/or buffering between incompatible uses.

E. Signage. A signage master plan shall be prepared for each proposed mixed use development consistent with the standards contained within Chapter 18.58 SMC.

1. Impacts associated with the adverse effect of lighted signage on adjacent dissimilar uses contained within a mixed use project shall be addressed.

2. A unified and coordinated sign scheme shall be created within each proposed mixed use development.

F. Shared Services. New development and redevelopment within a mixed use development shall provide adequate provisions for services including mailboxes, garbage and recycling pickup, transit stops, and walkways and parking area lighting consistent with Comprehensive Plan Policy LUP 25. The following shared service standards shall be considered:

1. Adequate safe pedestrian walkways should be established to shared services.

2. Street lighting shall be provided along walkways adjacent to and within the multifamily development. Lighting shall minimize glare, and shall be downward facing and/or shielded.

3. Security lighting shall be provided in parking or public areas.

4. Lighting shall be directed away from neighboring properties.

5. Garbage, maintenance and recycling facilities shall be screened and these services shared between uses when feasible.

6. Pedestrian access to nearby transit stops shall be provided along public rights-of-way.

7. Pedestrian connections to adjacent properties shall be provided where practicable.

G. Landscaping. Mixed use developments should provide landscaping consistent with the landscaping requirements for the type of development proposed. Landscaping within a project shall have a common design theme which takes into account existing development and compatibility of uses. The following landscaping standards shall be considered:

1. Landscaping shall separate buildings from pavement or walkways.

2. Street trees shall be provided along public streets and rights-of-way.

3. Landscaping should be easily maintained after the initial growth period. A maintenance plan to ensure the successful establishment and maintenance of landscaping may be required.

4. Landscaping for mixed use developments shall meet all other applicable landscaping requirements contained in this title. (Ord. 2012-012 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-003 § 1 (Att. 3); Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


Chapter 18.24 DESIGN STANDARDS

Sections:

18.24.010    Purpose.

18.24.020    Intent.

18.24.030    Utilization.

18.24.031    Design approval required.

18.24.032    Design review application.

18.24.033    Design review procedure.

18.24.034    Administrative approval.

18.24.035    Repealed.

18.24.036    Design review approval expiration.

18.24.037    Criteria for approval – Required findings.

18.24.038    Appeals.

18.24.039    Recommendations of DCD.

18.24.040    Definitions.

18.24.050    Facades, exterior walls and entryways.

18.24.060    Smaller structures in regional centers.

18.24.070    Site planning and compatibility.

18.24.080    Detail features.

18.24.090    Roofs.

18.24.100    Materials.

18.24.110    Windows and doors.

18.24.120    Colors.

18.24.130    Landscaping and buffering.

18.24.140    Fences.

18.24.150    Environmentally conscious development.

18.24.160    Parking lot design and orientation.

18.24.170    Lighting and glare.

18.24.180    Pedestrian flows.

18.24.190    Outdoor storage, trash collection, recycle and loading areas.

18.24.200    Central features and community spaces.

18.24.210    Multi-building and multifamily projects.

18.24.220    Town center sub-area.

18.24.230    Transportation consistency requirements.

18.24.240    Other requirements.


18.24.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide guidance and standards for the site and structural development of commercial, industrial, mixed use, and multifamily projects in order to maintain the vision of the rural heritage of the city of Sequim. This chapter applies to new commercial, industrial, mixed use and multifamily structures, not additions to or renovations of existing structures. This chapter does not pertain to a detached single-family dwelling, duplex, triplex or fourplex, unless associated with a mixed use development. (Ord. 2009-011 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 2008-007 § 2; Ord. 2003-018 § 1)


18.24.020 Intent.

The comprehensive plan emphasizes that decision makers, as they formulate and implement policies, “should seek to improve Sequim’s quality of life and the business climate while achieving community goals.” Proponents shall start with a clear understanding of rural character and rural architecture, as defined in this document. Projects shall build on the variety and contrasts that are Sequim and strive to present architecture that is both unique and fits in our rural city.

Other themes found in the comprehensive plan include preserving Sequim’s historic and scenic character, preserving open space through the use of landscape setbacks, plazas, or other means which protect or enhance the natural environment and add to the aesthetics of a land use proposal, and developing commercial zones in ways that do not infringe on the peaceful enjoyment of residents.

The comprehensive plan also provides for policies and goals for specific improvement, which are reflected in the Sequim Municipal Code and/or in this chapter. These design standards and guidelines emphasize:

A. Incorporating mixed uses;

B. Planning for human-scale development with pedestrian-friendly features;

C. Preserving view corridors, sunlight, open space, natural beauty, topography, and critical environments;

D. Creating a strong sense of place;

E. Providing a variety of transportation options; and

F. Encouraging desirable employment environments.

This chapter is intended to serve as a standard of excellence for development that serves the economy, community, and environment of the city of Sequim. (Ord. 2009-011 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 2008-007 § 2; Ord. 2003-018 § 1)


18.24.030 Utilization.

The following standards and guidelines are intended to be used for two purposes: first, as a design aid for use by developers proposing commercial, industrial, mixed use and multifamily developments, and, second, as an evaluation tool for the city of Sequim. These standards and guidelines apply to all proposed new construction of commercial, industrial, mixed use and multifamily projects pursuant to SMC 18.24.010.

The “guidelines” are not mandatory, but are provided in order to guide planners, design consultants, developers and city staff about the design objectives; “standards” are mandatory.

A. The city shall review all development subject to design review. “Development” means any new structure or associated site improvements open to exterior view, including, but not limited to, buildings, structures, landscaping, site screening, fencing, murals, signs, parking lots, lighting, pedestrian facilities, street furniture, and use of open space (including parks and recreational facilities, and some low impact development stormwater facilities) which do not have a previously reviewed and currently valid approval by the city. For purposes of this chapter, “development” does not include additions to or renovations of existing buildings or structures.

B. Design review is not required before approval of a subdivision plat, short plat, binding site plan or PUD approval. Design review may be required for improvements to property as set forth in subsection A of this section. Design standards and design review are required for governmental projects, except for normal maintenance and repair; provided, that design standards and design review requirements may be waived where application of design requirements would interfere with essential governmental functions of the proposed project.

C. Design standards and design review shall recognize the federal law known as the Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act and apply design standards accordingly. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2009-011 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 2008-007 § 2; Ord. 2003-018 § 1)


18.24.031 Design approval required.

A. Design review is required for all new commercial, industrial, mixed use and residential structures with more than four dwelling units with common walls. No building permit shall be issued for any development or construction requiring design review until design approval has been granted.

B. Development shall be completed in exact compliance with the design approved by the city. If, after such approval, a developer wishes to make any exterior design or landscaping alterations, the project/change shall be resubmitted into the design review process.

C. Failure to comply with this chapter and with design review requirements is a violation of SMC 1.12.010. (Ord. 2009-011 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 2008-007 § 2)


18.24.032 Design review application.

A. Preapplication. An applicant must request a design review preapplication meeting with city staff. This meeting allows an applicant an opportunity for early project review before formal submittal. The preapplication review does not bind the city in any way, but rather is offered as a convenience to the applicant. No fee shall be assessed for a design preapplication meeting. Preapplication does not vest the application. Applicants may also schedule meetings with city staff prior to the preapplication for early project consultation. Requests for design review preapplication meetings should include the following:

1. Vicinity map showing site location in relation to surrounding sites and development;

2. A sketch or drawing of the site showing its approximate configuration and dimensions;

3. A sketch or drawing of the site showing natural site conditions including topographic information, drainage, and existing vegetation. Photographs are encouraged;

4. Conceptual drawings or sketches of proposed buildings.

B. Design Review Application. Application for design review will be on application forms provided by the city. The city will also furnish applicants with guidelines and standards to assist in design. All applications must be submitted to the city department of community development, which will conduct an initial assessment for completeness and code compliance prior to review routing to city staff.

C. A complete design review application shall include the following:

1. Site Layout. A plan, drawn to scale no smaller than one inch equals 30 feet, showing location and size of all structures, critical areas, required buffer areas, landscape areas, open spaces, common areas or plazas, walkways, preliminary stormwater retention/detention facilities, and parking lot layout and vehicle circulation.

2. Landscape Plan. A plan showing the species, size and location of all existing indigenous and native trees eight inches in diameter or larger, and other significant shrubs, groundcovers, and ornamental grasses within the property subject to the application. This plan must also include all proposed new landscaping, and whether it is associated with stormwater management.

3. Stormwater Site Plan. A plan showing all proposed best management practices to be used in the site design. The plan, defined in Chapter 13.104 SMC, shall identify and describe the type of stormwater management technique(s) being used and applicable calculations (e.g., size, capacity, etc.).

4. Preliminary Site Section Drawings. Section drawings which illustrate existing and proposed grades.

5. Preliminary Grading Plan. An accurate topographic map of the property, delineating contours, existing and proposed, at no greater than five-foot intervals. The plan shall indicate all proposed cuts, fills and retaining wall heights and include areas of disturbance necessary to construct all retaining walls, structures and impervious surfaces.

6. Preliminary Utilities Plan. A utilities plan showing the location and type of any utilities proposed in critical areas, critical area buffers and natural vegetation retention areas.

7. Colored Elevation Drawings. Complete colored elevation drawings of all buildings showing dimensions and proposed materials including roofing, siding, windows and trim. Drawings shall include conceptual trim and cornice design and roof pitch. If landscaping is proposed to soften or mitigate architectural modulation or details, additional elevation drawings showing proposed landscaping shall be provided.

8. Equipment Screening. A description of how all mechanical and utility equipment will be screened.

9. Color and Material Palette. The proposed schematic color and material palette for all elements open to exterior view including but not limited to exterior siding, trim, cornice, windows and roofing shall be presented graphically.

10. Fencing. The location and description of any proposed fencing shall be shown on the landscaping plan.

11. Lighting and Signage. A photometric plan identifying the location and height of proposed parking lot, pedestrian and/or building security light structures and poles. Sign type and location shall be identified. A separate city of Sequim sign application will be required for additional sign information.

12. Accessories, Where Applicable. The location of all outdoor furniture, trash receptacles, recycling areas, bicycle racks and other accessories.

13. Applications for design review shall be accompanied by a fee as established periodically by the city council.

D. Applicants pursuing two or more land use and/or building permits on a single project may consolidate the review process in conformance with SMC 20.01.050. (Ord. 2018-006 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-017 § 1; Ord. 2009-011 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 2008-007 § 2)


18.24.033 Design review procedure.

A. The applicant shall follow the appropriate review process contained within this chapter based upon the project and whether or not the application or portions thereof strictly conform to the specific requirements of this chapter.

B. An application for design review, as required by this chapter, shall be submitted prior to the submission of an underlying building permit application.

C. Design review shall be processed as set forth in SMC Title 20, as supplemented by the procedures set forth in this chapter, and shall include:

1. Determination of completeness (SMC 20.01.130);

2. Notice of application (SMC 20.01.140). The notice of application shall be forwarded to all members of the design review board for all of the following types of development:

a. Nonresidential development, including community and public facilities;

b. Multifamily residential development as defined in this chapter;

c. Mixed use development; and

d. Governmental projects, except for normal maintenance and repair; provided, that design standards and design review requirements may be waived where application of design requirements would interfere with essential governmental functions of the proposed project. 

3. Final decision (SMC 20.01.030). (Ord. 2009-011 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 2008-007 § 2)


18.24.034 Administrative approval.

The community development director will process an application as follows:

A. Applications for all projects will be available at the department of community development for public review.

B. The application will be reviewed by the community development director or his/her designee for compliance with the specific requirements of this chapter. The community development director or his/her designee will issue a notice of decision approving the application or portions thereof if he/she finds that the application or portions of the application satisfy the specific requirements of this chapter, or deny the application if such codes and standards are not satisfied. The community development director or his/her designee will render the decision as set forth in SMC 20.01.230. (Ord. 2018-006 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-017 § 1; Ord. 2009-011 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 2008-007 § 2)


18.24.035 Design review board recommendation.

Repealed by Ord. 2018-006. (Ord. 2009-011 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 2008-007 § 2)


18.24.036 Design review approval expiration.

Approval for design review is valid for two years from the date of the notice of decision. The community development director or his/her designee may grant one extension of time not to exceed one year, upon the filing of a timely request for extension by the applicant. No extension will be granted if any local zoning or design review regulation has been amended in a manner that would have an impact upon the proposed development. (Ord. 2018-006 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-017 § 1; Ord. 2009-011 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 2008-007 § 2)


18.24.037 Criteria for approval – Required findings.

A. Minimum Criteria. The city of Sequim department of community development shall review the site design for compliance with approved lot coverage, setbacks, height, mass and scale, parking, land use and other appropriate regulations in the Sequim Municipal Code. These minimum requirements must be met before further review takes place.

B. General Review Criteria.

1. The community development director or his/her designee will review the detailed architectural design with respect to materials and surface textures, colors, fenestration pattern, wall planes, roof form and pitch and expression of detailing.

2. The community development director or his/her designee will also review the site design to determine how the proposed development melds into the existing environment, judging applications with respect to scale and proportion, orientation of buildings and other site features to streets and surrounding properties, and the placement and types of landscaping.

C. Specific Review Criteria. Specific review criteria will vary from project to project. Design standards established in this chapter shall be incorporated and used for detailed structure and site analysis.

D. Required Findings. The community development director or his/her designee must make the following findings before approval of any proposed development:

1. Comprehensive Plan Compliance. Find that the proposal complies with Sequim’s Comprehensive Plan and other adopted city policies.

2. Zoning Regulation Compliance. Find that the proposal meets the requirements of the regulations for the appropriate zoning district.

3. Design Review Compliance. Find that the proposal, as approved or conditionally approved, satisfies the criteria and purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 2018-006 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-017 § 1; Ord. 2009-011 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 2008-007 § 2)


18.24.038 Appeals.

The decision of the director of community development shall be final unless, within 21 days from the date of the decision, the applicant or any other party with standing files an appeal. The appeal shall be filed in conformance with the appeal process established in SMC 20.01.240, Appeals. Appeals of any administrative decision shall be made to a hearing officer, the costs for which shall be paid by the applicant. Appeals of hearing officer’s decision shall be made to the Clallam County superior court. (Ord. 2011-017 § 1; Ord. 2009-011 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 2008-007 § 2)


18.24.039 Recommendations of DCD.

The department of community development, when necessary, will hold public meetings to discuss and formulate recommendations to the city council on needed modifications to existing design standards. Any proposed land use control ordinance changes will be processed accordingly. (Ord. 2018-006 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-017 § 1; Ord. 2009-011 § 2 (Exh. B))


18.24.040 Definitions.

“Analogous colors” means adjacent colors on the color wheel.

“Arcade” means a range of arches supported on columns or attached to a wall; also a covered pedestrian shopping street.

“Architectural anomalies” are architectural treatments that are radically different from adjacent or neighboring ones, a sudden and isolated change in the design detail(s) or type of material(s) from those that are used elsewhere on a building facade or within the limits of a complex of buildings. To avoid architectural anomalies without restricting creative use of materials, radically varying materials shall be used in repeating patterns over a building’s facade or throughout a complex of buildings; for example, if metal wall panels (manmade material) are to be mixed with wood siding or stone (natural materials), the dissimilar materials must use similar details of incorporation and create patterns that repeat.

“Architectural treatment” is the application of architecture, the use of design treatments to buildings that ensure a human scale and provide visual rhythm as we move along and between building facades and building interiors. Examples are modulations of a building facade; incorporation of canopies, marquees, and overhangs; three-dimensional ornamentations; treatment and patterns of fenestrations; the application of textured materials, etc.

“Architecture” is a process and an experience, one where the built environment is made to respond to the human experience in its scale and as an event as we move through time and space.

“Awning” means a secondary covering attached to the exterior wall of a building wholly supported by the building to which it is attached. Awnings shall not be attached to a canopy. When allowed, an awning’s covering shall be of vinyl laminated to polyester yarns designed to be long-lasting. An awning is comprised of a lightweight, rigid skeleton structure over which a covering is attached.

“Balcony” means a platform projecting from the wall of a building and surrounded by a railing, balustrade, or parapet; an exterior floor projecting from the wall of a building supported by the primary structure without additional independent supports.

“Blank wall(s)” are walls without windows, showcases, displays and pedestrian entries.

“Buffer” or “buffer zone” is that intermediate or intervening space or area that serves to reduce or mitigate the interaction with adjacent properties or structures.

“Building footprint” means the outer perimeter of a building, excluding eave overhangs and other cantilevered portions of the building projecting no more than 24 inches and no wider than 10 feet.

“Canopy” means an architectural projection or hood over a door, window, or niche that is able to provide shade, shelter, and weather protection; a place for identity or decoration. Canopies are supported by the building to which they are attached as a cantilever or with ground mounting by not fewer than two stanchions (upright support posts).

“Certified arborist” means a professional arborist who is certified and in good standing with the International Society of Certified Arborists, including ISA certification and current membership in other professional organizations such as the American Society of Consulting Arborists. Credentials must reveal training in tree retention planning for construction, soils, tree health management planning, and evidence of a continuing education.

“CMU” means concrete masonry unit larger than 12 inches by four inches by four inches.

“Color hue” means the color of something; red, blue and yellow are primary colors; all other hues or colors are found between the primary hues or colors.

“Color saturation” means the dominance of hue in the color ranging from no color (white) to pure color.

“Color value” means the relative lightness or darkness of a color; a color value can range from almost white to almost black including all the tones of the color found in between.

“Color wheel” means the organization of color hues around a circle showing the relationship between visible colors.

“Community space” means an on-site, outdoor area devoted to the public for outdoor activities and leisure. The space can include covered areas, drinking fountains, sitting benches, etc. It shall not be used to store or display merchandise.

“Cornice” means a horizontal molded projection that crowns or completes the top of a wall or building. A fascia is not part of a cornice.

Drip Line. A tree’s “drip line” is the most extreme reach of its branches beyond its trunk or one foot of space from the trunk for every inch of trunk diameter as measured four and one-half feet above grade, whichever is greater.

“Eaves” means the projecting overhang at the lower borders of a roof.

“Elevation” means a view or scaled drawing of the side, front or rear of a particular structure without any allowance for the laws of perspective.

“Facade” means any face or elevation of a building envelope.

“Fascia” means a plain horizontal band which may consist of two or more fasciae overlapping each other, specifically used to describe the vertical “fascia board” which caps the end of rafters outside a building, which can be used to hold the rain gutters.

“Fenestration” means the products that fill openings in a building, such as windows, doors, skylights, curtain walls, etc., and are designed to permit the passage of air, light, vehicles, or people. Fenestration is commonly referred to the arrangement of windows in a building.

“Glass” can be: glass block, sheet, plate, polished (highly reflective), float, annealed, laminated, tempered, low-emissivity, or insulated glass.

“Glazing” means a transparent part of a wall made of glass or plastic.

“Greenbelt” means any area dedicated to plantings that lessens the impact of structures or parking lot areas, and provides relief for the resultant impact.

“Hardscape” means manmade or constructed elements, permanently in place, that are part of the completed project.

“HVAC” means heating, ventilating and air conditioning.

“Impervious” means a surface which cannot be easily penetrated. For instance, rain does not readily penetrate paved surfaces.

“Impervious surface” means a nonvegetated surface area which either prevents or retards the entry of water into the soil mantle as under natural conditions prior to development. A non-vegetated surface area which causes water to run off the surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate of flow from the flow present under natural conditions prior to development. Common impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, walkways, patios, driveways, parking lots or storage areas, concrete or asphalt paving, gravel roads, packed earthen materials, and oiled, macadam or other surfaces which similarly impede the natural infiltration of stormwater. Open, uncovered retention/detention facilities shall not be considered as impervious surfaces for the purposes of determining whether the thresholds for application of minimum requirements are exceeded. Open, uncovered retention/detention facilities shall be considered impervious surfaces for purposes of runoff modeling.

“In-fill development” means any existing, vacant structure or partially vacant, undeveloped lot within the city limits of Sequim that is available to lease, rent, or buy.

“Internal walkway” means those pedestrian walkways entirely within the site, dedicated to the safety of pedestrians using the site.

“Landscaping” or “landscape parkways” means the combination of natural elements such as trees, shrubs, groundcovers, vines, or other living organic and inorganic materials which are installed for purposes of creating an attractive and pleasing environment, screening unsightly views, reducing environmental impacts (including treatment of stormwater runoff), and filtering matter from the air.

“Large” means any structure 20,000 square feet or greater.

“Large lot” means a parcel of at least one and one-quarter acres; a lot large enough for a single-story, 20,000-square-foot structure with 100 parking spaces and at least 30 percent residual space (buffers, landscaping, etc.) or greater.

“Low impact development (LID)” means a stormwater and land use management strategy that strives to mimic predisturbance hydrologic processes of infiltration, filtration, storage, evaporation and transpiration by emphasizing conservation, use of on-site natural features, site planning, and distributed stormwater management practices that are integrated into a project design.

“Marquee” means a structural canopy over the entrance to a building supported at the innermost edge by the building and with rods or chains extending from the outermost edge to the building and which projects into the public right-of-way.

“Mass” means the physical bulk or volume of a building. In architectural terms, a single-mass building is a single geometric form such as a rectangle or square, and may include a simple roof form with no variation in the roof line.

“Massing” means that it allows for the provision of architectural features which reduce the bulk and mass of the building into a human-scale size and offer variety and consistency along the street face.

“Material module” means a three-dimensional change in a flat wall plane; i.e., bump out, a projection or a recess or an inset that is sufficiently offset from the wall plane a minimum of four inches that creates depth and shadow.

“Mixed use” means the development of a tract of land or structure with two or more different uses such as, but not limited to, residential, office/professional, commercial, or entertainment in a compact urban form.

“Multifamily,” as applied in this chapter, means structures containing five or more residential dwelling units that share a common wall.

“Overhang” means the part of a roof which extends horizontally beyond the vertical plane of the exterior wall of a building.

“Parapet” means a low, protective wall (usually solid) along the edge of a roof or balcony.

“Pathways” means a system of pedestrian trails not directly related to the sidewalk system of downtown and is typically a curvilinear or meandering path made with asphalt, wood chips or masonry.

“Pervious” means open to the passage or penetration of water or rain; a surface with holes or cracks that are larger than capillary pores; paving materials where fine aggregate is omitted from the mix; materials with a void structure of more than 15 percent allowing more than three gallons of water to pass per minute per square foot of surface area, e.g., porous asphalt, concrete, turf, single-size aggregate, or open-jointed blocks.

“Pitch” means the angle of a roof pitch, usually expressed as a ratio of units of vertical distance to 12 units of horizontal distance. For example, “8:12” means eight units of vertical rise to every 12 units of horizontal run.

“Planting strip” means a linear landscaped strip of land, typically no less than four feet wide, per the city’s right-of-way construction standards.

“Plastic” can be acrylic and/or polycarbonate.

“Portico/porte cochere” means a roofed space, open or partly enclosed, forming the entrance and centerpiece of the facade, often with detached or attached columns.

“Reflective glass” means a polished (mirrored) glazing that gives back or reflects light, or exhibits as an image, likeness or outline.

“Regional center” means multiple commercial or a combination of mixed use structures, designed as a single complex, which provide services to an entire region.

“Retail establishments” means any new development that is processed according to the requirements of the commercial (C-I(NC); C-II(G); C-II(M); C-II(S); and C-III), mixed use (MU) and regional commercial overlay (C-IV Overlay) zones or the city building permit process.

“Rural architecture” is often vernacular; the materials of construction are typically of the area’s available resources: wood (cedar shingles and board siding), river stone/rock, earth, and that it appears to have evolved over a period of time, reflecting the environment, culture and historical context in which it exists.

“Rural character” embraces sunlight, views and varied architectural design with good manners: a politeness where streets have continuity but each building has its own identity.

“Small” means any structure less than 20,000 square feet.

“SMC” means the Sequim Municipal Code.

“Story” means that portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or, if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it and including those basements used for the principal use.

“Stucco” means a material usually made of portland cement, sand, and a small percentage of lime and applied in a plastic state to form a hard covering for exterior walls.

“Town center sub-area” means the geographic area within the city with defined boundaries and distinct zoning due to unique uses or housing needs or requirements as envisioned in the city’s comprehensive plan. Specific overriding design standards only applicable within the town center are established in SMC 18.24.220.

“Traffic calming technique” means changes in street alignment, installation of barriers, and other physical measures to reduce traffic speeds and/or cut-through volumes, in the interest of street safety, livability, pedestrian movement, and other public purposes.

Transparent/Transparencies. A “transparency” is see-through and generally refers to glass. It can be windows, showcases, skylights and doors.

“Walkways” serve as pedestrian connectivity and interconnectivity to and through a development. Sidewalks and pathways are implied to be made of impervious and/or pervious materials. (Ord. 2018-006 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2009-011 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 2008-007 § 2; Ord. 2003-018 § 1)


18.24.050 Facades, exterior walls and entryways.

A. Guideline. Facades should provide visual interest, identity, character and scale that will be consistent with the community’s Visioning Report dated September 16, 1993. The intent is to create an environment human in scale where structures blend into the totality of the completed complex or neighborhood. The entire site should have an overall pleasing effect with the structures being responsible to the environment.

Entryway design elements should provide visual equity and employ enhanced aesthetic character to the building. The standards identify desirable entryway design features. Entrances should coordinate with pedestrian networking and public connectivity to and through the site and neighboring sites.

All facades of a building abutting public ways, such as but not limited to streets, sidewalks, and pathways, should be of a pleasing character appropriate to the pedestrian scale.

B. Standards.

1. Facades greater than 50 feet in length, measured horizontally, shall incorporate wall plane projections or recesses having a depth of at least three percent of the length of the facade and extending at least 20 percent of the length of the facade. No uninterrupted length of any facade shall exceed 50 horizontal feet.

2. Facades that face public streets or provide primary access to the building’s site shall have a variety of architectural treatments along no less than 60 percent of their horizontal length. Facades, exterior walls and entryways not facing public streets or providing primary access to the building site shall provide consistent architectural treatment.

3. All building facades visible to residentially zoned properties and/or public streets shall comply with the requirements of SMC 18.24.130 (Landscaping and buffering) and these standards and guidelines.

4. Facades that face public streets or provide primary access to the building’s site shall have clearly defined, highly visible customer entrances featuring no fewer than three of the following:

a. Canopies or porticos;

b. Overhangs;

c. Recesses/projections;

d. Arcades;

e. Raised and projected cornices;

f. Peaked roof forms;

g. Arches;

h. Outdoor patios or community spaces;

i. Display windows;

j. Architectural details such as tile work and moldings which are integrated into the building structure and design;

k. Integral planters that incorporate landscaped areas and/or places for sitting;

l. Balconies.

5. Blank walls shall not be allowed in any ground-level building wall abutting public sidewalks/walkways and streets, except as required for the structural integrity of the building. 

Figure 1
[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]


(Ord. 2009-011 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 2008-007 § 2; Ord. 2003-018 § 1)


18.24.060 Smaller structures in regional centers.

A. Guideline. The presence of smaller structures gives a center a “friendlier” appearance by creating variety, breaking up large expanses, and exhibiting the variety of the site’s opportunities. Windows and window displays (transparencies) should be used to contribute to the visual interest of exterior facades. The standards presented in this section are directed toward those situations where additional, smaller structures with separate, exterior customer entrances are located in principal buildings.

B. Standards. Where principal buildings contain additional, separate structures which occupy less than 20,000 square feet of gross floor area, with separate, exterior customer entrances:

1. The street-level facade of such stores shall be transparent between the height of three feet and seven feet above the grade of the walkway for no less than 60 percent of the horizontal length of the building facade for each such store.

2. No window shall consist of polished (mirrored) or highly reflective colored glass.

3. Structures less than 20,000 square feet and located within a regional center complex as a separate building pad shall incorporate into their design enhancements similar to the larger principal structure or anchor structure. This will provide visual consistency and a greater sense of place within the center.

4. Internal pedestrian walkways shall be provided in conformance with SMC 18.24.180, Pedestrian flows, to provide safe pedestrian access to all stores. (Ord. 2009-011 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 2008-007 § 2; Ord. 2003-018 § 1. Formerly 18.24.070)


18.24.070 Site planning and compatibility.

A. Guideline. Site planning should promote development that is functional, visually coherent, and visually compatible with existing and adjacent proposed projects and provide a high-quality appearance.

In neighborhood commercial zones (C-I(NC)), site planning should employ clustered building effects, creating a village center-nodal concept where the surrounding residential areas radiate from these centers, connected at all points via pedestrian and vehicular pathways.

Where practicable, buildings should be designed to fit natural slopes rather than regrading the land to fit a particular building design. See Figure 2.

Development of site should be required to preserve and protect one of the most enduring remnants of Sequim’s natural uniqueness: the Garry oak. Garry oak (Quercus garryana) is the only native oak species in Washington State. It is considered one of the three most valuable wildlife tree species in the state. Sequim’s Garry oaks are hundreds of years in individual age and are descended from oaks that grew in the Olympic rainshadow over 4,000 years ago. Protection and replanting of this unique species is a natural way of preserving the vestiges of Sequim’s past.

Figure 2
[IMAGE]


B. Standards.

1. All site planning must respect the existing natural site features, minimize site disturbance, employ clustering and other strategies that preserve open space, native soils and vegetation, and employ opportunities for the application of low impact development stormwater management consistent with Chapter 13.104 SMC.

2. Building or parking lot construction shall not take place within the drip line of existing Garry oak trees. The protection of existing Garry oak trees during construction is mandatory unless determined to be sick, dying or dead by an ISA-certified arborist or in the way of required elements that cannot be avoided.

3. Site amenities such as low walls, planter boxes, monument signs as approved through Chapter 18.58 SMC, stairs or plaza surfaces that incorporate materials used on the building’s exterior shall be incorporated into the landscape design around the building’s perimeter to visually anchor and transition the building to the site.

4. To maintain pedestrian character and environments, locate nonresidential structures (less than 20,000 square feet) on the front property line. One of these three standards must be met:

a. At least 50 percent of the structure’s facade shall be placed on the front property line. The remaining portion of the building may be stepped back to accommodate community space or parking. However, no more than 50 percent of required parking shall be located in this stepped-back area. (See Figure 3.)

b. The structure may set back from the front property line if community space and/or landscaping are incorporated. (See Figure 3.)

c. The structure and a drive-through lane may be set back from the front property line if community space and/or landscaping are incorporated.

Figure 3
[IMAGE]


5. The minimum setback for buildings 20,000 square feet or greater: the front facade shall be 50 feet from the nearest property line; side and rear building setbacks shall be a minimum of 10 feet and a minimum of 35 feet when adjacent to residentially zoned property. Where the facade faces adjacent residential zones, landscaping and buffering shall follow the landscaping standards identified in SMC 18.24.130. Setbacks shall also incorporate the landscaping requirements of SMC 18.24.130, Landscaping and buffering. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2009-011 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 2008-007 § 2. Formerly 18.24.075)


18.24.080 Detail features.

A. Guideline. Building design should reflect a rural architectural approach; be executed in a straightforward manner, using architectural massing, canopies, awnings, and marquees should not be used to mitigate large building mass. Where facades are repetitive, forms or thematic styles shall be reflected in each individual facade.

B. Standards.

1. All building facades must include a repeating pattern that shall include no fewer than three of the elements listed below. At least one of these elements shall repeat horizontally. Each selected element shall repeat at intervals of no more than 30 feet.

a. Color change;

b. Texture change;

c. Material module change;

d. Wall plane change.

2. Expression of architectural or structural bay shall be created through a change in plane as required in SMC 18.24.050(B)(1), such as an offset, reveal, or projecting rib, at intervals no more than 30 feet; see Figure 4.

3. New construction shall complement nearby existing structures; see Figure 5.

4. Canopies/awnings shall be limited to traditional locations over windows, walkways and entrances or over other architectural features where weather protection is needed.

Figure 4
[IMAGE]


Figure 5
[IMAGE]


The projections in the facade of this larger building appropriately reflect the scale and spacing of the adjacent structures.

5. Avoid layering canopies/awnings over existing projections. Canopies must be applied to walls or posts and may not be applied to existing projections over walkways and windows; see Figure 6.

Figure 6
[IMAGE]


Avoid layering awnings over existing projections.

6. To maintain consistency in canopy/awning design, differing canopy/awning designs are not permitted on a single building.

7. Architectural anomalies such as materials or details shall be integrated and similar to the overall building design. See Figure 7.

Figure 7
[IMAGE]


This continuous awning overpowers the building design and hides the original parapet or cornice detail. Limiting the location of awnings to individual doors and windows assures that they do not overpower the building facade.

(Ord. 2009-011 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 2008-007 § 2; Ord. 2003-018 § 1)


18.24.090 Roofs.

A. Guideline. Roof features should complement the character of adjoining neighborhoods. Roof design is encouraged to reduce stormwater runoff by managing the water where it falls, such as with roof gardens.

Solar collection systems are strongly encouraged and should be integrated into the structural architecture.

Sources of natural light should be utilized, wherever practical, to increase energy efficiency and worker well-being.

B. Standards.

1. Rooftop equipment such as HVAC units shall be concealed from public view, extending out to the site perimeter, adjacent pedestrian walkway and adjacent residential zoned properties.

2. Variations in rooflines shall be used to add interest and to address the mass, scale and height of the structure.

3. Bright colored or reflective roofing materials are prohibited. Limit roofing colors to darker earth tones or forest colors. Forest greens, earthy browns, charcoal or medium grays and dark clay colors are allowed.

4. Use roofing materials which provide texture and shadow lines. Cedar shingles, architectural grade asphalt shingles, tile, slate, and standing-seam metal roofs are allowed. Other roofing materials are prohibited except on roofs having slopes less than 1:12.

5. Roof surfaces exceeding 80 feet in length shall be interrupted into smaller modules using substantial shifts in building footprints which result in substantial shifts in roof lines; see Figure 8.

Figure 8
[IMAGE]


6. No single run of ridge, cornice or fascia (excluding eave overhang) shall exceed 80 feet in length without a five-foot transition in height. Cupolas and similar minor projections above roof lines do not meet this standard.

7. Roof forms shall be a true reflection of interior space. False projections of wall or roof forms are not allowed, except that parapets and gables may rise above the true roof line if they include side returns or roof planes that (a) extend back at least one and one-half times the width of the parapet or gable, or (b) extend back to a point that is not visible from any public vantage point.

8. A-frame, modified A-frame, curvilinear, domed, and unusual or atypical roof forms are allowed, provided they do not exceed 25 percent and this roof accent compliments the architecture of the structure. Multiple gables over a single-mass structure forming a “sawtooth” design are prohibited; see Figure 9.

Figure 9
[IMAGE]


Examples of unusual roof forms limited to 25 percent and prohibited roof forms. Mansard roof forms are also discouraged.

(Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2009-011 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 2008-007 § 2; Ord. 2003-018 § 1)


18.24.100 Materials.

A. Guideline. Exterior building materials comprise a significant part of the visual impact of a building. Therefore, they should be aesthetically pleasing and compatible with materials and colors used in adjoining properties.

Buildings should provide protection for pedestrians from adverse weather conditions and utilize overhangs, marquees, and awnings at entrances, along pedestrian pathways, and at transportation waiting areas.

Architectural style should maintain the small town, rural character. Design elements to be considered include, but are not limited to, providing offsets or bays, strong base materials, varying storefront treatments, multipane windows, and varying the bulkhead treatment.

B. Standards.

1. Predominant exterior building materials shall be constructed with high-quality materials such as:

a. Brick masonry;

b. Wood, large timbers;

c. Sandstone;

d. River rock and other native stone;

e. Tinted, textured, concrete masonry units;

f. Recycled and ecologically friendly materials;

g. Transparency elements such as windows and frames, showcases, skylights, and display windows;

h. Architectural metal panels, sheets, and beams.

2. Siding materials are limited to horizontal lap siding (of any lap design) made of wood or of cement-like materials; shingles made of cedar or cement-like materials; board and batten (or panels with similarly spaced battens); and brick, stone (real or cultured), nonscored, or split-faced block (CMU).

3. Stucco, tile, terra-cotta concrete, spandrel glass, corrugated metal panels and ground-faced or scored concrete block may be used as accent materials on commercial, mixed use and/or multifamily projects, not to exceed 20 percent of any given facade. Standing seam metal siding with separately attached battens (with proportions similar to board and batten siding) may be used in gables only, or on up to 20 percent of any given facade.

4. No unscreened facades visible from public streets and pathways shall include the following:

a. Smooth-faced concrete block;

b. Smooth-faced tilt-up concrete panels;

c. Smooth-faced prefabricated steel panels;

d. Prefabricated manufactured or modular units.

5. Blank walls shall not be allowed in any ground-level building wall abutting any form of public walkways or streets except as required for the structural integrity of the building. Buildings should be provided with a distinct “base” through the use of materials, texture or massing.

6. Buildings shall provide generous amounts of windows, skylights, or similar natural light-producing products to create ground floors with a “transparent” quality and to enhance the use of natural light and reduce energy consumption. No window or door shall consist of polished (mirrored) or highly reflective colored glass. (Ord. 2013-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2009-011 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 2008-007 § 2; Ord. 2003-018 § 1)


18.24.110 Windows and doors.

A. Guideline. The primary purpose of windows to the interior portion of the building is to let in light and air and to showcase products. To the outside of a building, windows can make an architectural statement. Double-hung, casement, fixed and transom windows reflect Sequim’s historical look and are recommended. The following standards are applicable to structures less than 20,000 square feet.

B. Standards.

1. No window or door shall consist of polished (mirrored) or highly reflective colored glass.

2. Windows in a facade shall be balanced and provide visual harmony. To the extent possible, multiple windows on a single wall plane shall be spaced and aligned with other windows in the same plane to create rhythm and harmony with the other architectural features of the facade.

Figure 10
[IMAGE]


The careful alignment of windows provides visual balance to this facade. Notice that it is not always necessary to center windows on a wall plane. Usually, however, noncentered windows look better below a hip than below a gable.
[IMAGE]


The scattered and haphazard arrangement of windows on this facade results in poor balance in the overall building design.

3. Commercial facades at street level abutting the street shall include windows, executed as described in subsection (B)(2) of this section, and as described in SMC 18.24.100(B)(6). (Ord. 2009-011 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 2008-007 § 2)


18.24.120 Colors.

A. Guideline. Color is an important and dominant aspect of building design. When selecting colors, consider how the medium can emphasize different materials and levels of detail to a building.

B. Standards. A project applicant shall graphically propose a color palette for their project. The palette shall include all the materials/colors proposed for the project, including, but not limited to, field or base color(s), trim colors, accent colors, and colors of natural materials.

The field or base color is one of the most dominating features of the building; trim colors are used on the building’s secondary features, while accent colors can emphasize the finer, more characteristic elements of the building’s design. Typically, no more than three distinct colors should be used in one building, but additional colors may be considered if they are close shades of one of the other three colors.

1. Field or Base Colors. When more than one base color is proposed, the hues of each color shall be analogous or next to each other on the paint manufacturer’s color wheel. The light/dark values and color saturations of each base color shall be equal; base colors of new construction shall be analogous to existing adjacent structures’ base colors. Note: paint manufacturers will be able to assist in the coordination of the various colors as described herein.

2. Trim colors (fascia, cornice, waist, window, door, skirt trim, etc.) are allowed to be in contrast to the base colors but shall have the same light/dark value and color saturation as the base colors, except whites and achromatic gray colors (gray made from black and white only) may be of any light/dark value. For example, the base color might be Spanish green (a light muted green from the blue-yellow family) and the trim color might be maroon (a deep reddish brown from the red-blue family) as long as the two colors complement each other in their brightness and intensity.

3. Accent colors can be of different light/dark values than base or trim colors. Accent colors can be brighter than field or trim colors. Accent colors shall be used with restraint. Appropriate areas for accent colors are those details that might otherwise go unnoticed, such as moldings or molding indentations, medallions, and shadow lines, roof windows and door frames. Doors are also an appropriate location for accent colors.

4. Natural Material Colors. Natural materials such as stones, clay masonries, split-faced concrete masonry, cedar and redwood have intrinsically pleasing hues, values and saturations of color. These materials shall not be refinished or painted so as to alter their natural tones (exception: wood siding materials may be stained when the material’s character is maintained); when these natural materials are used in combination with painted or stained materials, the painted or stained colors shall be of the same or analogous tones and of similar light/dark values and color saturations.

5. All applied colors shall have low reflectance and blend well with the surrounding environment.

6. Prefinished non-natural material colors on premanufactured awnings, canopies, marquees or other assemblies shall not be highly reflective; when primary or secondary colors are proposed they shall have light/dark values and color saturations that match the structure’s base color(s).

7. When roof colors are not in a grey tone (chromatic or achromatic grey) the colors shall have light/dark values and color saturations similar to the structure’s base color(s). Color restrictions apply to flat or low-pitched roofs only when the parapet or other screening device does not fully conceal the roofing surface from view. (Ord. 2009-011 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 2008-007 § 2)


18.24.130 Landscaping and buffering.

A. Guideline. Development should ensure that the parking, lighting, circulation and landscaping aspects are well-designed with regard to safety, efficiency and convenience for vehicles, bicycles, pedestrians and transit, both within the development and to and from surrounding areas. Landscaping and buffering should contribute to visual quality and continuity within and between developments, provide screening and mitigation of potential conflicts between activity areas and site elements, enhance outdoor spaces, reduce erosion and stormwater runoff and mitigate air pollution.

Landscaping that incorporates low impact development strategies for stormwater management should be considered as a way to meet the policies of the city of Sequim’s adopted stormwater management plan and be consistent with Chapter 13.104 SMC.

Every reasonable effort should be made to preserve existing trees. If preservation of the existing trees would enhance the appearance of the proposal, or prevent erosion and other negative environmental effects, the city may impose tree cutting restrictions on trees eight inches in diameter or larger.

Due to Sequim’s growing agri-lavender business, developers are strongly encouraged to incorporate lavender plants into their landscape design plan (especially for perimeter landscape areas). Evergreen varieties such as Grosso or Hidcote Giant or alternatives such as rosemary, which have attractive foliage when not in bloom, are recommended species.

For large structures (20,000 square feet or greater) the rear or sides of buildings often present an unattractive view of blank walls, loading areas, storage areas, HVAC units, garbage receptacles, and other such features. Architectural and landscaping features should mitigate these impacts.

B. Standards.

1. Stormwater management facilities are encouraged to be integrated with landscaping and must be designed and constructed in accordance with Chapter 13.104 SMC.

2. Landscape areas shall include all areas on the site that are not covered by buildings, structures, paving or impervious surface. The selection and location of turf, trees, groundcover (including shrubs, grasses, perennials, flowerbeds and slope retention), pedestrian paving, amended soil1, and other landscaping elements must prevent erosion.

a. Landscape design plans shall complement the existing or proposed landscaping within a development and shall enhance the human scale of a development by clearly defining pathways, entrance areas, plazas or public gathering spaces, parking areas, and access roadways.

b. Landscape design plans shall mitigate the impact to neighboring properties. The rear elevations of buildings, loading docks, and refuse collection areas must also be addressed in the landscape design plan. [It is required that rear elevations adjacent to noncommercial zoned parcels will be adequately screened within seven years of occupancy of the retail space.]2

c. Landscape design plans shall incorporate a mix of indigenous and native plants that are hardy and drought-tolerant, and shall include a minimum of 40 percent evergreen plantings (trees, shrubs, groundcovers, ornamental grasses, and evergreen herbs). Lavender plants shall be a part of the landscape plan. Permanently installed irrigation systems are required.

d. For large structures (20,000 square feet or greater), perimeter landscape buffer planting areas shall be a minimum of 10 feet in depth from the edge of walkways, curbs or property lines, along all sides of the property. Parcels smaller than 30 acres shall have a perimeter landscape buffer depth of 10 feet. Parcels 30 to less than 50 acres shall have a perimeter landscape buffer depth of 13 feet. Parcels 50 acres or greater shall have a perimeter landscape buffer depth of 15 feet.

e. For large structures (20,000 square feet or greater), parking lots with more than 50 parking spaces shall have curbed or bioretention planting areas. Planting areas shall be placed at each end of a parking row. No parking row shall contain 12 contiguous or abutting parking spaces without a curbed or bioretention planting area.

f. Parking lots associated with structures under 20,000 square feet shall have curbed or bioretention planting areas dividing the parking spaces as required in SMC 18.24.160, Parking lot design and orientation.

g. Landscape design plans shall also address a variety of landscape lighting elements utilized both for safety and aesthetics as required in SMC 18.24.170.

h. Any landscape element that dies, or is otherwise removed, shall be promptly replaced with the same, if not similar to, height or texture element as originally intended.

i. Off-site access to pedestrian and bicycle facility improvements may be required in order to comply with the transportation element of the comprehensive plan and the Sequim Municipal Code.

j. Where possible, pedestrians and vehicles shall be separated through provision of a walkway. Where complete separation of pedestrians and vehicles is not feasible, hazards shall be minimized by using landscaping, bollards, special paving, lighting and other means to clearly delineate pedestrian areas.

k. For large structures (20,000 square feet or greater), landscaped parkways around parking lot perimeters shall be consistent with minimum setback requirements. Trees may be spaced irregularly in informal groupings or be uniformly spaced, as consistent with larger overall planting patterns and organization. Perimeter landscaping along a street and within the public right-of-way shall utilize the adopted city of Sequim streetscape manual3 for community-wide consistency.

l. Ongoing future maintenance of landscaping shall be in accordance with accepted maintenance practices and Chapter 13.108 SMC, when applicable.4

m. All landscaping shall respect the existing natural topography.

n. Secondary design elements such as low walls, planter boxes, stairs or plaza surfaces that incorporate materials used on the building’s exterior shall be incorporated into the landscape design around the building’s perimeter to visually anchor and transition the building to the site.

o. Construction, such as but not limited to buildings, structures, paving or impervious surface, shall not take place within the drip line of existing Garry oak trees.

p. Topping of trees shall not be allowed unless necessary for safety reasons as certified by an ISA-certified arborist.

q. Landscaping scheme may include the use of vines and shrubs along blank walls.

r. The rear or sides of buildings often present an unattractive view of blank walls, loading areas, storage areas, HVAC units, garbage receptacles, and other such features. Architectural and landscaping features shall mitigate these impacts.

s. Landscape design plans shall not allow for any vegetation listed on the county’s noxious plant list.

2. The landscape design shall provide open spaces that preserve views and enhance the penetration of sunlight into buildings and common areas. Regional vistas and landmarks shall be maintained. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2009-011 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 2008-007 § 2; Ord. 2003-018 § 1.)


18.24.140 Fences.

A. Standards.

1. Fences shall be constructed of wood, wrought iron, brick, stone or concrete masonry unit (CMU). Smooth-faced CMU shall have a veneer finish visible to the public. 

2. Mesh fencing shall be allowed only when coated with vinyl or a powder paint coating in a dark, earth-based tone, and attached to posts made of wood, stone, or other masonry materials as allowed herein, and be restricted to industrial and storage-type properties; provided, that in the PF zone only, fences that define playfields, ball diamonds, sport courts and similar play and athletic facilities or are installed to ensure security of city infrastructure sites and facilities may be constructed with chain link/mesh and steel posts/rails that are covered in vinyl or powder-coated paint in black, dark brown or dark green color.

3. In areas not visible from any city right-of-way or community space, standard, galvanized chain link fencing including steel posts and rails is permitted, and shall be landscaped. (Ord. 2016-006 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2016-003 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2009-011 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 2008-007 § 2. Formerly 18.24.150)


18.24.150 Environmentally conscious development.

A. Guideline. When practical and possible, the use of “green” materials in construction is strongly encouraged. Alternative forms of energy, such as but not limited to solar or wind power, along with skylights, garden roofs and shared parking, are also strongly encouraged. Low impact development techniques are required for stormwater conveyance and treatment. Reclaimed water may be used for irrigation purposes when the city makes it available. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2009-011 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 2008-007 § 2. Formerly 18.24.160)


18.24.160 Parking lot design and orientation.

A. Guideline. Off-street parking for commercial and mixed use buildings should be designed to minimize visual impact to streets and adjacent spaces/properties. Parking areas should provide safe and efficient ingress and egress for vehicles and public transit. Parking lots should be configured and designed to reduce the overall mass of paved surfaces; see Figure 3.

Parking lot layout should maximize opportunities for creative low impact stormwater management techniques. Whenever possible, permeable paving systems should be evaluated and utilized (especially for employee parking areas). To reduce impervious surfaces, one-way drive aisles should be encouraged.

Examples of effective low impact development (LID) techniques for parking lots include but are not limited to:

1. End-of-island bioretention cell(s) with underdrain(s) and landscaping;

2. Bioretention cells or biofiltration swales located around the parking perimeter (see Figure 11);

3. Breached curb drainage inlets (or curb cuts) in the end-of-island bioretention cells and along the bioretention strips to collect runoff;

4. Bioretention cells installed between lines of parking stalls to increase the total treatment surface area.

Projects that combine commercial with residential units may use “shared parking” in order to reduce their parking stall requirements. These mixed use projects should consider locating the buildings on the front setback line and the parking lots and garages behind the buildings.

Wherever possible, off-street parking for commercial, mixed use, industrial, and multifamily projects shall utilize a small-lot design approach; designs configured to reduce the visual effect of the overall paved surface; a maximum of six spaces in a row or 12 spaces abutting each other without a curbed or bioretention planting area dividing the spaces.

B. Standards.

1. Large-surface parking lots (50 or more spaces) shall be visually and functionally segmented into several smaller lots.

2. Parking lot design must include detailed information on nonmotorized and pedestrian access to and through the development. Demarcation shall be required by utilizing a combination of: (a) change in paving surface materials, (b) landscaping, or (c) safety and directional lighting.

3. All required internal walkways must be located and constructed as an integral part of existing walkways and must coordinate with the city’s nonmotorized trail plan, if applicable.

4. Pedestrian access from city sidewalks that do not access through driveways into the site shall be provided.

Figure 11
[IMAGE]


5. For large structures (20,000 square feet or greater), setbacks for parking lot layout shall be provided at a minimum of 10 feet from any public right-of-way (except for alleys). This setback or buffer area between the street or access road and the parking lot shall always include trees, drought-resistant natural groundcovers, and other native landscape materials.

6. No parking row shall contain 12 contiguous or abutting parking spaces without a curbed planting area or bioretention cell. These areas shall include trees to a minimum height and diameter as specified in SMC 18.24.130 and these areas shall contribute to small-scale control of stormwater runoff.

7. Traffic calming techniques shall be utilized for pedestrian safety.5

8. Where applicable, provide adequate and easily accessible cart corrals. Landscaping shall be provided adjacent to these cart corrals to offset visual impacts.

9. If the landscape plan incorporates the retention of significant trees above the requirements of SMC 18.24.130, the city may approve a reduction of up to 10 percent of the required number of parking spaces if adequate parking is available for entire site build-out.

10. Except for properties located in the town center sub-area, the minimum number of parking spaces required is one per 400 gross square feet, and the maximum number is one per 250 gross square feet.

11. No more than 50 percent of required parking may be located forward of the front facade of a building.

12. Parking lots and parking garages between and behind buildings shall have well-signed site and building ingress and egress for pedestrian cueing and movement.

13. Certain pervious pavement applications (grass-crete, etc.) may be subject to approval by the fire marshal. (Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2009-011 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 2008-007 § 2; Ord. 2003-018 § 1. Formerly 18.24.170)


18.24.170 Lighting and glare.

A. Guideline. The extensive use of neon lighting should be discouraged. It is strongly recommended that neon graphics and signage be replaced with three-dimensional signage that is either backlit, illuminated with low voltage bracket lights, or emphasized with ground-mounted lighting.

Parking area and driveway light fixture options are identified in the city of Sequim Streets and Utilities Development Regulations Manual (see Detail SQM-R19).

B. Standards.

1. Illuminated signage and exterior building lighting shall be compatible with the architecture of the project and shall not detract from the visibility of surrounding buildings.

2. Landscape and architectural lighting shall be used to illuminate building facades, building entrances, and feature or courtyard spaces.

3. Night lighting must be provided for all pedestrian walkways and where stairs, curbs, ramps, and crosswalks occur.

4. All exterior lighting fixtures in parking areas and driveways shall utilize cutoff shields or other appropriate measures to conceal the light source from adjoining uses and rights-of-way. A photometric plan and fixture specifications shall be provided as part of application submittal.

5. Other lights shall be designed to avoid spillover glare beyond the site boundaries.

6. Light standards shall be no taller than 18 feet in parking lots and traffic areas and no taller than 14 feet in pedestrian walkways.

7. Lighting reduction and energy-efficient timer systems shall be required after normal business hours, except for lighting that is mandated for general safety and security. (Ord. 2009-011 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 2008-007 § 2; Ord. 2003-018 § 1. Formerly 18.24.180)


18.24.180 Pedestrian flows.

A. Guideline. This section sets forth standards for public walkways and internal pedestrian circulation systems that can provide user-friendly pedestrian access.

B. Standards.

1. Walkways at least eight feet in width shall be provided along all sides of the lot that abut a public street and shall provide human-scale lighting (SMC 18.24.170(B)(6)) to create a safe and attractive pedestrian atmosphere.

2. Continuous internal pedestrian walkways, no less than eight feet in width (six feet for small structures), shall be provided from the public walkway or right-of-way to the customer entrance of all buildings on the site. Walkways shall connect pedestrian activity such as, but not limited to, transit stops, street crossings, buildings and store entry points, and central features and community spaces. Walkways shall feature adjoining landscaped areas that include trees, shrubs, benches, flower beds, groundcovers, or other such materials for no less than 50 percent of its length.

3. Walkways at least eight feet in width (six feet for small structures) shall be provided the full length of the building featuring a customer entrance, and along any facade abutting public parking areas. Such walkways shall abut a minimum six-foot-wide planting bed, except where features such as arcades or entryways are part of the facade.

4. All internal pedestrian crosswalks shall be distinguished by the use of durable, low maintenance surface materials such as pavers, bricks, stamped asphalt, or scored concrete to enhance pedestrian safety and comfort, as well as the attractiveness of the walkways so long as they meet the ADA guidelines.

5. Bicycle lanes shall be provided, where appropriate, on ingress and egress routes and shall be consistent with standards identified and adopted by the city of Sequim.6

6. Commercial parking lots shall provide trash receptacles and bicycle racks as specified in the streetscape manual.7

7. All pedestrian amenities shall meet ADA guidelines. (Ord. 2009-011 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 2008-007 § 2; Ord. 2003-018 § 1. Formerly 18.24.190)


18.24.190 Outdoor storage, trash collection, recycle and loading areas.

A. Guideline. Loading, recycle and outdoor storage areas exert visual and noise impacts on surrounding neighborhoods and should be designed so that delivery and loading operations do not disturb adjoining neighborhoods. These areas, when visible and audible from adjoining properties and/or public streets, should be screened, recessed or enclosed. When such areas are insulated, the enclosures should conform to those used by the predominant materials and colors on the building. While screens and recesses can effectively mitigate these impacts, the selection of inappropriate screening materials can exacerbate the problem. Appropriate locations for loading and outdoor storage areas include areas between buildings, where more than one building is located on a site and such buildings are not more than 40 feet apart, or on those sides of buildings that do not have customer entrances.

B. Standards.

1. Areas for outdoor storage, truck parking, trash collection or compaction, recycling areas, cargo containers, loading, or other such uses shall not be visible from abutting streets or properties.

2. No areas for outdoor storage, trash collection or compaction, loading, or other such uses shall be located within 20 feet of any public street or public walkway.

3. Loading docks, truck parking, outdoor storage, utility meters, HVAC equipment, trash collection, trash compaction, and other service functions shall be incorporated into the overall design of the building and the landscaping so that the visual and acoustic impacts of these functions are contained and out of view from adjacent properties and public streets, and no attention is attracted to the functions by the use of screening materials that are different from or inferior to the principal materials of the building and landscape. Additional requirements are identified in SMC 18.48.060.

4. Non-enclosed areas for the storage and sale of seasonal inventory shall be permanently defined and screened with walls and/or fences. Materials, colors, and design of screening walls and/or fences and the cover shall conform to those used as predominant materials and colors on the building.

5. No outdoor storage in designated parking spaces or exterior walkways which reduces the unobstructed walkway to less than eight feet for large structures or six feet for small structures shall be allowed.

6. Noise attenuation shall be in conformance with Chapter 8.32 SMC.

7. For structures 20,000 square feet or greater, customer loading and unloading zones shall be provided. (Ord. 2009-011 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 2008-007 § 2; Ord. 2003-018 § 1. Formerly 18.24.200)


18.24.200 Central features and community spaces.

This section applies when three or more buildings are planned in a development.

A. Guideline. Buildings should offer attractive and inviting human-scale features, spaces, and amenities that reflect the rural heritage of the community. Entrances and parking lots should be configured to be functional and inviting with walkways conveniently tied to logical destinations. Transit stops and drop-off/pickup points should be considered as integral parts of the configuration.

A pedestrian walkway network should be anchored by special design features such as towers, arcades, cupolas, porticos, pedestrian light fixtures, bollards, planter walls, and other architectural elements that define circulation ways and outdoor spaces. Examples of outdoor spaces are plazas, patios, courtyards, and window-shopping areas. The features and spaces should enhance the building and the center as integral parts of the community fabric.

The overall design of this community space should strengthen our community’s identity by referencing our agricultural heritage and/or natural history. Special design features are encouraged, such as a clock tower, water feature, or public art.

B. Standard. A central community space shall be constructed that is centrally located and connected to the pedestrian walkway. It shall be constructed of materials that are not inferior to the principal materials of the building and landscape; see Figure 12. It shall have these components based on a case-by-case analysis and at the planning director’s discretion:

1. A landscape area that includes multiple trees.

2. A transportation drop-off point.

3. A plaza with seating and a covered structure with a cupola or other such deliberately shaped focal feature or amenity that adequately enhances the community space.

Figure 12
[IMAGE]


(Ord. 2009-011 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 2008-007 § 2; Ord. 2003-018 § 1. Formerly 18.24.210)


18.24.210 Multi-building and multifamily projects.

This section is triggered when (1) there are two or more buildings, (2) there are five or more residential units that share common walls, or (3) mixed use is planned for the development.

A. Guideline. Buildings should offer attractive and inviting human-scale features, spaces, and amenities that reflect the rural heritage of the community. Entrances and parking lots should be configured to be functional and inviting with walkways conveniently tied to logical destinations.

Larger structures built next to existing smaller structures should include projections in the facade which reflect and approximate the smaller structures’ massing and height; see Figures 13 and 14. If this cannot be achieved, then a significant increase in landscaping should be applied.

Figure 13
[IMAGE]


The projections in the facade of this larger building appropriately reflect the scale and spacing of the adjacent structures.

Figure 14
[IMAGE]


The bulk of this project’s upper story was reduced and significant landscaping was retained to better fit with the neighboring single-family zone.

B. Standards.

1. Coordinate all outdoor lighting fixtures and right-of-way paving materials.

2. Where practical, incorporate mixed use buildings which accommodate residential units.

3. Unify all public directional signs.

4. Provide continuous pedestrian links between buildings, sites and common areas.

5. Where practical, reflect mass, scale and height of adjacent structures.

6. Buildings shall be located at the front setback line unless significant vegetation warrants placing the building further back.

7. Avoid site designs that emphasize vehicular pavements.

8. Parking lots and carports shall not be located in front of street-oriented units. Driveways are allowed, as are garages, but garages shall not be the dominant architectural feature.

9. Emphasize individuality of units with variation of massing and/or details (e.g., a combination of trim, roof lines, porch designs, reverse designs and color variations) particularly on street-oriented units.

10. Provide consistent architectural interest to all prominent facades. (Ord. 2009-011 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 2008-007 § 2. Formerly 18.24.220)


18.24.220 Town center sub-area.

This section is reserved for specific design review standards applicable to the town center. (Ord. 2009-011 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 2008-007 § 2. Formerly 18.24.230)


18.24.230 Transportation consistency requirements.

A. Standards. Pursuant to the State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA) and other studies and applicable statutes and ordinances, the development shall provide appropriate roads, curbs, gutters, walkways, and signaling both on site and off site as necessary to accommodate traffic increases caused by the development. (Ord. 2009-011 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 2008-007 § 2; Ord. 2003-018 § 1. Formerly 18.24.240)


18.24.240 Other requirements.

A. Standards. These development standards are not inclusive of all requirements. Other ordinances and statutes govern stormwater drainage, traffic and other matters.

Vacant or abandoned properties, including but not limited to buildings, stormwater, parking, and landscaping, shall be maintained for the safety of the community, the local environment, and the visual impacts to the surrounding properties. Maintenance includes watering, trimming and pruning landscaping, promptly repairing damage, and prompt removal of graffiti. Signage on such properties shall be changed, if at all, in a visually attractive manner. Any covering of glass surfaces shall be done in such a way as to blend in with the rest of the building and in a visually attractive manner. Chain link fencing to exclude trespass shall be permitted for not more than 120 days (an extension may be requested for construction zones) after which it shall be removed or replaced with visually attractive fencing. (Ord. 2009-011 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 2008-007 § 2; Ord. 2003-018 § 1. Formerly 18.24.250)

1

For more information on amended soils best management practices see the Washington Organic Recycling Council (WORC) website at: http://compostwashington.org and the building soil manual at: www.buildingsoil.org. 2

For more information on amended soils best management practices see the Washington Organic Recycling Council (WORC) website at: http://compostwashington.org and the building soil manual at: www.buildingsoil.org. 3

See “Streetscape Manual for Commercial Districts,” City of Sequim, Madrona Planning and Development Services, December 1997. 4

Established methods for grounds maintenance are included in the “Grounds Maintenance Management Guideline, Sixth Edition,” Professional Grounds Maintenance Society. 5

See “Sequim/Dungeness Valley Non-motorized Transportation Plan,” Macloed Reckord, November 1997. 6

See “Sequim/Dungeness Valley Non-motorized Transportation Plan,” Macloed Reckord, November 1997. 7

See “Streetscape Manual for Commercial Districts,” City of Sequim, Madrona Planning and Development Services, December 1997. 


Chapter 18.30 MASTER-PLANNED OVERLAY*

Sections:

18.30.010    Purpose.

18.30.020    Applicability.

18.30.025    Minimum land area requirement.

18.30.027    Underlying zoning.

18.30.030    Application, review and approval process of master plan.

18.30.035    Contents of master plan.

18.30.040    Development standards.

18.30.050    Criteria for approval.

18.30.060    Conditions of approval.

18.30.070    Effect of master plan approval.

18.30.080    Subsequent development.

18.30.100    Approval process for subsequent development.

18.30.110    Amendment of approved master plan.

18.30.120    Expansion of master-planned overlay.

18.30.130    Vesting.

18.30.140    Duration of approved master plan.

*Prior legislation: Ord. 2017-012.


18.30.010 Purpose.

The purpose of the master-planned overlay is as follows:

A. To provide a means for creating master-planned developments in any zoning district, and to allow for the application of flexible development standards to encourage and foster creative and innovative planning practices that will result in well-designed, efficient and functional planned developments.

B. To promote urban infill and more economical and efficient use of the land, while providing a development that provides a variety of housing choices, business opportunities, high level of urban amenities, and is consistent with the goals and policies of the comprehensive plan.

C. To encourage the provision of more usable and suitably located recreation facilities and other private and common facilities than would otherwise be provided under conventional land development procedures. (Ord. 2019-001 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.30.020 Applicability.

The master-planned overlay is applicable for all zoning districts. The master plan designation is established through an amendment to the city’s zoning ordinance map and may require an amendment to the comprehensive plan land use map. A master plan may be submitted concurrently with map amendment application or subsequent to that process.

A. Master plans are designated as an overlay on the city’s zoning map.

B. The underlying zoning districts for a master plan’s geographic area are depicted on the city’s zoning map. If land use designation and zoning changes are proposed as part of the master plan, a comprehensive plan land use and zoning map amendment is necessary. (Ord. 2019-001 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.30.025 Minimum land area requirement.

Each area identified as a master plan must be a minimum area of 10 acres. The site may have a size of less than 10 acres if the review authority makes a written decision to support the conclusion that a master plan is in the public interest. (Ord. 2019-001 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.30.027 Underlying zoning.

For properties zoned PRC – Planned resort community (SMC 18.20.150), the requirements of SMC 18.20.050, Single-family residence R4-8 zone table, are in effect. (Ord. 2019-001 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.30.030 Application, review and approval process of master plan.

A. Application requirements and the review process of master plans will follow the C-2 process in SMC Title 20 with the city hearing examiner, or city council in the absence of a hearing examiner, being the review authority.

B. Before submitting an application for a master plan, the applicant will hold a public meeting to identify potential community impacts and concerns about the project. Public notice of the meeting is required. Neighborhood meeting noticing procedures will be defined by the director or designee at the time of the pre-application conference. (Ord. 2019-001 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.30.035 Contents of master plan.

The master plan must contain the following elements:

A. Existing Conditions. An application for a master plan will contain the following information related to the existing conditions of the subject site, presented in narrative, tabular and/or graphic formats:

1. Vicinity map that identifies surrounding uses within 500 feet of the site boundary.

2. Zoning map that identifies base and overlay zoning designations for the site and surrounding properties uses within 500 feet of the site boundary.

3. Subdivision or binding site plan application if the project proposes land to be segregated for sale or lease.

4. Site description including the following information provided in narrative, tabular and/or graphic formats:

a. Aerial photo and topography.

b. Natural resources and critical areas, including existing drainage patterns and courses, wetlands, springs and other water bodies; significant stands of trees and trees meeting criteria of SMC 18.24.032(C)(2); fish and wildlife habitat; and natural constraints such as steep slopes greater than 15 percent, and unstable, impermeable or weak soils. This includes any critical area studies or analysis required by the city’s critical areas ordinance (Chapter 18.80 SMC).

c. Existing buildings, including use, location, size and date of construction, if any.

d. Existing on-site transportation circulation system, if any.

e. Location and size of all existing public and private utilities on the site including water, sanitary sewer, stormwater retention/treatment facilities, and electrical, telephone and data transmission lines.

f. Location of all public and private easements.

g. A description of the type, design and characteristics of surrounding properties.

h. Site and soil analysis for suitability of appropriate low impact development stormwater management facilities.

5. Detailed description of the transportation system within and adjacent to the site including:

a. Street classification of all internal and adjacent streets.

b. Transit service availability.

c. Baseline traffic impact study.

6. Analysis of existing infrastructure capacity on, in the vicinity of, and downstream of the site.

B. Proposed Master Plan. Description of all proposed development within the subject site, presented in narrative, tabular and graphic formats:

1. Underlying Zoning District Boundaries. If these are proposed to be modified as part of the master plan, the existing and proposed configuration of zoning districts will be illustrated. Depending on the modification proposed, an amendment to the comprehensive plan’s land use and zoning map may be necessary.

2. Description of the mix of uses, including number of units and/or total gross square feet devoted to each, and location on the site.

a. Permitted Uses. All permitted or conditionally permitted uses in the underlying zoning district(s) are allowed.

b. Density. Residential density by phase and at full build-out.

3. All site improvements including the approximate size and location of buildings; surface and structured parking facilities; on-site pedestrian and vehicular circulation including identified improvements; transit stops and pedestrian/transit amenities; and open space and landscaped areas.

4. A preliminary infrastructure plan, including location of new and/or expanded existing public and private utilities including water, sanitary sewer, stormwater management facilities (including storm detention calculations, and LID management facilities where feasible); and electrical, telephone and data transmission lines.

5. Summary of transportation facilities including:

a. Traffic impact study prepared by a traffic/transportation engineer that describes traffic impacts associated with each phase of development and at full build-out of the project, and a plan for accommodating this traffic. The specific criteria that must be addressed in the traffic impact study will be determined by the city engineer.

b. Parking impact study describing the parking demand associated with each phase of the development and at full build-out of the project, and a mitigation plan for accommodating parking demand on the site.

c. A description of alternative modes of transportation, including public transit, bicycle and pedestrian.

d. A description of potential parking and traffic/pedestrian impacts, if any, and appropriate measures to mitigate these impacts.

6. Plan for protecting designated environmental, historic/cultural and open space resources.

7. Design standards that govern the orientation and design of buildings and other improvements, including but not limited to the following:

a. Architecture, including design standards and building materials for buildings, fences, walls and other structures.

b. Landscaping, including preliminary landscape plan and standard plant list. Native plant materials are preferred.

c. Pedestrian circulation, including development standards, amenities and materials.

d. Bicycle parking facilities, including specifications.

e. Signs.

f. Lighting.

8. Identification of any alternative development standards from underlying zoning district standards, and the specific application of the alternative standards.

9. Phasing plan for implementation of the proposed development.

10. Summary of development intensity at full build-out.

11. Summary of how the proposed master plan proposes innovative planning techniques, enhanced site design elements and/or other planning practices that will result in well-designed, efficient and functional planned developments; and conforms with the goals and policies of the city’s comprehensive plan.

12. SEPA checklist. (Ord. 2019-001 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.30.040 Development standards.

A. The provisions of the underlying zoning district will apply.

B. Uses identified as allowed or conditionally allowed in the respective zoning districts are permitted within the master-planned overlay. The developer may prohibit specific uses that are otherwise allowed in the underlying zoning if specifically prohibited in the text of proposed master plan.

C. As part of the proposed master plan, alternative development standards unique to the master-planned overlay may be identified. Alternative standards for height, setbacks, density, parking, landscaping, streets, and other development components will be specifically identified in the master plan in order to apply to future development of the subject site.

1. In exchange for considering alternative development standards, the master plan will include innovative planning techniques and enhanced site design elements, including, but not limited to:

a. Mixed use development;

b. Live/work units;

c. Integration of a variety of housing types;

d. Transit-oriented development;

e. Clustering development to orient toward open space features;

f. Enhanced open space and recreational amenities for residents;

g. Public parkland dedication;

h. Pedestrian and nonmotorized facilities including key city connections;

i. Enhanced stormwater management/LID;

j. Energy efficient development;

k. Green building techniques;

l. LEED certification(s) including neighborhood development;

m. Variety of building styles and architectural features/enhanced architectural design; and

n. Business and economic opportunities/development.

D. The master plan will identify the advantages and positive benefits of the proposed master plan to the Sequim community. Further, the master plan will demonstrate how the alternative standards enhance and benefit the future residents or users of the master plan, as well as the larger Sequim community. (Ord. 2019-001 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.30.050 Criteria for approval.

To receive approval of a master plan and application of master-planned overlay on the zoning map, the applicant must demonstrate compliance with all of the following criteria:

A. Content. The master plan contains all of the components required in SMC 18.30.035.

B. Innovative Planning Technique(s), Site Design and/or Architectural Design. The master plan has demonstrated the use and integration of innovative planning techniques, site design and aesthetically appropriate architectural building design.

C. Transportation System Capacity. There is sufficient capacity in the transportation system to safely support the proposed master-planned development in all future phases or there will be adequate capacity by the time each phase of the development is completed.

D. Availability of Public Services. There is sufficient capacity within public services, such as water supply, sanitary sewer, stormwater management, and police and fire services, to adequately serve the master-planned development in all future phases or there will be adequate capacity by the time each phase of the development is completed.

E. Protection of Regulated Critical Areas. City-regulated natural resources such as critical areas are protected in compliance with the other titles of the SMC.

F. Compatibility with Adjacent Uses. The master plan contains design, landscaping, parking/traffic management and multi-modal transportation elements that limit conflicts between the master-planned development and adjacent uses.

G. Mitigation of Off-Site Impacts. All potential off-site impacts including but not limited to traffic, noise, light and glare, and stormwater runoff are identified and mitigated to the extent practicable.

H. Alternative Development Standards. The master plan has identified all proposed alternative development standards and has demonstrated:

1. The alternative development standard(s) is warranted given the site conditions and/or characteristics of the site design.

2. The benefits accruing from the alternative development standards outweigh any potential adverse impacts.

3. Any impacts resulting from the alternative development standards are mitigated to the extent practical. (Ord. 2019-001 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.30.060 Conditions of approval.

The review authority has the authority to impose any conditions of approval necessary and consistent with federal and Washington State laws to mitigate potentially adverse impacts. (Ord. 2019-001 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.30.070 Effect of master plan approval.

The approved master plan together with all revisions, required mitigation and conditions imposed constitutes the approved master plan, which will be filed in the city’s department of community development. The approved master plan does not itself authorize development, but provides standards against which applications for subsequent development including site plans and permits for development of property covered by the approved master-planned overlay are to be reviewed. (Ord. 2019-001 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.30.080 Subsequent development.

A. When a land use permit is submitted to the city for development within a master-planned overlay, the DCD director or designee will review the application for substantial compliance with the approved master plan. “Substantial compliance” means the development proposal:

1. Is within the scope and intent of the approved master plan;

2. Is of similar size, scale, site and architectural design of the approved master plan, and does not present appreciably different environmental effects from those identified during the master plan review process;

3. Does not reduce overall acreage identified as dedicated public areas or buffer areas, and in the case of alterations to the location of such areas, provides equal or greater benefit as compared to the area designated in the master plan; and

4. Does not substantively change the mix and location of land uses, generation of traffic impacts, and/or major points of ingress or egress.

B. The DCD director or designee will give written notice to the applicant whether the proposed development substantially complies with the approved master plan. If the proposed development is determined not to be in substantial compliance, the notice will specify the reason(s) for the determination and suggest action(s) that would bring the proposal into substantial compliance, including, if appropriate, the need for an amendment to the master plan. (Ord. 2019-001 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.30.100 Approval process for subsequent development.

Any development permit sought under an approved master plan will be subject to the provisions of SMC Title 20. If site development or design standards approved as part of the master plan differ from otherwise applicable city standards, the approved master plan standards will control. If alternative standards are not identified in the approved master plan, the applicable city standard will control. (Ord. 2019-001 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.30.110 Amendment of approved master plan.

Any proposal to amend an approved master plan will be processed as a Type C-2 permit under the provisions of SMC Title 20 and will be reviewed under the criteria of approval for master plans, SMC 18.30.050.

A. An amendment to an approved master plan may be proposed in conjunction with a land use development permit that was found not to be in substantial compliance.

B. An amendment to an approved master plan may be proposed if the property owner/applicant wishes to change any of the elements of the approved master plan.

C. Any necessary zoning map amendments may be processed with a proposed amendment. (Ord. 2019-001 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.30.120 Expansion of master-planned overlay.

Additional land may be added to the master-planned overlay through a zoning use map amendment, unless a change in the underlying land use designation is desired: then an amendment to the comprehensive plan land use map may also be necessary. When the overlay is expanded, the master plan will be required to be amended to address the expanded area, prepared subject to the provisions of SMC 18.30.050. Amendments to the master plan may occur concurrently with the map amendment process or subsequent to that process. (Ord. 2019-001 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.30.130 Vesting.

Development standards, site and architectural design standards identified in an approved master plan will control for all subsequent site development as long as the approved master plan remains in effect. If alternative standards or procedures are not specifically identified in the approved master plan, the applicable city standard at the time of land use permit or subdivision submittal will control. (Ord. 2019-001 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.30.140 Duration of approved master plan.

An approved master plan will remain valid for five years or as provided for in the master plan’s approved phasing plan. If development within the approved master plan has not begun within five years or the approved phasing plan, as applicable, the master plan expires and is void. Once the master plan is commenced, the master plan is vested for the life of the project; provided, that if the master plan is constructed in phases, each phase is developed as a “stand-alone” phase, and all infrastructure necessary to support the phase is in place and conveyed to the city, before issuing any building permits for the specific phase. Master plan vesting does not include vesting to building, energy, stormwater, or other applicable codes. (Ord. 2019-001 § 1 (Exh. A))


Chapter 18.33 BUSINESS AND EMPLOYMENT DISTRICTS

Sections:

18.33.010    Establishment of zoning districts.

18.33.020    Purposes.

18.33.030    Uses.

18.33.040    Development standards.

18.33.045    Certain standards inapplicable.

18.33.050    Site planning and design guidelines.

18.33.060    Performance standards.

18.33.070    Commercial/residential mixed use.

18.33.080    Parking and loading standards.

18.33.090    Signage standards.

18.33.100    Project review.


18.33.010 Establishment of zoning districts.

The city’s comprehensive plan establishes three land use designations that support the business and employment goals and policies of the city of Sequim. The three land use designations will also serve as titles of zoning districts on the city’s zoning map, and are identified as:

A. Bell Creek economic opportunity area (BCEOA).

B. River Road economic opportunity area (RREOA).

C. High tech light industrial (HTLI).

The three business and employment districts are intended to enhance Sequim’s economic base by providing suitable areas to support the employment needs of the community. The business and employment districts provide for the location of manufacturing, product processing, research and development facilities, assembly, warehousing, distribution, professional services, corporate headquarters, medical facilities and complementary educational and recreational uses among others. Limited retail, business and support services that generally serve the needs of the districts’ tenants and patrons as well as limited multifamily mixed residential/commercial uses are also allowed. All three districts are intended to expand and diversify the city’s economic base and increase the number and range of living-wage jobs. (Ord. 2019-002 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.33.020 Purposes.

A. The Bell Creek economic opportunity area (BCEOA) district provides for business and professional offices, corporate headquarters, research and development facilities, light industry/manufacturing and complementary retail, commercial, educational, recreational and limited multifamily residential uses. The district is not intended to support the general commercial needs of the community.

B. The River Road economic opportunity area (RREOA) district is intended to enhance the city’s economic base by providing for an integrated grouping of businesses and buildings of a larger size and scale than the BCEOA and HTLI districts may support. The RREOA district supports a variety of uses, such as light manufacturing, professional office buildings, retail, commercial, multifamily residential and warehousing and distribution.

C. The high tech light industrial (HTLI) district provides appropriate locations for combining light, clean industries, including industrial service, manufacturing, fabrication, assembly and production; business and technology research and development; and warehousing, distribution and storage activities. Uses are typically not reliant on unprocessed natural resources. Professional offices and sale of goods produced on site are subordinate to permitted activities. (Ord. 2019-002 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.33.030 Uses.

A. Types of Uses. For the purposes of this chapter, there are three kinds of uses:

1. A permitted (P) use is one that is permitted outright, subject to all the applicable provisions of this title and relevant portions of the Sequim Municipal Code.

2. A conditional use (C) is a Type C-2 discretionary use reviewed through the process set forth in SMC 20.01.100 governing conditional uses.

3. A prohibited use (X) is one that is not permitted in the zoning district under any circumstances.

B. Recognizing that there may be certain uses not mentioned specifically in Table 18.33.031 because of changing businesses, technology advances, or other reasons, the DCD director is authorized to make similar use determinations, as set forth in SMC 18.20.015.

The following Table 18.33.031 is a list of uses for the three zoning districts:

Table 18.33.031 – Business and Employment District Uses  

	USE	BCEOA	RREOA	HTLI

	Office and Professional Services	 	 	 

	All forms of corporate, professional, public, brokerage, administrative, financial, building trade, and research offices	P	P	X

	Corporate headquarters and regional offices	P	P	X

	Office-oriented service providers, such as communications services, photocopying, courier and messenger services, graphic design, printing, promotional products, and the like	P	P	X

	Office equipment sales and services	P	P	X

	Technology service and support, copy and connectivity centers, telework centers	P	P	X

	Business/Technology Research and Development	 	 	 

	Biotechnology/medical laboratories	C	C	C

	Computer technology	P	P	P

	Electronic components and board systems engineering and development	P	P	P

	Research and research industry-oriented service providers	P	P	P

	Software engineering	P	P	P

	Commercial Services and Retail	 	 	 

	Commercial convenience, personal services, and restaurant establishments (In existing and/or new structures 5,000 square feet or larger, commercial convenience, personal service uses, and restaurant eating/drinking establishments are allowed but are to be subordinate to the building’s primary uses. All commercial uses located in the structure are limited to 25% of the building’s gross square footage. No drive-through facilities are allowed.)	P	P	X

	Commercial retail in conjunction with a primary use (Retail sales of products assembled, manufactured, etc., in the BCEOA, RREOA, HTLI zoning districts are allowed but are to be subordinate to the building’s primary use. Retail sales use is limited to 25% of the building’s gross square footage.)	P	P	P

	Food service contractor/caterer	P	P	P

	Food and drink where manufactured and sold on premises (on-premises tasting room, restaurant, and/or retail sales limited to 25% of gross square footage)	C	C	C

	Nursery/landscaping materials retail sales	C	P	X

	Wholesale product showrooms	P	P	C

	Light Industrial	 	 	 

	Equipment rental	X	X	C

	Industrial laundry and upholstery services	X	C	P

	Resource recycling and recovery (not including recycling drop-off facilities)	X	X	C

	Manufacturing	 	 	 

	Beverage products	C	P	P

	Cabinet shop or carpenter shop	X	C	P

	Electrical and electronic equipment manufacture	P	P	P

	Electrical component assembly, including assembly of computer products, office equipment, and related components	P	P	P

	Metal, wood and other materials fabrication and assembly in an enclosed building	C	C	P

	Food and kindred products, manufacture, processing and packaging (excluding animal slaughtering and processing)	C	C	P

	Furniture and fixtures manufacture and assembly	C	P	P

	Handcrafted products, crafts or other art-related items	P	P	P

	Measuring, analyzing and control instruments	P	P	P

	Medical equipment and supplies	P	P	P

	Miscellaneous light fabrication and assembly not otherwise named	C	C	P

	Perfumes, cosmetics and similar preparations	C	C	P

	Photographic, medical, audio and optical equipment	P	P	P

	Printing, publishing and allied products	C	P	P

	Products made from light stone, clay and glass	P	P	P

	Textiles, apparel and leather goods	P	C	C

	Warehousing, Distribution and Storage	 	 	 

	Equipment/materials outdoor storage as a primary use (including building trade and landscaping)	 	 	 

	a. Storage yards occupying less than 10,000 square feet	X	C	P

	b. Storage yards occupying more than 10,000 square feet	X	C	C

	Mail order or direct selling and distribution	P	P	P

	Packing, crating and convention and trade show services	P	P	P

	Processing and/or packaging previously prepared materials	P	P	P

	Self-serve mini-storage	X	X	X

	Truck and freight transportation services	X	X	X

	Warehousing, product distribution, and wholesale trade	X	C	P

	Residential	 	 	 

	Dwelling units above nonresidential uses (mixed use structures)

(Nonresidential uses must be located on ground level or first floor if ground level is parking)	P	P	X

	Employee/security units in conjunction with manufacturing, distribution or storage uses	P	P	P

	Existing residential use without increase in density	P	P	P

	(subject to nonconforming regulations)	 	 	 

	Live/work units	P	P	X

	Public and Quasi-Public	 	 	 

	Essential public facilities, state and regional	P	P	P

	Essential public facilities, local	C	C	C

	Government maintenance shops and fleet vehicle storage	C	C	P

	Public administration office and services	P	P	P

	Public parks	P	P	P

	Solid waste transfer facilities	X	X	C

	Recycling drop-off facilities	X	X	C

	Utility facilities and utility system	P	P	P

	Transit facilities, including park and ride lots and transfer centers	C	C	C

	Wireless communication facilities	P	P	P

	Co-location of wireless facilities on existing facility or structure	P	P	P

	Other	 	 	 

	Ambulatory and outpatient care services (physicians, outpatient clinics, dentists)	P	P	X

	Child care centers	C (as a secondary use)	C	C (as a secondary use)

	College, universities, technical, trade and other specialty schools	C	C	C

	Grade schools (K – 12)	C	C	X

	Hospital	C	C	X

	Museums, historic and cultural exhibits	P	P	X

	Privately owned amusement, sports or recreation establishments (retail sales limited to 25% of use’s total square footage)	P	P	X

	Churches, new freestanding/monument structures and existing building(s) 5,000 square feet or larger	C	C	X

	Churches, under 5,000 square feet and within an existing building(s)	C	C	C

	Sports arena or stadium	C	C	X

	Veterinary clinics and hospitals (not including kennels)	P	P	X

(Ord. 2019-002 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.33.040 Development standards.

For development standards, see Table 18.33.042 below.

Table 18.33.042 – Business and Employment Districts Development Standards  

	Standard	Bell Creek EOA	River Road EOA	HTLI

	Minimum/maximum lot area	None	None	None

	Maximum height	50 feet for single use building; 60 feet for mixed use building. Roof mounted mechanical equipment and its screening is not included in the height calculation.	35 feet for single use building; 45 for mixed use building. Roof mounted mechanical equipment and its screening is not included in the height calculation.	50 feet. Roof mounted mechanical equipment and its screening is not included in the height calculation.

	Maximum lot coverage	Based on stormwater, parking, and landscaping standards per Chapter 13.104 SMC, Chapter 18.22 SMC, and SMC 18.24.130, respectively, but to also achieve FAR/density minimums	Based on stormwater, parking, and landscaping standards per Chapter 13.104 SMC, Chapter 18.22 SMC, and SMC 18.24.130, respectively	Based on stormwater, parking, and landscaping standards per Chapter 13.104 SMC, Chapter 18.22 SMC, and SMC 18.24.130, respectively

	Minimum setback and buffer adjacent to public right-of-way	10 feet with additional landscaping and pedestrian connection to buildings	10 feet with additional landscaping and pedestrian connection to buildings	10 feet with additional landscaping and pedestrian connection to buildings

	Minimum setback and buffer when lot lines are adjacent to an R zoning district	20 feet, plus an additional 1 foot for each foot the building wall facing an R district exceeds an average of 35 feet in height, to a maximum setback of 40 feet	20 feet1	20 feet, plus an additional 1 foot for each foot the building wall facing an R district exceeds an average of 35 feet in height, to a maximum setback of 40 feet

	Minimum setback and buffer when lot lines are adjacent to a nonresidential zoning district	Front yard: 10 feet

Other yards: 5 feet

Street (public or private) frontage: 10 feet

Setbacks may be enlarged to provide additional area to meet overall site landscaping requirement	Front yard: 10 feet

Other yards: 5 feet

Street (public or private) frontage: 10 feet

Setbacks may be enlarged to provide additional area to meet overall site landscaping requirement	Front yard: 10 feet

Other yards: 5 feet

Street (public or private) frontage: 10 feet

Setbacks may be enlarged to provide additional area to meet overall site landscaping requirement

	Mixed commercial/residential use residential density	No density threshold	No density threshold	N/A

	Attached residential density	Minimum 12 units/acre	Minimum 12 units/acre	N/A

	Use mix threshold2	Office/professional/technology/ development/manufacturing/research, etc. = minimum of 55% of overall site	N/A	N/A

	 	Mixed use commercial/residential maximum of 30% of site	 	 

	 	Attached residential minimum 12 dwelling units/acre and maximum height of 4 stories. Maximum of 15% of site.	 	 

	Parking	See SMC 18.33.090. See Chapter 18.48 SMC for additional parking standards.	See SMC 18.33.090.

See Chapter 18.48 SMC for additional parking standards.	See SMC 18.33.090.

See Chapter 18.48 SMC for additional parking standards.

1No additional setback because 35 feet is maximum height limit in RREOA zone.

2Mixed use threshold based on Hovee report and not applicable to the RREOA and HTLI.

(Also see SMC 18.22.070, Commercial uses, for additional development standards applicable to the EOAs and HTLI zoning districts.)

(Ord. 2019-002 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.33.045 Certain standards inapplicable.

Standards identified in SMC 18.22.030, 18.24.050, 18.24.100, and 18.24.120 are inapplicable to development constructed in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 2019-002 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.33.050 Site planning and design guidelines.

The following design guidelines are intended to guide the design process for development in the employment and business zoning districts and supersede Chapter 18.24 SMC:

A. Landscaping.

1. A minimum of 20 percent of the property area must be landscaped. Setback, parking lot, street trees and building perimeter landscaping contribute to this requirement.

a. Critical area buffers may count toward this requirement but cannot contribute more than 40 percent of the 20 percent overall site landscaping requirement.

b. Retaining land at its natural grade with existing native vegetation is strongly encouraged and may contribute toward the required landscape percentage requirement if the existing vegetation is healthy and likely to survive development. A maintenance assurance device, agreement or bond for two years will be required to ensure the existing vegetation remains healthy and additional vegetation appropriate to the overall site’s landscape plan must be installed if the existing vegetation does not survive.

c. Low impact development techniques for stormwater management that are not fenced and can be designed to integrate vegetation appropriately into the site’s overall landscape plan may count toward this requirement at the determination and approval of the review authority.

d. A two-year maintenance bond will be required for all landscaped areas required by this code. The maintenance bond will be for 130 percent of the landscaping costs.

2. Setback Landscaping.

a. Setback areas are to be landscaped and covered with live plant materials that will ultimately cover 75 percent of the ground area within three years. One tree (deciduous tree of a minimum of two inches caliper or one six-foot-high evergreen tree) and three shrubs, each of which will attain a height of three and one-half feet within three years, must be provided for every 300 square feet of area to be landscaped.

b. Setback landscaping may include low impact development stormwater management facilities that are not fenced and can be designed to integrate vegetation appropriately into the setback’s landscape area.

c. When adjacent to any R4-8/lifestyle zoning district, setback landscaping must be provided for the full width of the setback and include a combination of sight-obscuring fencing, solid screen of evergreen trees and shrubs and berming, as approved by the review authority.

3. Street Trees. Street trees and related landscaping must be provided 40 feet on center for arterials and 30 feet on center for collectors within a minimum five-foot planting strip. Groundcover of sod or other approved groundcover will be provided. Species of trees are as set forth in the city’s master street tree plan, if applicable, or as otherwise approved by the review authority.

4. Parking Lot Landscaping. Parking lots with more than 10 spaces must be landscaped. A minimum of five percent of the parking lot area (that area inside parking lot perimeter curbing) must be landscaped; planting areas must be a minimum of five feet in width. Providing adequate shading opportunities should be taken into account. Parked vehicles may not overhang if the planting area is the minimum width of five feet. Wheel stops will be required when any parking space abuts landscaping. Unfenced low impact development stormwater management facilities may be located in parking lot landscaping when feasible and when designed to be integrated appropriately in the landscaped area.

5. Building Perimeter Landscaping. For any building wall that exceeds an average of 30 feet in height and combined with an unmodulated wall exceeding 100 feet in length (not including loading areas), a planting bed is required, with a hierarchy of plantings for at least 60 percent of the wall’s length provided:

a. Columnar trees and large shrubs must be installed a minimum of four feet from the building’s foundation within a minimum six-foot-wide planting bed at the structure’s foundation/base; or larger trees may be planted 25 feet on center within a 15-foot planting bed and a minimum 10 feet from the building’s foundation.

b. Shrubs or small trees must be planted a minimum three to six feet on center (depending on size at maturity) within the required planting bed.

c. Groundcover or other organic material must be provided to reduce wind and water erosion.

B. On-Site Pedestrian Circulation.

1. Buildings must be linked to their fronting street(s) with primary walkways.

2. Primary walkways must be a minimum of five feet in width and must be visually distinct from parking lot and driveway surfaces. Pedestrian walkways may be of permeable surfacing when approved by the city engineer.

3. Secondary walkways are those that provide for pedestrian connection between buildings without depending upon parking lots. All buildings must be linked to each other by a secondary walkway promoting the shortest distance between building entrances. When adjacent to an undeveloped parcel, a secondary walkway must be provided to the property line to provide future pedestrian connection separate from a future street connection. Secondary walkways do not need to be paved.

C. On-Site Pedestrian Circulation.

1. Sidewalks to Be Constructed in Business and Employment Districts. The property owner must provide and fully develop sidewalks along the entire frontage of the subject property if there is any new construction or remodel of the primary structure of that property and (a) the street grade has previously been approved by the public works director or (b) if the curbs and gutters are currently in place along the access road abutting the subject property. Sidewalk construction must meet city standards and be completed before a building permit for the new construction or remodel will be issued. This provision applies to all allowed uses in any commercial or mixed use district.

2. Minimum Sidewalk Development Standards. Sidewalks must be established consistent with adopted city of Sequim standard plans, the standards contained within SMC Title 12, Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places, and SMC Title 17, Subdivisions. Where sidewalk depths are inconsistent, a transition area must be provided to avoid hazardous conditions. Primary walkways must be visually distinct from parking lot and driveway surfaces. Pedestrian walkways may be of permeable surfacing when approved by the city engineer.

D. Building Design Standards. The purpose of building design standards in the business and employment zoning districts is to facilitate attractive Pacific Northwest architectural design and scale by avoiding large blank walls, bright colors and providing roof line treatment. The following standards apply to building design in all three of the business and employment zoning districts. The city’s administrative design review process applies to all proposals that require site plan review or a building permit that contains substantial building facade alteration to the exterior of an existing building. See also Chapter 18.24 SMC.


[IMAGE]


Figure 1

Example of Pacific Northwest architecture

1. Building Facades.

a. Architectural interest is required for all building facades visible from public streets and other publicly visible areas, such as parking areas.

i. Publicly visible building walls must incorporate insets or offsets, canopies, colonnades, wing walls, trellises, building facade landscaping, material variation, multi-planed roof line, or other features which diminish large blank walls.
[IMAGE]


Figure 2

Example of recesses and projections providing for interest in facade design

ii. For publicly visible building walls exceeding 50 feet in length, offset elements are required that break up the plane of the wall into at least three sections. Recesses and/or projections must have a depth of at least three percent of the facade’s length and extend at least 20 percent of the facade’s length.
[IMAGE]


Figure 3

Multiple facade treatment from color to building materials provides architectural interest in facades visible from the street

b. Provide visual terminus to tops of buildings. To avoid a truncated appearance, all structures must have a visual “cap.” Options include extended eaves; steep pitch hip, gable or saltbox roof form; false pitch roof with appearance of hip gable or saltbox; or projecting cornice of appropriate scale to the building and part of building’s trim detail.

c. Primary building entrances must be physically oriented to the street and primary pedestrian walkway. The primary entrances to structures, including all entrances to individual tenant spaces, must be clearly identifiable through architectural design. Specific treatments include, but are not limited to, wall modulation, arcades, overhangs, recesses/projections, raised and projected cornices, peaked roof forms, arches, gables, window clusters, landscape treatment, material/color/texture change, awnings, moldings, planters, balconies, and architectural details such as tile work and moldings which are integrated into the structure and pedestrian amenities, such as benches and tables.


[IMAGE]


Figure 4

Multiple tenant building provides interest to entryways with offsets and color and architecturally interesting courtyard/plaza


[IMAGE]


Figure 5


[IMAGE]


Figure 6

Courtyard with benches and planters

2. Materials.

a. Facades visible from public streets or other publicly visible areas must provide visual interest by providing a variety of building materials, windows, artwork, or other techniques. Desired materials include brick, wood, horizontal lap siding made of wood or cement-like materials, split-faced block or ground-faced block.

b. For structures including residential (mixed use structures) or live/work units, siding materials must include but are not limited to two of the following: horizontal lap siding (of any lap design) made of wood or cement-like materials, shingles made of cedar or cement-like materials, board and batten (or panels with similarly spaced battens), brick, or stone (real or cultured). Typically, the residential component will be differentiated from the nonresidential uses by scale and amount of detailing.

c. No unscreened facades visible from public streets and pathways may include the following:

i. Smooth-faced concrete block;

ii. Smooth-faced tilt-up concrete panels;

iii. Smooth-faced prefabricated steel panels;

iv. Prefabricated manufactured or modular units.

d. Blank walls are not allowed on any ground-level building wall abutting any form of public walkways or streets except as required for the structural integrity of the building. Buildings should be provided with a distinct “base” through the use of materials, texture or massing.


[IMAGE]


Figure 7

e. Buildings must provide generous amounts of windows, skylights, or similar natural light-producing products to create ground floors with a “transparent” quality and to enhance the use of natural light and reduce energy consumption. No window or door may consist of polished (mirrored) or highly reflective colored glass.

3. Color.

a. Main color of exterior walls is limited to subtle earth tone colors. Soft white, sands, grays, muted pastels, and deep, rich earth colors (terra cotta, forest green) are acceptable.

b. Trim color may be lighter or darker shades of the main color, soft white, or contrast or complement the main color but may not be bright or bold.

c. Accents or graphics may be brighter than main or trim color and are limited to 15 percent of the facade area, excluding glass. Bright, high contrast color banding is limited to maximum four inches in width. (Ord. 2019-002 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.33.060 Performance standards.

No land or structure may be used or occupied unless there is compliance with the following minimum performance standards:

A. Outdoor Storage. Outdoor storage of materials and supplies must be completely screened, with a combination of fencing and landscaping, from adjacent properties and public right-of-way and be located in the interior of the lot to the extent possible as determined by the DCD director.

B. Recycling/Trash Enclosures. Recycling/trash enclosures will be screened and placed to the side or rear of each building. The enclosures will be made of the same or similar materials of that of the principal building to which the enclosure belongs.

C. Emissions. Any air emissions must meet applicable regulations of the Puget Sound Clean Air Agency, and no visible, frequent smoke, dust, or gases may be emitted.

D. Exterior Lighting. Exterior lighting, except for warning or emergency lighting, must be hooded or shielded so illumination is directed downward and confined to the property boundaries of the light source.

E. Noise. Noise levels may not exceed the maximum allowed in Chapter 173-60 WAC for Class B (commercial) or Class C (industrial) environmental designations as appropriate to the use, or as set forth in the International Building Code requirements.

F. Exterior Mechanical Equipment.

1. All HVAC equipment, pumps, heaters and other mechanical devices must be screened from view from adjacent streets and properties.

2. Vents, mechanical penthouses, elevator equipment and similar appurtenances may extend no more than 15 feet above the roof line, must be surrounded by a sight-obscuring screen constructed to the same height as the mechanical equipment, and conform to the following criteria:

a. The screen must be integrated into the architecture of the building.

b. The screen must obscure to the extent possible the view of the appurtenances from adjacent streets and properties.

c. Rod, wire and dish antennas are exempt from the screening requirement if the screening would interfere with the effective operation of the antenna.

G. Heat and Glare. Except for exterior lighting, operations producing heat and glare must be conducted within an enclosed building.

H. Ground and Soil Contamination. Materials must be handled in such a manner to prevent ground or soil pollution, or which may contaminate aquifer or other natural drainage systems, as required by state and local health agencies.

I. Fire and Explosive Hazards. The manufacture, use, processing or storage of flammable liquids or materials, liquids or gases that produce flammable or explosive vapors or gases is permitted in accordance with the regulations of the adopted International Fire Code and International Building Code.

J. In addition to the standards identified above, the city may utilize its authority under the State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA) to identify additional mitigations on impacts to the environment, as determined at time of project review. (Ord. 2019-002 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.33.070 Commercial/residential mixed use.

A. Mixed Use Structures1. Mixed use structures allow for placement of a mix of commercial, business, employment and residential uses in a single building. Mixed use structures are intended to allow for efficient use of land and public services in an urban setting; encourage convenient access between employment, services and residential opportunities; and increase development alternatives.
[IMAGE]


Figure 8

Mixed Use Building

Architectural interest achieved through a mix of building materials, overhangs, offsets and cornice treatment

1. Permitted nonresidential uses must be located on the ground floor. However, part of the ground floor may be used as a driveway to rear or under-building or under-grade parking, or as a public pedestrian park area. Residential units may be allowed in the rear 40 percent of the ground floor of a mixed use structure if that portion of the ground floor does not front a public street. In all other cases the residential units must be located above allowed nonresidential uses (residences may not be located at street/ground level or below except as allowed above). The number of residential units is limited by the mixed use structure’s required development standards (lot coverage, height, landscaping, parking and setbacks) for the underlying zoning district.

2. At least one outdoor activity feature must be provided for the mixed use building, including but not limited to courtyards, delineated gathering spaces, or seating areas. These areas may consist of hardscape and/or landscaping.

3. A minimum of 40 square feet of private open space must be provided for each of the residential units, such as a private outdoor balcony.

4. On-site pedestrian circulation that links the public street and the primary entrance to the structure or residential units must be provided. When the pedestrian circulation crosses driveways, parking areas and loading areas, it must be clearly identifiable through use of different paving materials.

5. Each unit will have an associated 30 feet of private on-site storage either in the units, garage, basement or, in some circumstances, the rear 40 percent of the structure’s ground floor if this area does not front a public street.

B. Live/Work Units. Live/work units are allowed in the BCEOA and RREOA zoning districts and are a building use that combines business or manufacturing activities within the same structure as a residential living space. Live/work units are distinctive from mixed use because the business owner or employee must live in the unit. In addition, they can provide affordable work and housing space, meet the needs of special groups such as artists, and serve to incubate new businesses.
[IMAGE]


Figure 9

Live/Work Units

1. The total live/work unit is limited to 3,000 square feet in gross floor area.

2. The nonresidential use portion must be located on the first floor of the unit or, if parking is the first floor, the unit’s main floor area.

3. The nonresidential area is limited to 50 percent of live/work unit’s area.

4. Living space must be physically integrated and connected internally to the live/work unit and not be rented, leased, sold or occupied separately.

5. Private outdoor open space must be provided for the live/work units, such as a balcony or patio.

6. On-premises sales of goods are limited to those produced within the live/work unit or related to the permitted business activity.

7. A valid business license associated with the business or manufacturing activity must be obtained from the city.

8. Other restrictions may apply subject to the requirements of the adopted International Building Code. (Ord. 2019-002 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.33.080 Parking and loading standards.

The following standards apply to parking and loading in the BCEOA, RREOA and HTLI zoning districts. See SMC 18.48.050 for parking requirements for uses not listed below. All other applicable provisions from Chapter 18.48 SMC, except SMC 18.48.060, also apply.

A. Number of Spaces Required.

1. Office and professional services (except medical): one space per 300 square feet.

2. Business/technical research and development: one space per 500 square feet.

3. Medical office: one space per 200 square feet.

4. Hospitals: one space per longer-term care bed and one space for each 200 square feet of outpatient area.

5. Commercial Services and Retail.

a. Convenience and personal services: one space per 250 gross square feet.

b. Eating/drinking establishments: one space per table; plus one space per four stools; plus one space per employee based on largest shift.

6. Building trade/landscaping materials sales: one space per 300 square feet of retail area; and one space per 500 square feet of warehouse or storage area (including outdoor).

7. Food/drink manufacturing: one space per 500 square feet.

a. Food/drink with on-premises tasting room, restaurant and/or retail sales space: one space per 200 square feet.

8. Manufacturing: one space per 750 square feet.

9. Warehouse, distribution and storage: one space per 500 square feet.

10. Mixed use residential and live/work units: one and one-half spaces per residential unit in addition to other use required spaces, including additional customer/client and employee spaces for live/work units.

11. Ambulatory and outpatient care services: one space per 200 square feet.

12. Assembly uses: to be determined by DCD director at time of project.

13. Other uses not specifically listed above or in SMC 18.48.050 must furnish parking as required by the director based upon the most analogous use or through a parking study2.

B. When under-building parking is proposed in a business and employment zoning district and the structure fronts a collector or arterial street, at least 50 percent of street frontage (of the collector or arterial street) must include square footage that is to be occupied by permitted uses.

C. Parking or staging of delivery trucks on public streets is prohibited; provided, that smaller delivery trucks (e.g., UPS, FedEx) may park on public streets when on-street parking is available.

D. The primary vehicular access to businesses and loading areas must avoid a street that primarily serves residential uses.

E. Entrances and exits to and from parking and loading facilities must be minimized in number and clearly marked with appropriate directional signage.

F. Internal circulation must be designed for safety and efficiency by reducing conflicts between vehicular and pedestrian traffic, combining circulation and access areas where possible, and providing adequate truck maneuvering, stacking, and loading areas.

G. Loading facilities must be located internal to the site. Loading docks and doors facing a public street must be offset from the access drive and screened from the street as much as possible.

H. Driveways and parking areas must be landscaped, screened from residential areas, have shared driveways where possible and designed to meet ADA requirements.

I. Transit-oriented developments, approved as a planned unit development, or commercial uses, approved under the provisions of a binding site plan, may propose reduced parking requirements in lieu of provisions for alternate modes of transportation.

J. When possible, parking aisles will be separated from site circulation routes (see Figure 10).
[IMAGE]


Figure 10

(Ord. 2019-002 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.33.090 Signage standards.

The following standards, which may deviate from Chapter 18.58 SMC, apply to signage in the BCEOA, RREOA and HTLI zoning districts. In cases where this chapter conflicts with Chapter 18.58 SMC, this chapter controls.

A. Wall-mounted signs will be no larger than 50 square feet; or one square foot per one foot of lineal facade area where the sign is affixed, not to exceed 200 square feet per sign, whichever is greater. In no case may the total length of all signs exceed 60 percent of the lineal feet of the building frontage (see Figure 11).

1. For multi-occupancy buildings, the facade area for each tenant or user is derived by measuring only the surface area of the exterior facade of the premises actually used by the tenant or use. One sign is allowed per tenant or use.

2. One wall-mounted sign as a business directory of the multiple-business building is allowed per street frontage and must be located near the entrance(s) to the building. The directory sign may not exceed 20 square feet.

3. Wall signs must be centered, proportional, and shaped to the architectural features of the buildings (see Figure 11).

4. No wall-mounted sign may extend above the height of the roof line or parapet of the building.


[IMAGE]


Figure 11

Wall Sign Placement

B. Freestanding/Monument Sign Area. The total allowable sign area for freestanding/ monument signs is 25 square feet or one-half square foot of sign area for each lineal foot of street frontage, whichever is greater, up to a maximum of 50 square feet of freestanding/monument sign area.

C. Height. The maximum height of a freestanding/monument sign located within five feet of the public right-of-way or private street is four feet. Signs set back a minimum of five feet are permitted a height of five feet plus one-half foot of height for each additional foot of setback exceeding five feet up to a maximum of eight feet in height. Any sign in excess of eight feet as permitted by this code in SMC 18.58.110(D)(5) must be set back a minimum of 10 feet.

D. Base Height Provision. The copy of all signage must be at least one foot above grade to allow vertical space for landscaping and to enhance the visibility of the sign (see Figure 12).
[IMAGE]


Figure 12

E. Location. No freestanding/monument signs may be located within any vision triangle or within 25 feet of the right-of-way of any street intersecting the street on which the freestanding/monument sign fronts.

F. Address Numbers. Legible address numbers are required on all freestanding/monument signs. Address numbers are exempt from sign area standards.

G. Freestanding signs do not include pole/pylon signs, which are prohibited – see Figure 13 below (SMC 18.58.070(B)).
[IMAGE]


Figure 13

Prohibited Signs

1. No more than one freestanding/monument sign is permitted per multiple-occupancy building unless the building fronts more than one public street, where one additional freestanding/monument sign is allowed per additional street frontage. One sign may be located at the corner of two arterial streets upon which the building fronts in lieu of one sign on each street frontage if sign location is outside of the vision triangle.

2. All freestanding/monument signs must be located as close as possible to the center of the street frontage on which they are located.

3. All freestanding/monument signs must be located in a planting/landscaped bed of equal area to that of the sign. The planting bed may be included within a landscape/planting strip required in SMC 18.33.050. The minimum dimension of the planting bed must be five feet measured from inside face of curb to inside face of curb. The planting beds will be improved with the following:

a. One-gallon groundcover planted 12 inches on center; and

b. One shrub per 10 square feet of sign area. Shrubs located within the vision clearance area may not be taller than 36 inches at full height.

H. Multi-Building Business Development.

1. Each building in a multi-business center may have no more than one freestanding/monument sign unless the building fronts more than one public street, where one additional freestanding/monument sign is allowed.

2. One directory sign per entrance/exit for multi-business centers is allowed; provided, that the identification sign is no larger than 30 square feet and eight feet in height.

3. For horizontally mixed use projects permitted by the municipal code, a sign program, which implements the intent of this chapter, must be approved as part of the discretionary approval of the planned unit development, binding site plan or other allowed application process.

4. Directional signs may not exceed six square feet per face and must be located on the premises to which the sign is intended to guide or direct traffic. Directional signs are not included in the maximum number of freestanding/monument signs allowed.

5. Illumination of signs must not interfere with traffic, traffic control devices or the signs of others. Signs on awnings or canopies may not be illuminated internally if the light illuminates other than the sign.

6. No sign, except as otherwise permitted by this chapter, may be permitted that does not pertain directly to an approved use or business conducted on the premises. (Ord. 2019-002 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.33.100 Project review.

Before a building permit will be issued, the design review process and requirements found in Chapter 18.24 SMC must be followed. If a use is identified as a C, the conditional use and site plan review process will be consolidated. All project permits follow the process set forth in SMC Title 20, Land Use and Development. (Ord. 2019-002 § 1 (Exh. A))1

For development standards for horizontal mixed use development see SMC 18.22.080, Mixed use. 2

Parking Studies. An applicant may request a modification, to be allowed by the approval body, to the minimum number of parking or loading spaces required, by providing a study from a qualified professional that substantiates that parking demand can be met with a reduced requirement due to such factors as drive-by trip capture, hours of operation, or alternative transportation availability for the customer base (SMC 18.48.070(C)). 


Chapter 18.35 PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS

Sections:

18.35.010    Purpose.

18.35.020    Review authority.

18.35.030    Uses permitted.

18.35.040    Size of planned residential development.

18.35.050    Modification of certain development standards.

18.35.060    PRD development standards.

18.35.070    Planned residential development site design criteria.

18.35.080    Residential types in residential low (R4-8) zoning district.

18.35.085    Residential types in the lifestyle/multifamily and EOA zoning districts.

18.35.090    Open space requirements.

18.35.100    Amenities required.

18.35.110    Residential density bonus incentives.

18.35.130    Submittal requirements.

18.35.140    Criteria for approval.

18.35.150    Final approval.

18.35.160    Appeals.

18.35.170    Extension of time.


18.35.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to encourage creative and superior site design in residential, lifestyle and economic opportunity (EOA) zones which also promotes the preservation of open space, preservation of native vegetation, protection of critical areas and a variety of housing types at a variety of price points in such development by permitting greater flexibility in zoning requirements than is permitted by other chapters of this title, while ensuring compliance with the goals and policies of the Sequim comprehensive plan. Furthermore, it is the purpose of this chapter:

A. To implement the city’s comprehensive plan and the state of Washington’s Growth Management Act, Chapter 36.70A RCW.

B. To allow flexibility in lot size and design for residential development, in order to enable development to attempt to achieve the zoned density.

C. To allow flexibility in residential design and creative site planning leading to superior residential and subdivision developments than generally are realized through conventional subdivision regulations.

D. To preserve protected critical areas and their buffers as defined in the Sequim critical areas ordinance.

E. To provide open space, recreational opportunities and other benefit features for enjoyment of future occupants.

F. To encourage preservation of cultural, scenic or natural features.

G. To encourage a diversity of housing units and types within and between neighborhoods at a variety of price points providing more affordable housing choices to the community.

H. To provide for maximizing efficiency of street layout, utility networks, and other public improvements.

I. To preserve and retain areas of trees or groupings of trees. (Ord. 2019-006 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.35.020 Review authority.

All planned residential development (PRD) permits will be processed as Type C-2 applications according to the provisions of SMC Title 20. The review authority will have the authority to approve, approve with conditions, disapprove, or revoke planned residential developments, subject to the provisions of this chapter. The review authority is the city hearing examiner, or, in the absence of a city hearing examiner, the city council. (Ord. 2019-006 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.35.030 Uses permitted.

In addition to any use consistent with the uses permitted in the underlying zoning district, commercial/retail uses (see Table 18.35.031 for permitted uses) consisting of no more than 15 percent of the PRD’s total land area will be permitted in planned residential developments in accordance with the approved development plan (e.g., three acres per a 20-acre development).

Table 18.35.031 – Permitted Commercial and Retail Uses in PRDs 

	Land Use	R4-8	Multifamily*	EOA

	Convenience retail sales, including variety and specialty stores; general merchandise; flower/plant shop; clothing; home and business/office supplies and goods; art and art supplies; dry goods; gifts, and the like (no individual business will exceed 5,000 sq. ft. in size).	P	P	P

	Laundry/dry cleaner	C	C	C

	Coffee shop/restaurant (no drive-through service)	P	P	P

	Professional office	P	P	P

	Medical or dental clinic/office/pharmacy	P	P	P

	Day care	P	P	P

P = Permitted, C = Permitted through a conditional use permit process.

* In this chapter the term “multifamily” is used interchangeably with the term “lifestyle district.”

(Ord. 2019-006 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.35.040 Size of planned residential development.

Except as set forth below, a tract of land to be developed as a planned residential development will have a minimum of three net acres. However, a smaller site size may be allowed if the review authority makes specific findings to support the conclusion that a planned residential development less than three acres in size is in the public interest and one or more of the following conditions apply:

A. The site contains critical areas and their protected buffers, as defined and set forth by the city’s critical areas ordinance.

B. A physical and/or topographic feature of importance identified through a site analysis (such as but not limited to rock outcroppings, significant stands of trees, and areas of cultural resources) exists on the site or in the neighborhood, which can be conserved and still leave the applicant adequate land for use by the planned residential development.

C. The property or its neighborhood has a historical character of importance to the community that will be protected by use of a planned residential development.

D. The property is adjacent to or across the street from property which has been developed or redeveloped under a planned residential development, and a planned residential development will contribute to or supplement the existing amenities, open space and values of the adjacent planned residential development.

E. The planned residential development design contains unique or innovative design concepts that could not be achieved without a planned residential development.

F. The proposed planned residential development is located in the R4-8 or MF or EOA zoning districts. Further, adequate perimeter landscaping, buffering or other compatibility provisions must be able to be provided through project design.

G. The proposed planned residential development provides an infill opportunity in the vicinity in which it is located.

H. A cottage housing development as standalone when at least 12 cottages are proposed or as part of a larger development proposal. (Ord. 2019-006 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.35.050 Modification of certain development standards.

The city’s standard development regulations may be modified for a PRD as set forth in Table 18.35.050 below; all other development standards will be as set forth in the underlying zoning district requirements.

Table 18.35.050 – Lot Requirements for PRD  

	Development Standard	R4-8 zoning district (including any method of subdivision for single-family detached)	MF and EOA zoning district + attached units in R4-8 district	No subdivision proposed – commonly held ownership (condominium) for all zones

	Density	Per underlying zoning district and as allowed as bonus units in SMC 18.35.110

	Minimum Lot Area	3,750 square feet. 3,000 square feet for detached single-family cottages.	No minimum lot area for attached units. 3,000 square feet for detached units.	3 acres or as a component of a PRD w/subdivision

	Minimum Lot Width	30'	20'	n/a

	Minimum Lot Depth	70'	None	n/a

	Maximum Building Lot Coverage	50%	60%	n/a (see Maximum Overall Lot Coverage below)

	Front Yard Setback*	10'	0' minimum, 10' maximum	n/a (see Perimeter Setback below)

	Maximum Building Height	25'	55' attached, 25' detached	25'

	Rear Yard Setback*	5'	5'	n/a (see Perimeter Setback below)

	Side Yard Setback*	5'	5'	n/a (see Perimeter Setback below)

	Street Corner Yard Setback* (corner lots at intersections(s) of public streets/rights-of-way)	10' or greater if necessary for sight distance as determined by the city engineer	10' or greater if necessary for sight distance as determined by the city engineer	n/a (per Perimeter Setback below)

	Perimeter Setback	n/a	n/a	20' and as may be required by SMC 18.35.070

	Setback between Structures*	n/a	n/a	10'

	Maximum Overall Lot Coverage	n/a	n/a	60%

* Additional building setback may be required per adopted International Building Code.

(Ord. 2019-006 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.35.060 PRD development standards.

A. Lot Size Variety. When a PRD subdivision has an average lot size of 4,000 square feet or less, a variety of lot sizes are desired to provide for market variety, clustering and creativity. The PRD design will include at least three different lot size ranges distributed throughout the PRD. The applicant must demonstrate to the review authority how this requirement has been met through the required written narrative.

PRDs may include lot averaging where no lot is less than the minimum (3,000 square feet) or more than the maximum (14,500 square feet) lot size requirements of this section and serve as a means to provide diversity and excellence in site design, protection of critical areas, provision of open space, recreational amenities and a range of housing choices and prices.

B. Alleys. If a unit abuts an alley, the garage will be accessed from the alley whenever possible. When parking is accessed from the rear of the lot, garages must be separated at least 25 feet from garage face to garage face in order to provide safe vehicle back-out room.

C. Privacy. Dwellings on lots without direct frontage on a public street should be situated to respect the privacy of abutting homes and to create usable private yard space for the dwelling(s). The review authority will have the ability/discretion during the preliminary review process to establish alternate setbacks in order to accomplish this objective.

D. Project Design. Site design for the entire project (including open space areas, recreational amenities, any attached units and/or condominium areas, and building architectural renderings) must be submitted in support of the proposed PRD during preliminary review. The renderings will include possible footprint locations and housing elevations or generally identified architectural style. Open space areas and preliminary location of active recreational amenities, trails, conceptual landscaping and other amenities will also be identified.

E. Individual Identity. Home individuality will be achieved through the following methods:

1. At building permit application submittal, the DCD director will review submitted building permits for compliance with this section, as well as substantial compliance with the conceptual architectural renderings required in subsection D of this section, Project Design.

2. If the subject site topography precludes compliance with any of the standards included within this chapter, the DCD director may modify those standards within this chapter if supported by written findings included in the staff report.

3. When lots front on a public street, the house will have windows and doors that face the street. Houses will have a distinct entry feature such as a porch or weather-covered entryway.

4. When lots front on a public street, garage doors must not be the dominant feature of the building facade. At least two of the following design elements will be provided on home designs that have the garage door projecting forward from the first-level living space:

a. Windows in gables or dormers above the garage doors.

b. Covered porches that emphasize the front entry.

c. Trellis in front of garage.

d. Additional front yard landscaping.

e. Variety of architectural elements incorporated into the front building facade design, such as knee braces, varied column types, window boxes, corbels, and raised panel garage doors with windows.

5. All projects should include a diversity of housing designs. The same building plans cannot be utilized on consecutive lots. “Flip-flopping” or reversing building plans does not satisfy this requirement and is not permitted on immediately adjacent lots.

6. Varied architectural design features (such as roofline articulation, color and materials) and home placements will be utilized to avoid appearance of a long row of identical homes.

F. Landscaping. A minimum 10-foot-wide landscaping strip will be provided along all public street frontage classified as a neighborhood collector to buffer the neighborhood from street traffic. The landscaping may be provided through a landscape easement on lots. If the landscaping is provided in an open space tract and permanently maintained by a homeowners’ association, it may contribute to the project’s open space requirement. No alteration to these landscaping areas may occur without the city’s written permission.

G. Nonresidential development must be oriented towards serving the residents of the PRD community in which it exists and meet all design review criteria for similar development that occurs outside of a PRD. This includes building design, landscaping and parking. Reductions to parking may be granted through the approval process if the applicant can demonstrate the nonresidential component will only serve the immediate PRD community and, therefore, not have the parking demand of a similar use outside of the PRD. (Ord. 2019-006 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.35.070 Planned residential development site design criteria.

A. When a PRD is proposed adjacent to an existing single-family residential zone which has been developed utilizing traditional city subdivision development standards and lot sizes (5,400 square feet or larger), the PRD will be designed and developed so as to be consistent with the single-family residential environment at its adjacent perimeter. The review authority may require the PRD to make provisions such as matching lot sizes, lot widths or house height and scale (or other provisions as deemed appropriate) for those lots that are located adjacent to the existing subdivision. Further, any proposed attached units will be clustered and located away from the established single-family subdivision.

B. When a PRD is proposed within or adjacent to an R4-8 zoning district (developed or un/underdeveloped), the perimeter of the PRD may be subject to screening provisions (this is in addition to subsection A of this section as applicable). The review authority may require the PRD to make such provisions as providing a six-foot sight-obscuring fence, a minimum 10-foot vegetated buffer (designated as an open space tract), or other provisions as deemed appropriate to provide adequate screening. No alteration to these landscaping areas may occur without the city’s written permission. (Ord. 2019-006 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.35.080 Residential types in residential low (R4-8) zoning district.

In addition to detached single-family housing units, attached dwellings, not to exceed fourplexes, may be allowed in the R4-8 zone through a PRD if the proposal meets the following criteria:

A. The overall site density does not exceed the zoning district maximum or the allowable density bonus (see SMC 18.35.110).

B. The attached units must be clustered and located within the interior of the project, along street frontages, or other areas which are appropriate and compatible with adjacent residential zones.

C. The attached units must be single-family in appearance.
[IMAGE]


Example of a triplex with a garage for each end unit, accessed from the side. The triplex design includes a number of techniques to provide architectural variety, with materials variety, multi-planed roofline, window treatments, and building modulation.

D. Architectural renderings of the attached units must be submitted with the application. (Ord. 2019-006 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.35.085 Residential types in the lifestyle/multifamily and EOA zoning districts.

A mix of detached single-family housing units, attached dwellings and apartment style buildings may be allowed in the LS/MF and EOA zones through a PRD if the proposal meets the following criteria:

A. The overall site density does not exceed the zoning district maximum or the allowable density bonus (see SMC 18.35.110).

B. The attached units and apartment style building(s) must be clustered and located within the interior of the project, along major street frontages, or other areas which are appropriate and compatible with adjacent land possessing or zoned to accommodate detached single-family development.

C. The attached units must be single-family in appearance (see SMC 18.35.080). This does not apply to apartment style building(s).

D. Architectural renderings of the attached units and apartment style building(s) must be submitted with the application. (Ord. 2019-006 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.35.090 Open space requirements.

Common open space and other appropriate beneficial features are required for all planned residential developments.

A. Open space is intended to benefit the occupants of the planned residential development and will be improved with recreational amenities.

B. The open space design will be appropriate to the size, natural features and topography of the subject site. The design will include open space that is accessible for all residents through pedestrian connections. Further, the open space area(s) will be visible to at least half of the home sites. This may require multiple open space areas.
[IMAGE]


Above: Walking trail, sitting area and stormwater pond used to create active open space.

C. Open space is required based on the average lot size in the proposed development. The greater the deviation from the R4-8 standard lot size, the greater the open space requirement. This relationship is intended to mitigate the effects of smaller lot sizes including reduced recreation space on private lots, reduced setbacks between structures and overall intensity of the development. The required open space is a percentage of the gross project area.


[IMAGE]


Above: Walking trail in area of retained vegetation used to create active open space.

D. The amount of open space required is set forth in Table 18.35.090.A. The determination of average lot size will be the sum of all individual lot square footage, divided by the total number of proposed lots.

Table 18.35.090.A – Amount of Open Space Required for PRD Subdivisions 

	Proposed Average Lot Size	Required Amount of Open Space (of gross project area)

	4,499 or smaller	20%

	4,500 – 5,499	15%

	5,500 – 6,499	10%

	6,500 – 7,499	5%

E. For PRDs where no individual lots are proposed (i.e., commonly held ownership/condominium), the amount of open space required is tied to the proposed intensity of the PRD, so that as a project increases the number of units, the open space amount also increases in order to compensate for the loss of private yards and privacy, as well as providing for light, air, space, and recreational amenities throughout the PRD design. The amount of open space required will be based upon the number of units as prescribed below:

Table 18.35.090.B – Amount of Open Space Required for Commonly Held Ownership (Condominium) Development 

	Number of Units	Required Amount of Open Space (of gross project area)

	1 – 40 units	5%

	41 – 80 units	10%

	81 – 110 units	15%

	111 or greater units	20%

F. For projects with a combination of individual lots and units on commonly held ownership, total amount of open space required is cumulative. The amount of open space required will be calculated using Tables 18.35.090.A and 18.35.090.B percentage requirements for each respective area (i.e., area(s) of common ownership tract percentage and remainder of site percentage). Each area’s acreage requirement will then be combined for the project’s total open space requirement.

G. Critical area protection areas and required buffers as defined and required by the city’s adopted critical areas ordinance may contribute to the above-required open space amount per the criteria below:

1. If less than 25 percent of the subject site contains protected critical areas and required buffers, then the critical area and protected buffer area may contribute up to 40 percent of the project’s required open space amount, credited on a square-foot-by-square-foot basis.

2. If 25 percent to 40 percent of the subject site contains protected critical areas and required buffers, then the critical area and protected buffer area may contribute up to 50 percent of the project’s required open space amount, credited on a square-foot-by-square-foot basis.

3. If 41 percent or greater of the subject site contains protected critical areas and required buffers, then the critical area and protected buffer area may contribute up to 60 percent of the project’s required open space amount, credited on a square-foot-by-square-foot basis.

H. Stormwater management facilities may contribute to a project’s required open space amount under the following circumstances:

1. For projects that utilize low impact development (LID)1 techniques for their stormwater management, the DCD director may consider on a case-by-case basis to include an area of the LID technique to contribute towards the project’s passive open space requirement. The director must find that the LID technique will beneficially contribute to a project’s open space and/or landscaping and can be maintained and operated as passive open space for this credit to occur.

2. For projects that utilize stormwater vaults, the top of the vault may be proposed to also serve as an active recreational amenity (e.g., sport court), if grade and landscaping provide for a usable area. In such cases, the area proposed to serve as the active amenity can therefore contribute toward the open space requirement.

I. Open space areas not proposed to be improved with recreational amenities or purposes will remain as natural vegetation or landscaped with groundcover, shrubs and trees consistent with the type and location of open space. Natural vegetation removal in preserved and approved open space will only be permitted for public safety reasons and after review and approval of the DCD director and a qualified professional arborist certified by either the International Society of Arboriculture or the National Arborist Association. Enhancement of critical area buffer vegetation will be as allowed and prescribed in Chapter 18.80 SMC, Critical and Environmentally Sensitive Areas Protection. (Ord. 2019-006 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.35.100 Amenities required.

A. Passive and active recreational amenities (owned and maintained by the homeowners) are required to be provided for all PRDs and must be located within the required open space areas.

B. Table 18.35.100 provides guidance on the type of passive and active amenities in proposed PRDs. Other amenities may be permitted at the discretion of the review authority if the applicant can demonstrate the unlisted amenity provides similar purpose and function as those amenities that are listed. At a minimum, the following must be provided:

1. PRDs with 51 or less units must provide at least two Group 1 amenities.

2. PRDs with 52 to 80 units must provide one Group 1 amenity and one Group 2 amenity.

3. PRDs with 81 to 110 units must provide two Group 1 amenities and two Group 2 amenities.

4. PRDs with 111 units or more must provide three Group 1 amenities and two Group 2 amenities.

Table 18.35.100 – Types of Passive and Active Recreational Amenities  

	(below amenities can be mixed and matched as long as required number from each group is met)

	Passive	Active

	Group 1 Amenities	Group 1 Amenities

	Picnic areas with improved seating area and at least 2 picnic tables, in conjunction with an open play area	Multipurpose sport court or other type of sport court (pickleball, shuffleboard, etc.)

	Passive seating areas connected by walking path in a length proportionate to the size of the project	Basketball court (minimum 1/2 court)

	Walking path in a length proportionate to the size of the project	Tennis court (minimum 1 standard size)

	Arboretum/gardens with interpretive trail	Playground (minimum 0.25 acre) with large toy

	Any other comparable passive recreation use as approved by the review authority	Any other comparable active recreation use as approved by the review authority

	Group 2 Amenities	Group 2 Amenities

	Pond/fountain/waterfall with seating for no less than 10 persons	Outdoor exercise circuit with a trail in a length proportionate to the size of the project

	Community gardens with improved soils, fencing and sheds	Clubhouse including gathering space for intended residents and kitchen facilities

	Gazebo connected to gardens or walking paths in a length proportionate to the size of the project	Large picnic area with covered shelter and multifamily barbecue

	Nature interpretive areas/viewing areas with trail and educational signage	Swimming pool and spa

	Any other comparable passive recreation use as approved by the review authority	Any other comparable active recreation use as approved by the review authority


[IMAGE]


Above: Example of an active recreational feature (children’s play area) and passive feature (picnic table and bench).


[IMAGE]


Above: Example of a passive recreational feature (picnic shelter) connected to an active recreational feature (trail system).

C. The location of the recreational amenities will be distributed throughout the PRD for use by all residents unless clustering related amenities will result in recreational opportunities which contribute to the project’s overall recreational plan and provisions (e.g., a playfield located adjacent to a clubhouse, or walking paths and gazebo in conjunction with viewing areas).

D. All PRD amenity design will provide, when feasible, pedestrian linkages and connectivity between adjacent properties. (Ord. 2019-006 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.35.110 Residential density bonus incentives.

The applicant may request an increase in the density permitted by the underlying zoning district in exchange for public benefits through land dedications and facility improvements to help achieve comprehensive plan goals of creation of quality neighborhoods, affordable housing, public facility acquisition and improvement, low impact development techniques, environmentally responsible design, and pedestrian and walkability improvements.

A. The density incentive is expressed as additional bonus dwelling units earned per amount of public benefit provided. When a range is specified, the additional bonus dwelling units will be determined by the DCD director during project review, using the criteria established in Table 18.35.110 for those public benefits.

B. Bonus dwelling units may be earned through any combination from Table 18.35.110; however, bonus units cannot exceed 25 percent increase above maximum density allowed in the underlying zoning district.

C. When bonus dwelling units are proposed, a PRD cannot also include accessory dwelling units within the proposed project.

Table 18.35.110 – Public Benefit Incentives/Residential Density Bonus  

	Benefit	Density Incentive

	Affordable Housing	10 – 25% increase through development agreement consistent with RCW 36.70A.540.

	Public Facilities*

(public buildings/facilities, trails, parks, and street right-of-way)	 

	Dedications:	 

	Dedication of land: for public buildings and facilities (such as schools, utilities); public park (consistent with city’s park capital facility plan); public trails; or street right-of-way (in addition to that required by project). Off-site dedications may be considered when acquired by the applicant and dedicated to the city.	5 – 12% increase above maximum density allowed in underlying zoning district. Range is dependent upon priority and amount of usable acres dedicated.

	Improvements:	 

	Improvement to city or other agency standards of public buildings and facilities; public parks; public trails and street right-of-way.	5 – 15% increase above maximum density allowed in underlying zoning district. Range is dependent upon priority, amount and cost of facility improvement.

	Inclusion of a number of visible low impact development (LID) measures in project design and stormwater facility construction.	7% increase above maximum density allowed in underlying zoning district.

	Project Design	 

	Preservation of substantial vegetation above the required open space amounts. No increase in permitted density will be permitted for sites that have been cleared of evergreen trees and native understory within 5 years prior to the date of application. (Density increases granted which were based upon preservation of existing trees will be forfeited if such trees are removed between time of preliminary plat approval and issuance of building permits.)	5% increase above maximum density allowed in underlying zoning district.

	Retention or creation of a perimeter buffer minimum of 50' in width, composed of existing trees and vegetation, additional plantings, and/or installation of fencing or landscaping.	1 bonus unit per 250 lineal feet of perimeter buffer retained, enhanced or created.

	Enhancement of existing native vegetation, proposed through a landscape plan, and approved by the DCD director and certified arborist or other persons with credentialed expertise.	5% increase above maximum density allowed in underlying zoning district.

	Residential Home Design	 

	Inclusion in home design of at least three multi-generational or fully accessible elements, including but not limited to having one entrance without step(s); master bedroom on main floor; 33" doors into bathroom; or other home design elements that can be demonstrated to easily convert into being accessible under the provisions of Americans with Disability Act (ADA).	5% increase above maximum density allowed in the underlying zoning district when multi-generational elements (as listed in this section) are incorporated into home design; 10% increase above maximum density allowed when home design is fully functional under ADA provisions. Minimum 7% of the pre-density bonus units must be provided to utilize the density.

	Home design in which the dwelling units are constructed with Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) certification or equivalent standard.	10% increase above maximum density allowed in underlying zoning district when minimum 7% of the pre-density bonus units are designed with LEED certification or equivalent standard.

	Pedestrian Connections and Walkability*	 

	Construction of an identified pedestrian/bicycle deficiency** (per city of Sequim capital improvement plan). Improvements may consist of paved shoulder, sidewalk or detached path or walkway depending on adjoining conditions.	5 – 10% increase above maximum density allowed in underlying zoning district. Range dependent on priority, length and cost of improvement.

* Dedication of land and construction of improvements under this section are voluntary by the developer and are undertaken for the purpose of achieving a density incentive. For that reason, developers who elect to dedicate land or construct improvements under this section will not be entitled to credit against park or transportation impact fees for the value of such land or improvements.

** In addition to what may be required as part of project review and approval.

(Ord. 2019-006 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.35.130 Submittal requirements.

All applications will be accompanied with complete site plans and subdivision plans if creating lots, drawn to one-inch-to-100-foot scale (other scales may be acceptable depending on the size of the project) and produced in such a way as to clearly indicate compliance with all applicable requirements, and will include the following. At least one sheet will show the proposed project in its entirety (drawn at its appropriate scale).

A. A vicinity map showing the location of the property and surrounding properties. A copy of assessor’s quarter section map may be used to identify the site.

B. Dimensions and orientation of the subject parcel.

C. Location of existing natural features and structures, including: (1) significant stands of trees and trees to be retained (species must be identified; dominant species for stands); (2) topography including identification of geologic hazard areas; (3) any known cultural assets; (4) streams, wetlands and other critical areas or environmental features; (5) aerial photography, if available, of subject site; (6) site and soils analysis for suitability of appropriate low impact development stormwater management facilities; and (7) identification of any adjacent off-site natural features which may have an impact on the subject site, as well as any existing or proposed open space, trail linkages or road connections.

D. Location of proposed lots, building footprints, and open space numbered as open space tracts.

E. Location of walls and fences, indication of their height and construction materials.

F. Elevation of the site at two-foot contour intervals for grades zero to 10 percent and at five-foot contour intervals for grades more than 10 percent.

G. Streets adjacent to, surrounding or intended to serve the property; curb cuts and internal pedestrian and vehicular traffic circulation routes.

H. Existing and proposed exterior lighting.

I. Landscape plan depicting the location and configuration of overall site landscaping, including protected critical areas.

J. Location and layout of off-street parking, on-street parking, and site circulation.

K. Preliminary utility plan depicting the location of utility and drainage facilities and related tracts or easements.

L. Site design for the entire project, including open space areas, pedestrian walkways and connections, recreational amenity details, outdoor features, building footprints and preliminary building elevations and/or general proposed architectural style.

M. Architectural elevations/renderings for any proposed attached unit structures.

N. Environmental checklist or, if required, environmental impact statement.

O. Preliminary draft of restrictive covenants.

P. Other architectural or engineering data which may be necessary to determine compliance with applicable regulations including any appropriate site design guidelines.

Q. Other information may be required as identified at the pre-application conference and/or application form.

R. A written statement explaining how the proposed PRD meets the purpose and findings of this chapter. (Ord. 2019-006 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.35.140 Criteria for approval.

In approving a planned residential development, the review authority must find that the proposal meets all of the following criteria:

A. The proposal, through its design and submitted supporting documents, has clearly demonstrated it meets the stated purposes of this chapter.

B. The proposal complies with all of the applicable provisions of this title, except those provisions from which deviation has been allowed under this chapter and SMC Title 17.

C. The proposal provides overall site design features through its conceptual architectural renderings for the entire project, and has included open space areas, pedestrian walkways and connections, recreational amenities, and outdoor features.

D. The proposal would not impair the integrity and character of the zoning district in which it is to be located.

E. The site is physically suited for the type and intensity of land use(s) being proposed.

F. The proposal would be compatible with existing and future land uses within the general area in which the proposal is to be located by providing screening or buffering between parcels and providing consistency between any existing single-family subdivisions and the proposal.

G. The proposal would preserve natural features and critical areas and would preserve and incorporate existing significant stands of trees (SMC 18.24.032(C)(2)) within the project design as much as possible.

H. There are adequate provisions for water, sanitary sewer, and public utilities (electric, gas, phone) and services to ensure that the proposal would not be detrimental to public health and safety.

I. There will be adequate provisions for public access to serve the subject proposal, as well as providing for neighborhood connectivity as appropriate and as required by the city.

J. The proposal is consistent with the comprehensive plan and the city’s adopted development standards.

K. There will not be significant unmitigated harmful effects upon environmental quality and natural resources.

L. The proposed location, size and design of the proposal would not be detrimental to the public interests, health, safety or welfare of the city. (Ord. 2019-006 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.35.150 Final approval.

A. Within five years following the approval of the planned residential development, the applicant will file with the city engineer a final plat or, if no subdivision is occurring, a final site development plan for review by the review authority. If the review authority finds that the final plat or final site development plan is consistent with the PRD as approved, and that all conditions of the development approval have been satisfied, the review authority will approve the final plat or final site development plan. The review authority may approve the final plat or final site development plan in phases if phasing is included in the original application and each phase does not depend on elements that will be built in another phase. Each phase must be able to stand on its own as if it was a separate project.

B. If the review authority finds evidence of a significant deviation from the original approved PRD, the review authority will advise the applicant to submit an application for amendment of the preliminary plan. An amendment will be considered in the same procedural manner as an original application and the amendments will be heard by the review authority of the initial application.

C. Upon request by the applicant and for demonstrated appropriate reasons, the review authority may approve, at its discretion, adequate financial guarantees of compliance with the final plat or final development plan consistent with Chapter 17.64 SMC.

D. A final draft of covenants, conditions and restrictions (CCRs) will include provisions that the project’s homeowners’ association will own, maintain and enforce all open space tracts, perimeter buffers, fences, recreational amenities, private roads, parking bays, and all other applicable project condition(s) regarding ownership, maintenance and enforcement of all commonly owned elements. Further, the face of the final plat or final development plan must include statement(s) that the project’s homeowners’ association will own, maintain and enforce all open space tracts, perimeter buffers, fences, recreational amenities, private roads, parking bays, and all other commonly owned elements. The city will not join the homeowners’ association as enforcers of the project’s CCRs nor will the city maintain private roads, alleys and other privately owned infrastructure and/or open space or recreational amenities.

E. A final draft of the project’s CCRs and face of the final plat or final development plan must include the following statement:

Open space areas not proposed to be improved with recreational amenities or purposes will remain as natural vegetation or appropriately landscaped. Removal of preserved and approved open space in natural vegetation will only be permitted for public safety reasons and upon review and approval of the DCD Director and a certified arborist or other expert in urban forestry. Enhancement of critical area buffer vegetation will be as allowed and prescribed in SMC 18.80, Critical Areas.

(Ord. 2019-006 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.35.160 Appeals.

The applicant or any interested person may appeal the decision of the review authority as set forth in Chapter 20.01 SMC, Administration of Land Use and Zoning Applications and Development Regulations. (Ord. 2019-006 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.35.170 Extension of time.

A. During City Review of PRD Application.

1. An application found to be technically complete under SMC Title 17 will be deemed null and void if the applicant fails to submit additional information within 180 days of the director’s or hearing examiner’s written request; further, a technically complete application will be deemed null and void if the application has been on hold a combined total of 180 days. If the additional information has not been submitted and accepted by the city, the application will be closed and a new application will be required to be submitted.

2. A technically complete application which has been on hold for a total of 180 days may request one 180-day extension. The extension will be granted if all of the following are met:

a. The applicant requests such an extension in writing no less than 30 days prior to the expiration of the initial 180-day time period. Verbal requests will not be accepted.

b. The director or hearing examiner finds in writing that unusual circumstances beyond the applicant’s control or other good cause has prevented them from providing the additional information within the initial 180-day time period.

c. The applicant demonstrates the likelihood that the requested information will be provided to the city within the additional 180-day time period.

d. The DCD director will not grant more than one extension.

If at the end of the 180-day extension, the additional information has not been submitted and accepted by the city, the application will be closed and a new application will be required to be submitted.

B. After City Permit Approval. Upon written request by the property owner filed no less than 30 days prior to the date of permit expiration, the DCD director may grant an extension of time up to but not exceeding one year. Any extensions of time will be based upon finding:

1. The PRD permit is compliant with all applicable development codes at the time of the extension request.

2. There has been no material change of circumstances applicable to the property since project permit approval.

3. The applicant must provide good cause for the delay, and demonstrate likelihood that the permit will be commenced within the additional year.

4. The DCD director will not grant more than one extension. (Ord. 2019-006 § 1 (Exh. A))

1

“Low impact development best management practices” means distributed stormwater management practices, integrated into a project design, that emphasize pre-disturbance hydrologic processes of infiltration, filtration, storage, evaporation and transpiration. LID BMPs include, but are not limited to, bioretention, rain gardens, permeable pavements, roof downspout controls, dispersion, soil quality and depth, vegetated roofs, minimum excavation foundations, and water reuse. 


Chapter 18.40 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS

(Repealed by Ord. 2012-012)


Chapter 18.44 BULK AND DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS

Sections:

18.44.010    Purpose.

18.44.020    Exceptions.

18.44.030    Sight clearance.

18.44.040    Repealed.

18.44.060    Repealed.


18.44.010 Purpose.

In recognition of the varied topography and geographical relationships within the city and with consideration for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens, bulk, dimensional and general requirements for the zoning districts are required as a necessary part of the development and use of land. All permitted uses and conditional uses, except as indicated by Chapter 18.56 SMC, Essential Public Facilities and Special Property Uses, must comply with the requirements listed in zone Tables 18.20.040 through 18.20.150 of the SMC. (Ord. 2017-012 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2006-016 § 5; Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


18.44.020 Exceptions. 

The bulk, dimensional and general requirements found in SMC zone Tables 18.20.040 through 18.20.150 apply to specifically permitted and conditional uses, excepting the following:

A. The maximum building heights provided in SMC zone Tables 18.20.040 through 18.20.150 do not apply to towers and antennas as set forth in Chapter 18.61 SMC; provided, that towers and antennas are set back from all exterior property lines at a minimum ratio of one foot of setback for every three feet of vertical height as measured from grade.

B. Antennas, satellite dishes, or other communication devices cannot be located in the front setback area.

C. All structures excepting fences, hedges, and berms must not be established within the front setback area.

D. Maximum building height in zones listed in zone Tables 18.20.040 through 18.20.150 may be exceeded only under the following exceptions:

1. Elevator towers, HVAC equipment, solar and wind energy facilities, building maintenance equipment, and communications antennas or dishes may exceed the height limit of the zone or the greatest height of the finished roof, whichever is less, by up to 12 feet; provided, that HVAC equipment and screening and antennas/dishes must be set back from the roof perimeter a distance equal to the height of these features above the finished roof; and

2. One incidental roof and its supports covering not more than the lesser of 256 square feet or five percent of the total roof area and standing not more than 12 feet high over a single, fully open rooftop patio is permitted; provided, that the roof covering cannot be more than 48 inches high in cross section at any point, the covering structure cannot be more than 20 feet in any dimension, and the roof design must be consistent with the building architecture in material and design. (Ord. 2017-012 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2016-015 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 2013-008 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2012-018 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B. Formerly 18.44.030)


18.44.030 Sight clearance.

All corners subject to yard requirements must maintain, for safety purposes, a triangular area in which no physical obstruction, such as a structure, fence, tree or shrub higher than 42 inches above grade will be permitted. Such triangular area must have one angle formed by the front lot line and the side lot line separating the lot from the side street, the length of which lot line sides of the triangle will be 15 feet. The third side of the triangle will be a line connecting the two lot lines at the 15-foot point on each. (Ord. 2017-012 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B. Formerly 18.44.050)


18.44.040 Setbacks, zero lot line and minimum lot width.

Repealed by Ord. 2017-012. (Ord. 2006-016 § 5; Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


18.44.060 Road classifications.

Repealed by Ord. 2016-007. (Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


Chapter 18.46 LANDSCAPING STANDARDS*

(Reserved)

*Code reviser’s note: Ordinance No. 2000-003, available in the office of the city clerk, provides interim landscaping standards.


Chapter 18.48 OFF-STREET PARKING

Sections:

18.48.010    Intent and purpose.

18.48.020    Application.

18.48.030    General provisions.

18.48.040    Minimum parking space and lot dimensions.

18.48.050    Minimum number of spaces required.

18.48.060    Minimum loading space requirements.

18.48.070    Modified calculations for required on-site parking spaces.

18.48.080    Parking lot location, construction and design.

18.48.090    Access and driveway approach regulations from streets and alleys.

18.48.100    Parking and storage of recreational vehicles, boats and trailers on residential property.

18.48.110    Parking of commercial vehicles in residential zones.

18.48.120    Commercial storage of vehicles.

18.48.130    –

18.48.145    Repealed.


18.48.010 Intent and purpose.

The intent and purpose of these off-street parking regulations is to provide for the orderly establishment of parking opportunities within the community while maintaining the general welfare, safety and attractiveness for the residents and users of the parking facilities. For the purposes of this chapter recreational vehicle shall refer to all motor homes, campers, utility trailers, living trailers, boats and boat trailers and similar vehicles. On-street parking and the use of the public right-of-way is regulated by SMC Title 10, Vehicles and Traffic. (Ord. 2003-017 § 1)


18.48.020 Application.

A. The provision of required off-street parking spaces, covered spaces, drive-through spaces, loading spaces, handicapped-accessible spaces, bicycle spaces and parking lots constructed to the standards established by this code, except as otherwise allowed by this chapter, shall apply to the following:

1. New nonresidential land use and/or the construction of new nonresidential buildings.

2. New construction where the floor area or outdoor use area proposed for expansion of an existing nonresidential land use increases the parking demand and the required number of parking spaces.

3. A change in use of an existing residential property that results in an intensification of the land use relative to parking demand and the required number of parking spaces.

4. Establishment or construction of a new residential dwelling unit or expansion of a residential unit by more than 50 percent of the original floor area.

B. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for the use of any building or site nor a building or site improvement permit issued for the erection or alteration of any building or site unless such use or building complies with the regulations of this section. This shall not be interpreted to interfere with the continued use of a legally nonconforming site or building as provided for in this chapter.

C. Except as otherwise required by this chapter existing legal nonconforming parking facilities may remain and be maintained as established unless there is a danger to the public health, safety or welfare.

1. Except as otherwise specifically required by this chapter for legal nonconforming uses or other city permits, improvements, repair or maintenance to existing legal nonconforming parking facilities, i.e., landscaping, drainage, surface seal coat, slurry coat or asphalt overlay of existing paved portions of parking lot, and re-striping are not governed by this chapter; provided, that work neither requires nor provides for any additional access to city streets or alleys.

2. Any expansion of existing legal nonconforming parking lots shall require that the expanded portion conform to the provisions of this chapter.

3. Voluntary improvements to legal nonconforming uses and/or expansion of legal nonconforming uses shall not be required to comply with the minimum number of spaces required.

4. The application of this chapter to the expansion of spaces provided for a nonconforming use that is triggered due to a change of use shall only be to the difference between that required for the existing use and the new use.

D. Requirements for uses not specifically listed in this chapter shall be determined by the director of the department of community development, based on the requirements of comparable uses and upon the particular characteristics of the use and/or other provisions of this chapter. 

E. The numbers and dimensions of parking and loading spaces required by this chapter shall be considered the minimum required, unless otherwise provided, and additional parking may be required based on the nature of the use and anticipated demand. On-street parking shall not be counted toward compliance with the minimum number of spaces required except in the town center sub-area (SMC 18.48.130). (Ord. 2011-017 § 2; Ord. 2003-017 § 1)


18.48.030 General provisions.

A. All parking spaces, loading spaces and parking lots shall be maintained and kept available for their intended use and vehicle size and shall not be discontinued, reduced, or altered in any way without approval of the department of community development and in compliance with the requirements and standards of this chapter.

B. All required guest, ADA, loading, compact, or other restricted spaces shall be designated as such and restricted to such use.

C. No repair work or servicing of vehicles shall be conducted on designated parking areas.

D. Required fractional spaces shall be counted as a space.

E. Off-street parking and parking lots constructed, even when not required by this chapter, shall be constructed and maintained in compliance with the development and use standards of this chapter.

F. No property shall be used for the sale of more than one vehicle, or the parking and/or storage of a vehicle except as in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Except as otherwise noted, all vehicles shall be provided with a parking surface in compliance with the design and development standards for parking spaces and parking lots in this chapter.

G. All parking lot construction/improvements/expansions, drainage, landscaping and striping plans of existing parking lots shall be approved by the department of community development and public works department for compliance with the requirements of this chapter and title. 

H. Grading and paving of parking lots shall be in compliance with the permits and standards required in SMC Title 15, Buildings and Construction, and with the stormwater management requirements of the city of Sequim. All associated construction within a public right-of-way, including driveway approach construction and landscaping, requires the approval of an encroachment and access permit from the public works department, with associated bonding or other surety for completion of the work and compliance with all adopted traffic control and safety regulations and procedures. (Ord. 2011-017 § 1; Ord. 2003-017 § 1)


18.48.040 Minimum parking space and lot dimensions.

	A. Parking Stall Size:	 

	1. Residential 	9 feet by 19 feet.

	2. Commercial	9 feet by 19 feet.

	3. Compact	8 feet by 15 feet.

	4. *ADA Accessible	Van: 8 feet by 19 feet plus 8-foot unloading area.

Car: 8 feet by 19 feet plus 5-foot unloading area.

	5. RV	10 feet by 30 feet.

	6. Parallel	8 feet by 23 feet.

	7. Drive-through	8 feet by 20 feet.

	8. Diagonal	30, 45 and 60-degree parking space sizes are identified in SMC 18.48.040(B).

	*    Dimensions may not be less than state-adopted standards. ADA spaces shall be provided at one space/25 spaces. Unloading area may be on either side of parking stall.

B. Table for standard size parking angles (does not include two-foot allowance for overhang or interlock reduction).

	A	B	C	D	E

	0	8′	8′	23′	12′

	30	9′	17′	18′	12′

	45	9′	19′	12.7′	14′

	60	9′	20.5′	10.4′	15′

	90	9′	19′	 9′	24′

	A = Parking angle

B = Stall width

C = Stall depth from curb to drive aisle

D = Width at curb

E = Aisle width, one-way

C. Backup space shall be 24 feet except for diagonal spaces accessed by a one-way drive aisle. 

D. Drive aisles from which no parking is directly accessed shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width for two-way and 12 feet in width for one-way.

E. There shall be a two-foot overhang allowance into landscaping, hardscape buffers or sidewalk areas; provided, that the sidewalk maintains a width of no less than five feet. (Ord. 2003-017 § 1)


18.48.050 Minimum number of spaces required.

A. Off-street parking ratios expressed as the number of spaces per square feet means net square footage. Net square footage is calculated as 85 percent of the gross square footage of the structure. Public parking spaces, either on street or in public parking lots, shall not be included in parking calculations. The applicability of parking on private streets shall be determined during project approval.

B. The required number of parking spaces for each type of land use shall be as stipulated below, except as the requirements may be modified or installation phased by other sections of this chapter including SMC 18.48.070, Modified calculations for required on-site parking spaces, and for uses within the town center sub-area:

1. Residential:

a. Single-family detached/attached, duplexes, triplexes and fourplexes: two spaces/unit.

b. Multifamily (five or more units): one and one-half spaces/unit.

c. Mobile home parks: two spaces/unit.

d. Group facilities: one space/three beds.

2. Commercial (except for properties located in the downtown sub-area):

a. Retail: one space/250 square feet minimum. 

b. Restaurants: one space/table; plus one space/four stools; plus one space/ employee based on largest shift.

c. Bank and professional office (except medical): one space/300 square feet.

d. Medical office: one space/200 square feet.

e. Gyms/fitness centers: one space/200 square feet. 

f. Health club: one space/200 square feet.

g. Hotels and motels: one space/unit plus one employee space for each employee working more than six hours per day per 10 units, plus one-half of the parking required for accessory uses by type.

h. Outdoor product display areas: one space/1,000 square feet of display or sales area. Will require temporary activity permit.

i. Electric vehicle infrastructure – battery exchange station and rapid charging station only: one parking space per employee and 0.65 spaces per rapid charging station space (for customers waiting to use rapid charging station [required only if the use is the primary use on the property]).

3. Industrial:

a. Manufacturing: one space/750 square feet.

b. Warehousing: one space/1,500 square feet up to 10,000 square feet and one space/2,000 square feet over 10,000 square feet.

c. Research and development: one space/500 square feet.

d. In addition to above industrial uses, employed drivers taking vehicles off site for delivery or construction shall provide one space/driver.

e. Office space in industrial uses: one space/250 square feet.

4. Public and semi-public uses including public schools, parks and athletic facilities: While the exact number of spaces shall be determined through the special use permit process, the following minimums shall apply:

a. Hospitals and convalescent care facilities: one space/longer-term care bed and one space for each 200 square feet of outpatient area.

b. Schools: one space/classroom; plus one space/250 square feet of office area; plus one space/100 square feet of kitchen area; plus one guest space/five required spaces; plus 10 spaces/classroom for high schools and colleges.

c. Churches: one space/three seats in the largest assembly area.

d. Theaters: one space/three seats.

e. Library: one space/300 square feet.

f. Museum and art gallery: one space/500 square feet.

g. Clubs and lodges: one space/two seats.

h. Sports facilities/stadiums: one space/three seats.

i. Technical school: one space/100 square feet.

j. Auditoriums: one space/three seats.

k. Community and recreation centers: one space/200 square feet.

5. For unnamed uses, the number of spaces required may be based on a similar listed use or on a study provided by a recognized professional in the area of parking and trip demand.

6. For projects that combine a mix of uses, the requirement shall be calculated by the addition of the total required for each use area by square footage; the provisions for shared parking in this chapter may be applied.

7. Compact spaces:

a. Up to 20 percent of the number of required spaces over 20 may be compact.

b. Compact spaces shall be clearly designated. (Ord. 2018-006 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2014-011 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 2012-002 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 2003-017 § 1)


18.48.060 Minimum loading space requirements.

A. Size. Loading space sizes shall be dimensioned to accommodate the type of vehicle intended for use; however, the following minimums shall apply where loading spaces are required:

1. Type A Space equals 10 feet by 30 feet with 15 feet vertical clearance.

2. Type B Space equals 12 feet by 40 feet with 15 feet vertical clearance.

B. Location. Loading spaces shall be adjacent to the doors they serve and be separated from parking spaces and not interfere with parking and pedestrian circulation.

C. Numbers. In addition to the minimums listed below, each loading door shall have an associated loading space. All loading spaces shall be designated with striping.

	Type of use	Floor area	Number of spaces required

	Commercial	0 – 10,000

 

10,001 – 20,000

Over 20,000	Not required

1 Type A

1 Type B

	Industrial	0 – 5,000

5,001 – 15,000

15,001 – 50,000

Over 50,000	1 Type A

1 Type B

2 Type B

3 Type B

	Public	As required by use permit.

(Ord. 2003-017 § 1)


18.48.070 Modified calculations for required on-site parking spaces.

In addition to the following, see SMC 18.48.080(B), Parking lot location, regarding the use of off-site parking.

A. Common Use of Facilities. Common parking areas may be shared for independent uses where the total number of spaces provided equals the sum of that required for the individual uses. Where there is assurance, such as a document recorded to run with the land, the parking will always be accessible to all parties. ADA accessible parking requirements shall be based on the total number of spaces provided.

B. Joint Use of Facilities. A minor conditional use permit may be issued for joint use of parking facilities, i.e., where the same parking spaces are used by different uses at different times, under the following conditions:

1. Up to 50 percent of the parking required for a use that normally operates in the daytime may be credited to a use that normally operates at night or vice versa.

2. Up to 100 percent of the parking required for a church or school may be credited to another use during periods when the church or school is not active.

3. The use for which the joint use is requested must be located within 600 feet of the parking facility.

4. The applicant shall provide evidence that such joint use will not create a conflict or overlapping use of the parking facility.

5. A written agreement shall be recorded with the Clallam County auditor to run with the land that ensures the parking facility will be available for as long as the joint use is required.

C. Parking Studies. An applicant may request a modification, to be allowed by the approval body, to the minimum number of parking or loading spaces required, by providing a study from a qualified professional that substantiates that parking demand can be met with a reduced requirement due to such factors as drive-by trip capture, hours of operation, or alternative transportation availability for the customer base.

D. Transit-Oriented Development. Transit-oriented developments, approved as a planned unit development, or commercial uses, approved under the provisions of a binding site plan, may propose reduced parking requirements in lieu of provisions for alternate modes of transportation. (Ord. 2003-017 § 1)


18.48.080 Parking lot location, construction and design.

A. General Criteria. All parking lots and spaces constructed shall comply with the following unless specifically altered by some other provision of the Sequim Municipal Code, design guidelines or as modified where allowed in approval of a use permit.

1. Parking lots and spaces shall be constructed of either asphalt concrete (AC) or Portland cement concrete (PCC) or low impact development strategies where feasible and practicable. 

2. Comply with the city of Sequim requirements for grading, drainage and stormwater management.

3. Provide adequate directional signs.

4. Provide for safe pedestrian access to building and public sidewalks.

5. Provide for through circulation, limiting the need for backup maneuvers.

6. Drive-through queues shall be designed so that overflow will not interfere with public streets or main drive aisles in shopping centers.

7. All parking lots shall comply with Washington State regulations relative to access by persons with disabilities.

8. No parking space shall obstruct a doorway or exit from a structure.

9. Parking stalls shall be clear of all obstructions that limit the use thereof.

10. A parking space shall not be located so as to cause a visual obstruction.

11. Loading spaces shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicle circulation.

12. Wheel stops shall be provided in the form of continuous curbs or sidewalk edges. Freestanding wheel stops shall not be permitted except with the approval of the director of the department of community development. 

13. Water drainage to and from the parking lot shall not cross sidewalks.

14. Parking lots shall be designed to permit on-site turn-around and to permit vehicles to enter and exit the site in a forward motion.

15. All fire lanes, compact parking spaces, ADA accessible spaces, and loading areas and turn-around areas shall be appropriately marked.

16. Drive-Through Lanes. Drive-through queuing lanes shall accommodate a minimum of four passenger vehicles and shall not obstruct the free flow of vehicle circulation loading areas or pedestrian access. They shall be a minimum of 10 feet in width. 

B. Location.

1. Required parking spaces may be located off site with concurrence of the body approving the parking lot if a document is recorded to ensure the continued availability of the spaces for the life of the use or until such time as other spaces are made available, they comply with the development standards of this code and do not reduce the required number of spaces available for the use located on the off-site property.

2. The location requirements for this section may be altered through approval of a use permit or binding site plan where the intention of the code for user convenience is met and safe and direct pedestrian pathways are provided from parking to the use.

C. Landscaping.

1. Parking spaces shall be separated from public sidewalks with landscaped planters that shall be a minimum of 10 feet when associated with a parking lot of 50 spaces or greater.

2. A minimum five-foot-wide planter or raised PCC or AC buffer shall separate parking spaces from on-site sidewalks, poles, signs, fences, and buildings.

3. For every 30 adjacent parking spaces, landscape areas shall be provided. These areas may be coordinated with parking lot illumination, stormwater conveyance areas, or other amenities.

4. Landscaped areas shall be separated from paving by a raised concrete curb. Curb cuts are permitted when associated with stormwater conveyance.

5. There shall be one tree for each 10 parking spaces in a lot.

6. Parking lot landscape areas shall comply with any adopted city landscape and irrigation regulations.

7. Separate parking lots with landscape and/or hardscape buffers from public sidewalks and buildings. Buffers should be a minimum of five feet in width. Buffers adjacent to the public right-of-way, except for alleys, shall be landscaped and have 10 feet minimum width for parking lots with more than 50 spaces.

8. Landscaping shall not exceed three feet in height within an intersection view triangle.

9. At the discretion of the director of the department of community development, incorporation of low impact development strategies may substitute for required spaces. This shall not be in lieu of required landscaping.

D. Lighting.

1. Provide adequate lighting for both vehicle and pedestrian circulation and public safety.

2. Freestanding parking lot luminaires shall be located in landscaped islands or otherwise separated from parked or moving vehicles at a maximum height of 25 feet and shall not allow direct light or glare onto adjacent properties. For those parking lots that are adjacent to residentially zoned property, the maximum height of light posts shall not exceed 18 feet. 

3. Wall and canopy lighting shall be screened to keep direct light and glare from spilling off the site.

4. All lighting shall meet Washington State Energy Codes.

E. Striping.

1. Non-single-family, duplex and triplex parking spaces shall be designated by a four-inch-wide white painted stripe.

2. Directional arrows shall be provided on all drive aisles.

3. Fire lanes and no-parking areas shall be clearly designated.

F. Deviations to City of Sequim Standards for Design of Parking Facilities. Administrative approval may be given for deviations to application of the standards of this section for the expansion or improvement of existing parking lots where there is no threat to public safety. (Ord. 2012-012 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-017 § 2; Ord. 2003-017 § 1)


18.48.090 Access and driveway approach regulations from streets and alleys.

The number, size and location of driveway access to public streets and alleys shall be limited as follows:

A. General.

1. Minimum 30-foot separation from back of curb return at intersections.

2. In lieu of the standards below, major development may use divided driveways or curb returns in lieu of driveway approaches as necessary to accommodate traffic and turning movements.

3. Driveway approach shall be clearly defined through use of landscaping.

4. Driveways into commercial, industrial or multifamily residential projects shall be aligned with existing or future driveways on the opposite side of the street where left turns are allowed. They may be minimally offset where no left turn conflict is created; otherwise there shall be a minimum of 200 feet of separation to allow for opposing left turn lanes.

5. Service, one-way restricted, or other special situation drive approaches shall be clearly designated.

B. Commercial and Industrial Developments.

1. Limit width to 30 feet or one-half width of frontage, whichever is less.

2. Use a four-foot-wide flare approach.

3. Design approach for weight of trucks.

4. Avoid cross traffic near entrance.

5. Allow vehicles to fully enter site before potential obstruction from cross traffic or backups.

6. Define location with landscaping.

7. Provide for safe pedestrian crossing of driveways.

C. Residential.

1. Single-Family/Duplex/Triplex.

a. Limit to one access frontage.

b. Limit driveway access to arterials or major collectors.

c. Maximum 20-foot width or one-half of lot width, whichever is less.

d. Use two-foot flares at approach.

2. Multifamily.

a. No access to spaces directly from street.

b. Access shall be to lowest street category for corner lots. (Ord. 2003-017 § 1)


18.48.100 Parking and storage of recreational vehicles, boats and trailers on residential property.

See also Chapters 10.12, 10.13 and 10.14 SMC. Noncommercial recreational vehicles, trailers and boats and trailers may be parked and stored on residential property only in conformance with the following conditions:

A. May not be utilized as a residence unless a permit has been obtained for a period of not to exceed seven calendar days. A maximum of four permits may be obtained in any calendar year.

B. In mobile home parks, planned unit developments and apartment complexes:

1. Recreational vehicles may not be parked in spaces provided for passenger vehicle parking.

2. Recreational vehicles, trailers and boats and trailers shall be parked and/or stored as provided for in the development approval of the project.

C. For single-family detached houses, duplexes and triplexes, off-street parking is allowed so long as they do not block pedestrian traffic on the sidewalks and only as set forth in this subsection.

1. Front yard: No such vehicle shall be parked in the front of a residence except in a driveway for a period not to exceed 24 hours.

2. Side yard: No such vehicle shall be parked on the side yard except on a driveway or pad, provided the recreational vehicle is not extended beyond the front of the house.

3. Rear yard: A vehicle may be parked or stored in the rear yard; provided, that it be placed on a pad and placed so as not to obstruct the sight distance in alleyways and not in the alley right-of-way. (Ord. 2005-014; Ord. 2003-017 § 1)


18.48.110 Parking of commercial vehicles in residential zones.

Commercial vehicles greater than 12,000 pounds (gross vehicle weight), other than those allowed through a home occupation permit per Chapter 18.67 SMC, may not be parked or stored in residential zones except for the period of time required to make legitimate deliveries or pickups. (Ord. 2003-017 § 1)


18.48.120 Commercial storage of vehicles.

A. Commercial vehicles shall be stored in approved designated locations and shall not obstruct the use or access to parking spaces.

B. Striping is not required in vehicle storage areas; however, required drive aisles and fire lanes must be designated and be kept clear of obstructions.

C. Alternative all-weather surfaces may be permitted for storage of nonmotorized vehicles and trailers where there is no significant danger from leakage of fuel or lubricants. (Ord. 2003-017 § 1)


18.48.130 Town center sub-area parking space requirements.

Repealed by Ord. 2018-006. (Ord. 2003-017 § 1)


18.48.131 Application (sub-area).

Repealed by Ord. 2018-006. (Ord. 2003-017 § 1)


18.48.132 Off-street parking and loading space requirements (sub-area).

Repealed by Ord. 2018-006. (Ord. 2011-017 § 2; Ord. 2003-017 § 1)


18.48.133 Use of public parking (sub-area).

Repealed by Ord. 2018-006. (Ord. 2003-017 § 1)


18.48.134 Alternative means of meeting on-site parking requirements (sub-area).

Repealed by Ord. 2018-006. (Ord. 2003-017 § 1)


18.48.135 Access and design (sub-area).

Repealed by Ord. 2018-006. (Ord. 2003-017 § 1)


18.48.140 Special assessment area for maintenance and parking development.

Repealed by Ord. 2018-006. (Ord. 2003-017 § 1)


18.48.145 Variances.

Repealed by Ord. 2018-006. (Ord. 2003-017 § 1)


Chapter 18.50 ELECTRIC VEHICLE INFRASTRUCTURE

Sections:

18.50.010    Purpose.

18.50.020    Electric vehicle infrastructure – Where allowed.

18.50.030    Battery charging station or rapid charging station – Retrofitting in existing development.

18.50.040    Electric vehicle charging station spaces – Allowed as required spaces.

18.50.050    Off-street electric vehicle charging station spaces.

18.50.060    Accessible electric vehicle charging stations.

18.50.070    Electric vehicle charging station spaces – Signage.

18.50.080    Stacking spaces for electric vehicle battery exchange stations.


18.50.010 Purpose.

To establish “electric vehicle infrastructure” (EVI) regulations for the city to allow EVI and to meet the intent of RCW 35A.63.107 requiring the city to allow EVI in all zones except for residential zones. (Ord. 2012-002 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.50.020 Electric vehicle infrastructure – Where allowed.

Electric vehicle infrastructure is allowed as specified under SMC 18.20.020, 18.20.030, 18.20.040, 18.20.050, 18.20.060 and 18.57.020. (Ord. 2012-002 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.50.030 Battery charging station or rapid charging station – Retrofitting in existing development.

A. Required off-street parking spaces within any existing development listed under SMC 18.20.020 through 18.20.060 and Chapter 18.57 SMC may be converted to battery charging station spaces or rapid charging station spaces for battery electric vehicles (BEVs) and plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEVs); provided, that the battery charging and/or rapid charging stations are accessory to the permitted use(s) on the property.

B. The use of any charging station on site shall not obstruct any vehicular or pedestrian traffic on site (such as waiting for a charging station space within a drive aisle or a designated pedestrian crossing) or within a public right-of-way (ROW).

C. Battery or rapid charging station spaces shall be designated for charging electric vehicles only as provided under SMC 18.50.070. Nonelectric vehicles or noncharging BEVs or PHEVs shall not be allowed. The type of signage designating these spaces shall be approved by the city manager or his designee. (Ord. 2012-002 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.50.040 Electric vehicle charging station spaces – Allowed as required spaces.

Electric vehicle charging station spaces shall be allowed to be used in the computation of required off-street parking spaces as provided under SMC 18.48.050; provided, that the electric vehicle charging station(s) is accessory to the primary use of the property. (Ord. 2012-002 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.50.050 Off-street electric vehicle charging station spaces.

A. Number. No minimum number of charging station spaces is required.

B. Location and Design Criteria. The provision of electric vehicle parking will vary based on the design and use of the primary parking lot. The following required and additional locational and design criteria are provided in recognition of the various parking lot layout options:

1. Where provided, parking for electric vehicle charging purposes is required to include the following:

a. Signage. Signage, as required under SMC 18.50.070 for each charging station space, shall be posted indicating the space is only for electric vehicle charging purposes. Days and hours of operations shall be included if time limits or tow-away provisions are to be enforced.

b. Maintenance. Charging station equipment shall be maintained in all respects, including the functioning of the charging equipment. A phone number or other contact information shall be provided on the charging station equipment for reporting when the equipment is not functioning or other problems are encountered.

c. Accessibility. Where charging station equipment is provided within an adjacent pedestrian circulation area, such as a sidewalk or accessible route to the building entrance, the charging equipment shall be located so as not to interfere with accessibility requirements of WAC 51-50-005.

d. Lighting. Where charging station equipment is installed, adequate site lighting shall exist, unless charging is for daytime purposes only.

2. Parking for electric vehicles should also consider the following:

a. Notification. Information on the charging station, identifying voltage and amperage levels and any time of use, fees, or safety information.

b. Signage. Installation of directional signs at the parking lot entrance and at appropriate decision points to effectively guide motorists to the charging station space(s).

C. Data Collection. To allow for maintenance and notification, owners of any private new electric vehicle infrastructure station that will be publicly available (see definition of “electric vehicle charging station – public”) shall provide information on the station’s geographic location, date of installation, equipment type and model, and owner contact information. This information shall be submitted to the department of community development. (Ord. 2012-002 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.50.060 Accessible electric vehicle charging stations.

Where electric vehicle charging stations are provided in parking lots, accessible electric vehicle charging stations shall be provided as follows:

A. Accessible electric vehicle charging stations shall be provided in the ratios shown on the following table:

	Number of EV Charging Stations	Minimum Accessible EV Charging Stations

	1 – 50	1

	51 – 100	2

	101 – 150	3

	151 – 200	4

	201 – 250	5

	251 – 300	6

B. Accessible electric vehicle charging stations should be located in close proximity to the building or facility entrance and shall be connected to a barrier-free accessible route of travel. It is not necessary to designate the accessible electric vehicle charging station exclusively for the use of disabled persons. Below are two options for providing for accessible electric vehicle charging stations.

Figure 18.50.060a – Off-street accessible electric vehicle charging station – Option 1

 

	
[IMAGE]
	
[IMAGE]


	 	Puget Sound area parking garage.

Photo by ECOtality North America.

Figure 18.50.060b – Off-street accessible electric vehicle charging station – Option 2

	
[IMAGE]
	
[IMAGE]


	 	Fashion Island Shopping Mall, Newport Beach, CA.

Photo by LightMoves.

(Ord. 2012-002 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.50.070 Electric vehicle charging station spaces – Signage.

A. Off-street public electric vehicle charging station spaces shall provide the following signage:

Figure 18.50.070a Directional – Off-Street Parking Lot 

	
[IMAGE]
	 

 

 

12" x 12"

	
[IMAGE]
	 

 

12" x 6"

Comment: The directional sign for an on-site parking lot should be used in the parking facility with a directional arrow at all decision points.

Figure 18.50.070b – Off-Street EV Parking – Parking Space with Charging Station Equipment

	
[IMAGE]
	 

 

 

12" x 12"

	
[IMAGE]
	 

 

 

12" x 18"

	
[IMAGE]
	 

 

 

12" x 18"

Comment: Combination sign identifying space as an electric vehicle charging station, prohibiting nonelectric vehicles, with charging time limits. The use of time limits is optional. The blue/white and red/black signs define that only an electric vehicle that is charging can use the spaces. The green sign defines time limits for how long an electric vehicle can be in the space during the specified hours. Outside of the specified hours, electric vehicles can charge for an indefinite period of time. (Ord. 2012-002 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.50.080 Stacking spaces for electric vehicle battery exchange stations.

Electric vehicle battery exchange stations shall provide three stacking spaces. A stacking space shall be an area measuring eight feet by 20 feet with direct forward access to the battery exchange bay. A stacking space shall be located to prevent any vehicles from extending onto the public right-of-way, or interfering with any pedestrian circulation, traffic maneuvering, or other required parking areas. Stacking spaces may not be counted as required off-street parking spaces. (Ord. 2012-002 § 1 (Exh. A))


Chapter 18.56 ESSENTIAL PUBLIC FACILITIES AND SPECIAL PROPERTY USES

Sections:

18.56.010    Intent.

18.56.020    Purpose.

18.56.030    Permitted uses.

18.56.040    Permit required.

18.56.050    Application required.

18.56.060    Permit – Criteria.

18.56.070    Permit – Modification.

18.56.080    Permit – Binding site plan may be required.

18.56.090    Public facilities (PF) zone designation required for properties in public ownership.


18.56.010 Intent.

It is the intent of the special use permit section of the zoning code to allow the following uses in districts from which they are now prohibited by Chapter 18.20 SMC, or in certain districts as herein provided, where it can be determined that such uses are in the interest of the public health, safety and general welfare and where such uses meet all of the applicable standards set forth herein. (Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


18.56.020 Purpose. 

The purpose of this section is to allow certain specified uses which are deemed necessary to the public convenience and/or have been identified by the comprehensive plan as being essential public facilities, but are found to possess characteristics which make impractical their being identified exclusively with any particular zone classification as herein defined. Since certain special property uses have intrinsic characteristics relating to their function or operation which may necessitate buildings or structures associated with the special property uses to exceed the height, bulk, dimensional, or development standards of the zoning districts in which the special property uses may be located, the council may authorize that the height, bulk, dimensional, or development standards associated with the following special property uses be permitted to exceed those limitations set forth in the subject zoning district; provided, that such revised height, bulk, dimensional, or development standards are consistent with the criteria contained in Chapter 18.44 SMC. (Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


18.56.030 Permitted uses. 

The council may permit the following uses in districts from which they are now prohibited by this title:

A. Airport and airfields.

B. Government buildings.

C. Educational institutions.

D. Hospitals and sanitariums (except animal clinics and hospitals).

E. Nursing homes and boarding homes for the aged.

F. Correctional institutions.

G. Towers and antennas over 100 feet in height, subject to the requirements of Chapter 18.61 SMC.

H. Essential public facilities and utilities.

I. Parks, playgrounds, recreation or community centers.

J. Group homes, alcoholism or drug treatment centers, detoxification centers, work release facilities for convicts or ex-convicts, or other housing serving as an alternative to incarceration with 12 or more residents.

K. Energy facilities.

L. Hazardous waste treatment and storage facilities.

M. Shelters for the transient or for the homeless.

N. Master planned resorts.

O. Solid waste facilities

P. Sewage treatment facilities.

Q. Bus stations and transit facilities. (Ord. 2016-015 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


18.56.040 Permit required. 

Essential public facilities and special property uses shall be allowed within certain use zones after obtaining an essential public facilities and special property use permit granted by the city council. (Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


18.56.050 Application required. 

Forms for application for essential public facilities and special property use permits shall be supplied by the department of community development. Such forms shall require the following minimum information:

A. Signature of applicant.

B. Signature of landowners if other than applicant.

C. The location of adjacent utilities intended to serve the development and a layout of existing and proposed utilities and utility easements within the development.

D. A scaled vicinity map showing the relationship of the proposed development to existing streets and surrounding land uses, and indicating the location of any nearby bodies of water, wetlands, or other significant natural features. The vicinity map should indicate all structures located within 300 feet of the subject property.

E. A scaled site plan of the proposed use showing existing and proposed streets, structures, open spaces, uses of each structure, parking areas, fencing, pedestrian paths and trails, buffers, and landscaping. The site plan shall include the following:

1. The proposed name of the development, north arrow, scale, vertical elevations, datum, date, legal description, and names and addresses of the applicant, project architect, project engineer, surveyor, and project land planner.

2. The basic layout of the site, lot lines, street layout and roadway width.

3. The proposed phases of development, if any.

4. Finish contours at two-foot intervals.

5. Any areas proposed or required to be dedicated for public access and use.

F. A circulation plan indicating the proposed movement of vehicles, goods, and pedestrians within the development and to and from adjacent public arterial, collectors or roadways. Any special engineering features and traffic regulation devices needed to insure the safety of this circulation plan shall be shown.

G. Such additional information as deemed materially necessary by the department of community development to enable the council to take action pursuant to the requirements of this section. (Ord. 2011-017 § 1; Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


18.56.060 Permit – Criteria. 

An essential public facilities and/or special property use permit granted by the council shall be subject to the following criteria:

A. There shall be a demonstrated need for the essential public facilities and/or special use within the community at large which shall not be contrary to the public interest.

B. The essential public facility and/or special use shall be consistent with the goals and policies of the comprehensive plan, and applicable ordinances of the city.

C. The council shall find that the essential public facility and/or special use shall be located, planned and developed in such a manner that the essential public facility and/or special use is not inconsistent with the health, safety, convenience or general welfare of persons residing or working in the city. The council’s findings shall address, but not be limited to the following:

1. The generation of noise, noxious or offensive emissions, or other nuisances which may be injurious or detrimental to a significant portion of the city.

2. The availability of public services which may be necessary or desirable for the support of the special use. These may include, but shall not be limited to, availability of utilities, transportation systems, including vehicular, pedestrian, and public transit systems, and education, police and fire facilities, and social and health services.

3. The adequacy of landscaping, screening, yard setbacks, open spaces or other development characteristics necessary to mitigate the impact of the special use upon neighboring properties.

4. Proposed uses which exceed the bulk, dimensional, height, density and/or use standards of the zoning district within which they propose to locate, must demonstrate that the proposed variance is essential to the establishment of the public facility and/or special use; i.e., a variance in height may be granted for a water tower, but not to provide an architectural element. (Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


18.56.070 Permit – Modification.

Modifications to essential public facilities and special properties use permits shall be reviewed by the administrator consistent with the requirements of SMC Title 20. The administrator shall determine whether the proposed modification is minor or major. Major modifications will require reapplication and consideration consistent with the requirements of this section and SMC Title 20. (Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


18.56.080 Permit – Binding site plan may be required. 

The council may find that an essential public facilities and/or special use permit may require a binding site plan. The binding site plan, if required, will be prepared consistent with the requirements of SMC Title 17. (Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


18.56.090 Public facilities (PF) zone designation required for properties in public ownership.

Those special uses and essential public facilities which are located on lands in public ownership shall be designated on the optimum land use map and the official zoning map as PF (public facilities). Redesignation of approved essential public facilities and/or special uses in public ownership shall be considered a Type I Rezone, Chapter 18.88 SMC and shall amend the comprehensive plan optimum land use map and the official zoning map concurrently. (Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


Chapter 18.57 DOWNTOWN DISTRICTS

Sections:

18.57.010    Purpose.

18.57.020    Downtown zones allowed and prohibited uses.

18.57.030    Development intensity.

18.57.040    Development bonuses.

18.57.050    Maximum building height.

18.57.060    Set-to and setback lines.

18.57.070    Parking standards.

18.57.080    Design standards and guidelines applicable to downtown.


18.57.010 Purpose.

The purpose of these districts is to create a lively and diverse downtown, oriented to both nearby neighborhoods and the larger community, with a mixture of uses, including retail, services, restaurants, institutions, and higher density residential. While multi-story buildings are allowed, both new development and expansion of existing buildings should exhibit bulk and scale that respects their proximity to adjacent residential patterns having a lower height. Over time, in the downtown core and downtown mixed use 1 districts, auto-oriented uses would gradually disappear, sidewalk-fronting buildings would predominate, and visible surface parking lots would be replaced with parking behind buildings or within structures. The downtown mixed use 2 district provides auto-oriented good and services as a transitional district into the downtown core. All development within all three districts should contribute to enhancing safety, comfort, and visual appeal for pedestrians.

The districts referenced in these provisions consist of:

A. Downtown core;

B. Downtown mixed use 1;

C. Downtown mixed use 2.

Zoning Map:
[IMAGE]


(Ord. 2017-012 § 1 (Exh. B); Ord. 2011-016 § 2 (Exh. B))


18.57.020 Downtown zones allowed and prohibited uses.

A. Because these districts are intended to encourage a wide mixture of uses, all uses listed in Chapter 18.20 SMC, except those listed in subsection D of this section, are permitted, subject to the additional use requirements of subsections B and C of this section. Nonetheless, the director of the department of community development retains the authority to determine if any proposed use does not comport with the intent of the district.

B. Conditional uses within the DC, DMU-I, and DMU-II zones include the following:

1. Major. Agricultural processing, light; bars and taverns; communication relay or transmission facilities; construction yards; day care centers (more than 12 charges); recreational vehicle parks, seasonal (up to 180-day stay); recreational vehicle parks, transient (up to 30-day stay); towers, antennas (including amateur radio) and supporting structures less than 65 feet, and wireless communications facilities as set forth in Chapter 18.61 SMC.

2. Minor. Espresso stands (drive-through). 

C. Special uses within the DC, DMU-I, and DMU-II zones include the following: essential public facilities and utilities; group homes (other), 13 or more persons; group homes for the functionally disabled (13 or more persons); parks, playgrounds, golf courses, recreation or community centers; swimming pools, public and private; special needs housing.

D. Prohibited Uses in the Downtown Zones. 

1. Uses Prohibited in All Three Districts. Adult entertainment; gasoline stations and car washes; halfway houses and rehabilitation centers; jails and other detention or correction facilities; kennels; manufacturing and fabrication; sales, leasing, servicing, or repair of vehicles, unless entirely within a structure; warehousing, including mini-storage; battery exchange stations; marijuana (recreational or medical use) retail store.

2. Additional Uses Prohibited in the Downtown Core and Mixed Use 1 Districts. Outdoor storage of inventory, materials or supplies, unless behind a building or along an alley.

3. Additional Uses Prohibited in the Downtown Core. Residential use on the ground level (except in rear 40 percent of commercial building or in a rear, secondary building); commercial uses with drive-through windows or service kiosks. (Ord. 2016-015 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 2015-012 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2014-003 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2012-006 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2012-002 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 2011-017 § 2; Ord. 2011-016 § 2 (Exh. B))


18.57.030 Development intensity.

A. Floor Area Ratio. Floor area ratio is a method of calculating allowable floor area within a development. The FAR multiplied by the parcel size equals the amount of allowable floor area that can be built.

(Example: a parcel size of 10,000 square feet multiplied by an FAR of two equals 20,000 square feet of allowable floor area.)

Within these three districts the following maximum FARs are permitted:

	District	Nonresidential Use	Residential Use	Combined

	Basic	With Bonuses	Basic	With Bonuses

	Downtown Core	1.0	2.0	1.0	2.5	3.5

	Downtown Mixed Use 1	0.5	1.0	1.0	2.0	2.5

	Downtown Mixed Use 2	0.3	0.7	0.7	1.5	2.0

Notes:

1.    In a combined FAR, the maximum FAR for each use category shall not be exceeded.

2.    Hotels and motels are considered residential uses for the purpose of FAR.

3.    Floor area for purpose of calculating allowable FAR includes all structures on a site. However, the following spaces may be deducted from allowable floor area:

–    Floor area devoted to parking.

–    Elevators and mechanical spaces.

–    Exterior decks, porches and arcades open to the air.

–    Any space devoted to a bonus feature.

–    Any space below average finished grade around the perimeter of the building.

4.    All development must comply with any applicable design standards and guidelines for this district.

(Ord. 2011-016 § 2 (Exh. B))


18.57.040 Development bonuses.

If a development incorporates amenities from the lists below, the FAR may be increased through a discretionary review process intended to ensure that each included amenity both satisfies its design criteria and serves the intended purpose in the proposed location.

A. Minor Amenities. Each feature from the following list may allow an increase of 0.3 FAR from the basic allowable FAR to the maximum FAR.

1. Canopy over the Public Sidewalk. Inclusion of a canopy amenity is required to achieve any FAR of 2.0 or greater in any project. A permanent structure (durable permanent construction, typically glass and steel) extending over the sidewalk a minimum of five feet in width and extending along at least 75 percent of a building’s frontage. The height above the sidewalk shall be between eight and 10 feet; provided, that the minimum clearance under canopy-hung signs shall be seven feet six inches.

2. Additional Streetscape Features. Seating, trees, pedestrian-scaled lighting, and special paving in addition to any that are required by the design standards and guidelines.

3. Common Courtyard or Green. This space shall be available to tenants or residents of the development. It shall be an area equal to at least four percent of the floor area of the building. There should be both paved areas and landscaping, with planting consuming at least 30 percent of the area. Seating and pedestrian-scaled lighting shall be provided.

4. Alley Enhancements. Pedestrian-scaled lighting, special paving, and rear entrances intended to encourage pedestrian use of the alley.

5. Upgraded Materials on Building. Use of brick and stone on the building facades that face streets and alleys.

6. Shared Driveway. This amenity would involve sharing a single curb cut with an adjacent property and require any necessary cross easement agreement to be made between property owners.

B. Major Amenities. Each public amenity from the following list may allow an increase of 0.5 FAR from the basic allowable FAR up to the maximum FAR.

1. Exterior Public Space. This space shall be available to the public at least for the period between 7:00 a.m. and dusk. It shall be an area equal to at least two percent of the total interior floor space of the development. No dimension shall be less than 10 feet. Landscaping, textured paving, pedestrian-scaled lighting, and seating shall be included.

2. Public Art or Water Feature. Each feature must be appraised at a value that is at least two percent of the value of building construction. Documentation of building costs and appraised value of the art or water feature shall be provided. The feature may be installed with the development or may contribute a like amount to an established city fund.

3. Through-Block Pedestrian Connection. A walkway at least eight feet wide allowing the public to walk between a street and an alley or another street. The walkway shall be flanked with planting and pedestrian-scaled lighting.

4. Structured Parking. All required parking shall be contained within a structure.

5. Contribution to a Cultural Facility within the City Center. Cultural facilities shall include a public library, museum or community center.

The contribution shall be an amount equal to or exceeding two percent of the value of building construction. Documentation of building costs shall be provided. (Ord. 2011-016 § 2 (Exh. B))


18.57.050 Maximum building height.

A. Downtown core: 45 feet.

B. Downtown mixed use 1 and 2: 38 feet.

C. Notes.

1. The minimum height of the first (ground level) floor of any building in the downtown core district shall be 13 feet.

2. Floors above 35 feet in the downtown core and above 25 feet in the downtown mixed use 1 and 2 districts shall be set back from any facade along a street by at least seven feet.

3. Roof forms, including parapets, towers, pitched and curved shapes that do not contain habitable space, may exceed the height limit, but by no more than five feet measured from the midpoint of the roof form. (Ord. 2011-016 § 2 (Exh. B))


18.57.060 Set-to and setback lines.

In the downtown core, the first floor of commercial building facades facing streets shall be placed within five feet of the back of the right-of-way.

In the downtown mixed use 1 and 2 districts, the first floor of buildings containing ground-floor residential shall be set back from the right-of-way by at least seven feet, but no more than 15 feet. (Ord. 2011-016 § 2 (Exh. B))


18.57.070 Parking standards.

A. Residential Uses.

	Residential Type	Minimum Requirement

	Senior Housing*	0.5 space per unit

	Studios	0.5 space per unit

	One-Bedrooms and Greater	1.0 space per unit

	Hotels and Motels	1.0 space per room

*    Restricted by deed to persons over 62 years of age.

B. Commercial and Other Uses. One off-street parking stall must be provided for each 500 square feet of new construction in excess of 2,500 square feet. Exemption from parking requirements: all permitted nonresidential uses less than 2,500 square feet.

C. Off-Site Parking. Some or all of the parking requirement may be satisfied on off-site lots, so long as the parking is located within 600 feet of the use.

D. Shared Parking. If residential and nonresidential uses within a development share parking, the director of the department of community development may reduce the total amount of required parking by up to 20 percent.

E. Location of Parking. Within these three districts, off-street surface parking is not allowed to be adjacent to Washington Street or Sequim Avenue.

F. On-street parking and spaces located in public parking lots may not be reserved or restricted except spaces reserved for use by disabled persons or on which time limits have been set by the city.

G. Nothing in this section is intended to limit voluntary parking management programs established by business or property owners. (Ord. 2018-006 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-017 § 2; Ord. 2011-016 § 2 (Exh. B))


18.57.080 Design standards and guidelines applicable to downtown.

Design standards and guidelines for the downtown districts described in this section are adopted by reference, but are contained in another document.

A. Site Design.

1. Parking Lot Screening and Landscaping.

Intent: To soften the visual effect of asphalt and parked cars on downtown.

a. One tree, minimum two-inch caliper, required per six parking stalls.

b. Low fence or decorative wall (24 inches to 42 inches high) with shrubs along any street frontage planted at a sufficient density to create a full visual screen at maturity.

c. Chain link fencing and razor ribbon are not allowed.

Examples of low wall and landscaping
[IMAGE]


2. Parking Lot Lighting.

Intent: To reduce glare and spillover of light.

a. For lots greater than 20 stalls, one light required per 20 stalls.

b. Fixture height shall be no greater than 25 feet.

c. Cut-off type fixtures required.

d. A photometric plan that demonstrates that all lighting and glare will illuminate only within property boundaries shall be submitted for all new lots.

Examples of cut-off light fixtures
[IMAGE]


3. Curb Cuts.

Intent: To reduce the disruption of pedestrian movement by vehicles.

a. No curb cuts allowed along Washington in the downtown core district.

b. No more than one curb cut per street frontage allowed elsewhere (see minor amenity FAR bonus, SMC 18.57.040(A)).

c. Maximum curb cut width is 24 feet.


[IMAGE]


4. Sidewalk/Frontage Improvements.

Intent: To provide clear expectations of private contributions to streetscape.

a. Two-foot by two-foot scored concrete surface.

b. Minimum seven-foot-wide, unobstructed walking route.

c. Street trees, minimum two-and-one-half-inch caliper, 30 feet maximum spacing.
[IMAGE]


5. Screening of Trash Areas.

Intent: To reduce the visual effects of trash collection containers.

a. Solid, opaque enclosure is required.

b. Planting is also required where there is any street frontage.

Screening trash areas with enclosures and landscaping
[IMAGE]


B. Building Design.

1. Ground Level Transparency.

Intent: To ensure good visual connectivity between the interior activities within buildings and the streets and sidewalks to contribute to a socially dynamic environment and promote natural self-policing with many eyes on the street.

a. Minimum of 75 percent along Washington and Sequim in the downtown core.

b. Minimum of 20 percent along other streets.

c. Measured between two feet and 10 feet.

d. Mirrored, highly reflective, and darkly tinted glass not permitted.

Pedestrian level transparency
[IMAGE]


2. Ground Level Architectural Features.

Intent: Ensure that new buildings provide rich and varied experiences for people walking by.

a. All new buildings in the core district along Washington Avenue shall include overhead weather protection (canopy or awning) at a minimum of five feet in width over the sidewalk on 75 percent of the facade.

b. Street-facing facades shall include a minimum of four of the following:

i. Kick-plate below windows 24 inches to 30 inches in height with projecting sill.

ii. Plinth. A continuous course of masonry or architecturally finished concrete at the base of an exterior wall, with a height ranging from 16 inches to 32 inches.

iii. Canopy or awning, minimum five feet in width over sidewalk.

iv. Recessed entry door.

v. Decorative lighting fixtures.

vi. Clerestory above primary display windows.

vii. Planters for seasonal planting.

viii. Decorative tilework.

ix. Pedestrian-scaled signs.

x. Flower baskets.

xi. Sidewalk-facing garden (residential buildings only).

xii. Other unique or artful element.


[IMAGE]


c. Treatment of blank walls longer than 30 feet, if facing a street; at least two shall be required:

i. Vegetation.

ii. Artwork/mural.

iii. Seating.

iv. Architectural details (e.g., tilework, board and batten, fine-grained score pattern).

Examples of blank wall treatments
[IMAGE]


d. Vinyl awnings, half-round awnings, and awnings that are principally designed to cast intense light downward or to provide signage are not permitted.

e. Materials used at ground level are expected to be long-lasting and durable and contribute positively to the pedestrian experience. SMC 18.24.100(B)(1) applies to facades facing a pedestrian-oriented street or alley and illustrates the intent for building surfaces that create visual character and interest while conveying a sense of timeless durability.

Example of high quality ground level building materials
[IMAGE]


3. Upper Floor Architectural Features.

Intent: To ensure that new buildings offer visual interest as seen from a distance and contribute to the character of the townscape.

At least two of the following shall be required above the first floor:

a. Belt course of masonry.

b. Overhang or projection.

c. Offsets in wall.

d. Balconies or decks.

e. Change in color or materials.

f. Bay windows.

g. Stepback(s).


[IMAGE]


4. Roofline.

Intent: To create a distinct profile on the skyline.

a. Flat roofs shall include a prominent cornice that creates a shadow and caps the edge of the roof.

b. Pitched residential roofs shall be in the range 6:12 to 12:12.
[IMAGE]


5. Screening Rooftop Mechanical Equipment.

Intent: To reduce the visual impact of mechanical equipment on roofs.

Mechanical equipment shall be screened by an extended parapet wall or other roof forms that are integrated into the building’s architecture.


[IMAGE]


C. Sign Design.

1. Pedestrian Scale.

Intent: To encourage projecting and wall signs that are scaled and designed to attract pedestrians’ interest, yet not overwhelm a building’s facade.

a. Signs within these three districts shall be oriented to people walking, not driving in vehicles.

b. Pole signs shall not be allowed in these three districts.

c. Projecting signs shall not exceed 16 square feet in area; maximum allowed sign extension from the building facade is four feet; provided, that no sign shall extend to within two feet or less of the street curb edge; projecting signs shall be installed between seven feet six inches and 14 feet above grade on the facade of entry or primary pedestrian street.

d. Wall signs shall be allowed as provided in SMC 18.58.110(E); provided, that the allowed wall sign area shall be reduced by an amount equal to any permitted projecting sign that is installed.
[IMAGE]


2. Relationship to Building Design.

Intent: To ensure that signs respect the character of buildings.

Signs should not obscure architectural features.


[IMAGE]


3. Whimsical and Artful Elements.

Intent: To encourage creativity and expressing individual businesses.

Signs should be highly graphic with features that boldly symbolize the identity of the business.


[IMAGE]


(Ord. 2013-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-016 § 2 (Exh. B))


Chapter 18.58 SIGN CODE

Sections: 

18.58.010    Purpose – Intent.

18.58.020    Definitions.

18.58.030    Administrative provisions.

18.58.035    Kiosk signs.

18.58.040    Enforcement and penalties – Permanent signs.

18.58.045    Enforcement and penalties – Temporary and portable signs.

18.58.050    Variances – Permanent signs.

18.58.060    Exemptions – Permanent signs.

18.58.065    Exemptions – Temporary signs.

18.58.066    Exemptions – Portable signs.

18.58.067    Special events and temporary activities (community events).

18.58.070    Prohibited signs.

18.58.080    Washington State Department of Transportation signs.

18.58.090    Temporary signs requiring a permit.

18.58.094    Garage sale signs.

18.58.100    General regulations.

18.58.110    Signs in commercial and industrial districts.

18.58.115    Downtown sign standards.

18.58.120    Signs in residential areas.

18.58.130    Signs for uses with special needs.

18.58.135    Political campaign signs.

18.58.140    Nonconforming signs – Permanent signs.

18.58.150    Removal of abandoned or obsolete signs and structures.

18.58.160    Maintenance.

18.58.170    Liability.

18.58.180    Constitutionality.


18.58.010 Purpose – Intent. 

The city council finds that it is necessary and desirable to create a legal framework for a comprehensive and balanced system of street graphics to facilitate an easy and pleasant communication between people and their environment and to avoid the visual clutter that is potentially harmful to traffic and pedestrian safety, property values, business opportunities, and community appearance. Generally, signs should not be on city property. Generally, signs in the downtown area should be oriented for pedestrian traffic rather than motor vehicle traffic. With these purposes in mind, it is the intent of this chapter to authorize the use of street graphics which are:

A. Compatible with their surroundings;

B. Appropriate to the activity that displays them;

C. Expressive of the identity of individual activities and the community as a whole; and

D. Legible in the circumstances in which they are seen.

Nothing in this chapter is intended to affect noncommercial free speech which has been exempted from regulation by constitutional court decision applicable in this state. (Ord. 2012-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-013 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2000-005 § 2)


18.58.020 Definitions.

“Abandoned or obsolete sign or structure” means a legal nonconforming sign and/or structure that for a period of more than one year does not correctly identify, exhort, or advertise any person, business, lessor, lessee, owner, product, or activity conducted or available on or off the premises on which such sign is located.

“Advertising vehicle” means any vehicle not used in the daily operation or transport of goods or services which is parked on, or otherwise located near and visible from, a public right-of-way, which has attached thereto, or located thereon, any sign or advertising device for the primary purpose of providing advertisement for, or direction to, a business or activity of a business.

“Awning” means a structure, as of canvas, plastic or metal, extended before a window, door, etc., as a protection from sun or rain.

“Billboard” means any sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered elsewhere than on the premises.

“Building frontage” means the linear width of the face of a building, or lease area in multi-tenant buildings, which fronts on or along a public street or highway or a private road accessible for the vehicle circulation of the general public, not including alleys, or the frontage on a parking lot accessible by the public.

“Building parapet” means a building wall extending vertically above the plate line of the roof where it intersects the wall.

“Building sign” means any sign attached to a building, as contrasted to a freestanding sign.

“Canopy” means a roof-like projection from a building offering protection from sun or precipitation which typically runs continually across the face, or a portion of the face, of a building. (See “Awning”; “Marquee.”)

“Canopy sign” means a sign attached to or integrated into a canopy.

“Cantilevered sign” means a freestanding sign projecting from and anchored to one or more sides of a vertical supporting pier structure. (See “Capital sign.”)

“Capital sign” means a freestanding sign set on top, as a capital, of a vertical supporting structure of a lesser width than the sign.

“Center identification sign” means a freestanding sign structure containing the name identifying an integrated business development, and may also include identification signs on which the names and nature of businesses only within the development are uniformly displayed.

“Changeable copy sign/reader board” means a sign or portion thereof with characters, letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering the face or the surface of the sign. A sign on which the message changes more often than eight times per day shall be considered an animated sign and not a changeable copy sign for the purposes of this chapter. A sign on which the only copy that changes is an electronic or mechanical indication of the time and/or temperature is considered a “time and temperature” sign and not a changeable copy sign for the purposes of this chapter.

“Combination signs” means two or more signs supported by the same structure.

“Community event” means a special event permitted by the city or an event which is nonprofit and charitable and intended to benefit community members including such events as blood drives, food drives, book sales, bake sales, car washes and similar events which are infrequent and of short duration.

“Department” means the department of community development.

“Directional” means directing traffic, either vehicular or pedestrian, to parking, entry, exit, loading, drive-in facility or other similar locations on site.

“Director” means the director of community development.

“Festoon” means materials or devices, whether or not they contain printed material, which are attached to real or personal property with the purpose or effect of attracting public attention to an object or site. Festoons include flags, pennants, balloons, ribbon, tinsel and other similar materials, regardless of size. Festoons are deemed to be signs.

“Flag” means any fabric, banner, or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political subdivision or other entity.

“Follow-through sign” means an off-premises, directional sign limited in size, number and location based on the requirements of Department of Transportation rules to provide information on the location of commercial activities which are advertised on state-approved highway “gas-food-lodging” signs.

“Freestanding sign” means any permanent sign not attached to a building.

“Home occupation” means a clearly ancillary and secondary commercial use on residential property run by the owner/occupant of the residential dwelling unit as defined and permitted by the Sequim Municipal Code.

“Integrated development” means a development consisting of five or more related establishments in separate units, in the same or different buildings and on the same or individual lots, using common driveways and on-site parking.

“Mansard roof” means any roof that has an angle, as measured from the horizontal, greater than 45 degrees and which derives part of its support from the building wall and is attached to (but not necessarily a part of) a low-slope roof with a pitch of less than 3:12 and which extends along the full length of the front building wall or three-quarters of the length of a side building wall.

“Marquee” means a roof-like projection over an entrance, as to a theater.

“Marquee sign” means a sign attached to or forming a marquee.

“Monument sign, large” means a freestanding sign not exceeding eight feet in height, supported by a solid pedestal extending the entire length of the sign.

“Monument sign, small” means a low-profile, freestanding sign, not exceeding four feet in height, supported by a solid pedestal extending the entire length of the sign.

“Multi-tenant” means a single building occupied by two or more tenants, with each tenant’s space distinctly separate from other spaces.

“Noncommercial sign on residential property” means address, no soliciting, no trespassing, children at play, guard dog, celebratory decorations or signs related to a noncommercial event, yard sale, missing pet, child’s lemonade stand and similar signs.

“Off site” means an outside sign which is not located on the premises of the entity or person related to the sign or if it is located on governmental property including rights-of-way. A sign shall not be considered “off site” if it is no larger than two feet wide and three feet high and is touching or next to a zero lot line structure on sidewalk right-of-way.

“Outdoor menu board” means an outdoor sign, associated with a restaurant or other business with a drive-through window, which gives a detailed list of foods or other goods and prices that are available at the business. Such signs are permitted on site.

“Pad lot” means a separate legal parcel in an integrated commercial center designed to house a separate freestanding building for a single business.

“Parcel” means an individual, legally created lot.

“Permanent sign” means a legally placed sign intended to be “permanently in place” for the duration of the allowed, underlying land use. Examples of permanent signs may include, but are not limited to, wall signs, projecting signs, freestanding or monument signs, signs painted on awnings, or any other sign permanently affixed to the ground or a structure.

“Pole sign” means any freestanding sign supported by a single long slender vertical support of wood or metal, etc., that is in excess of eight feet in height.

“Political campaign signage” means signs advertising an existing or potential ballot issue upon which residents of Sequim may be eligible to vote.

“Portable sign” means any sign that is intended to be in place for a limited duration, is capable of being moved easily, and is not securely affixed to the ground or a structure. These signs typically include, but are not limited to, signs commonly known as sandwich boards, A-frames, etc., and which are not affixed to the ground or to a structure.

“Private property” means all property legally owned by a private person(s) and/or entity.

“Projecting sign” means a sign affixed to a building or wall in such a manner that its leading edge extends more than six inches beyond the surface of such building or wall.

“Pylon sign” means any gate-like, freestanding sign supported by multiple supporting structures.

“Retail center, major” means a commercial center of 10 or more businesses on one or more parcels designed as a single integrated development. (See “Shopping center.”)

“Retail center, minor” means a commercial center of five to nine businesses on one or more parcels designed as a single integrated development.

“Setback” means the distance from the property line to the nearest part of the applicable building, structure, or sign, measured perpendicularly to the property line.

“Shopping center” means an integrated retail center with common parking, landscaping and circulation with multiple businesses containing retail, service, restaurant and entertainment uses among at least one anchor store and multiple smaller tenants.

“Sign area” means the entire area within the outside border of the sign. The area of a sign having no continuous border or lacking a border shall mean the entire area within a single continuous perimeter formed by no more than eight straight lines enclosing the extreme limits of writing, representations, emblem, or any figure or similar character, together with any frame or other material or color forming an integral part of the display or used as a border excluding the necessary supports or uprights on which such sign is placed. Where a sign has two or more faces, the area of all faces shall be included in determining the area of the sign, except that where two such faces are placed back to back and are at no point more than three feet from one another, the area of the sign shall be taken as the area of one face if the two faces are of equal area, or as the area of the larger face if the two faces are of unequal area.

“Sign height” means the height of the sign measured from the general natural grade at the base of the sign to the highest point of the sign structure.

“Special activity permit” means a permit issued pursuant to Chapter 18.68 SMC by the city for temporary structures and/or activities including temporary business activities and special sales events.

“Street frontage” means the lineal extent of a parcel of land along a public street or highway or a private road accessible for the vehicle circulation of the general public, not including alleys as measured from one side property line intersecting said street right-of-way to the next lot line intersecting said street.

“Strip mall” means a kind of retail shopping location along a street or road consisting of a series of adjoining shops, small businesses in a building or buildings typically with a uniform front design and direct access to each shop from a common parking area in front or back. Strip malls do not include “big box” stores over 60,000 square feet.

“Temporary sign” means any on-site sign, banner, pennant, balloon, flyer, or other display constructed of wood, cloth, canvas, light fabric, plastic, cardboard and/or other light materials, with or without frames, securely, but not permanently, affixed to the ground or a structure, intended to be displayed for a limited time only. Painted window signs which are readily removed by washing shall be considered temporary signs.

“Triggering event” means the event for which the temporary or portable signage is sought. Triggering events are limited to events listed in SMC 18.58.065 which include only when the building is for sale, rent or lease or when there is an outside product merchandise display on-site or when there is a grand opening of a business or when it is going out of business.

“Wall sign” means a sign attached parallel to, but within six inches of, a wall, painted on a wall surface, or erected and confined within the limits of an outside wall of a building or structure (including a parapet, gable or mansard extension of such wall which is supported by such wall or building) and which displays only one sign face. (Ord. 2014-006 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2012-017 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2012-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-013 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2000-005 § 2)


18.58.030 Administrative provisions.

A. Administration. The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and implemented by the director of community development. Enforcement shall be done in cooperation with other city departments.

B. Interpretation. Where there is any dispute concerning the interpretation of this chapter, the decision of the director of community development shall prevail subject to the appeal provisions of this chapter.

C. Permit Required. A sign permit for each sign shall be obtained from the department of community development prior to the placing, erecting, moving, reconstructing, altering or displaying of any exterior signs, excluding change of face or copy on existing signs, unless exempted by SMC 18.58.060. A building permit and/or electrical permit may also be required under the provisions of the International Building Code and Uniform Sign Code. No sign may be placed within the public right-of-way without approval of the public works director, except as may be permitted by this chapter.

D. Application for Permits. Application for sign permits shall be made to the department on a form provided by the director. Such application shall require:

1. Name of business, city business license number and address of sign location;

2. Name, signature and title of applicant;

3. Name, signature and address of property owner; and/or

4. Name, signature and address of property owner’s legal agent;

5. Name(s) and address(es) of contractor(s), Washington contractor’s registration number and city business license number;

6. Description of the work to be performed including type, size and construction of sign;

7. Description of type, size and location of other existing signs applicable to determination of compliance with the provisions of this chapter including reference to any approved master sign program;

8. Attachments, including scaled and dimensioned site plan and building elevations showing size, height, location, copy, construction and materials of the sign;

9. Attached building permit, if required, with construction details, including attachment and footing details, wind load calculations, ULI number, point of electrical connection and/or location of associated electrical fixtures and structural engineer’s wet stamp, if required.

E. Fee. The fee for review of a sign permit application and issuance of a sign permit shall be as established by the city council. The fee for any building permit for the construction of a sign or sign structure shall be as required by the International Building Code or Uniform Sign Code.

F. Issuance of Permit. Upon the filing of an application for a sign permit, the plans, specifications and other data shall be examined by the director and the chief building official, and if it appears the proposed sign is in compliance with the requirements of this title and all other laws of the city, the director shall issue a sign compliance permit and the chief building official shall then issue the building permit, if required.

G. Appeals. Appeals of the interpretation, enforcement and decisions made under the provisions of this chapter shall be made in compliance with the appeal process as outlined in SMC Title 20. (Ord. 2012-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-017 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 2011-013 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2000-005 § 2)


18.58.035 Kiosk signs.

The city may provide kiosks on public property or rights-of-way. Such kiosks may display signs of a size and style, including type font specification determined by the city by administrative policy. In addition to city announcements, space may be provided for a fee to display off-site messages which are commercial for-profit or nonprofit. Messages displayed in a kiosk shall be in lieu of other off-site signs by the same individual, business, or organization. (Ord. 2012-011 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.58.040 Enforcement and penalties – Permanent signs.

A. Inspections. The building inspector or designee is authorized, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter or inspect any building, structure, or premises in the city for the purpose of inspection of a sign and its structural and electrical connections to ensure compliance with all applicable codes and ordinances. Such inspections shall be carried out during business hours unless an emergency exists.

B. Removal of Signs. Those signs which pose a threat to the public health, safety and welfare, are located within the city right-of-way or other public property, or were illegally established are considered a public nuisance and may be removed by the building inspector without prior notification.

C. Notice of Violation. Whenever the building inspector or designee determines that a violation of this chapter exists, a notice of violation shall be issued which specifically indicates:

1. Which provisions of this chapter are being violated.

2. What steps are necessary to correct the violation.

3. Statement that the owner shall have 45 days from the date the notice is given in which to correct the violation; except temporary signs, banners, and portable signs which shall be dealt with as set forth herein.

4. Failure to comply with the notice will result in an administrative fee of $100.00 being assessed against the violator. Please refer to subsection (E)(1) of this section.

D. Delivery of Notice. The building inspector or designee shall:

1. Leave a copy of the notice of violation with the occupant or person in charge of the property, or post it in a conspicuous place on the subject property if no one is present, or send a copy of the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the occupant or person in charge of the property on which the violation is taking place; and

2. Send a copy of the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of the subject property.

E. Second Notice. In the event that the violation shall not be corrected within the time frame set forth in the notice of violation, the building inspector or designee shall send a second notice of the violation. The notice shall contain all items specified in subsections (C)(1) through (3) of this section, and shall also indicate:

1. That the $100.00 administrative fee has been assessed against the violator and will have to be paid in addition to the violation being corrected; and

2. Failure to comply with the notice subjects the violator to civil and criminal penalties. The second notice of violation shall be given in the same manner as the first notice.

F. Removal of Signs by the Building Inspector. In the event that the violator does not correct the violation in the time set forth and does not pay the administrative fee, the following penalties shall apply, and the building inspector shall have the authority to remove the sign at the owner’s expense.

G. Civil and Criminal Penalties. In the event that the violator does not correct the violation in the time set forth and pay the administrative fee, the following penalties shall apply:

1. Penalty for First Offense. Any person who commits any violation of this chapter, where such violation constitutes a first offense and where such person has failed to pay the administrative fee in response to a second notice, shall have committed a civil infraction and, upon a finding by the court or hearing officer, whichever is the appropriate body, such infraction has been committed, shall pay a monetary penalty to the city of Sequim in an amount not to exceed $250.00.

2. Penalty for Second or Subsequent Offense. Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this chapter, where such person has been adjudged by the court to have committed a previous violation of such provisions and where such person has failed to pay the administrative fee in response to the second notice of violation, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed one year or by both such fine and imprisonment. In addition, each day or portion thereof during which any violation of this chapter is committed or permitted shall constitute a separate offense.

3. Additional Remedies. Any nonconforming sign is a public nuisance and may be abated. In addition to any other remedy provided by this chapter, the city may initiate injunction or abatement proceedings or any other appropriate action in the courts against any person, firm or corporation who violates or fails to comply with any provisions of this chapter to prevent, enjoin, abate or terminate violations of this chapter or to restore a condition which existed prior to the violation. The violator shall pay the costs of such action including reasonable attorneys’ fees. (Ord. 2012-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-013 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2000-005 § 2)


18.58.045 Enforcement and penalties – Temporary and portable signs.

A. Property Owners or Occupants Liable. Property owners or occupants who have temporary or portable signs located on their property or upon adjacent rights-of-way where they are the underlying owner shall be presumed to have consented to the sign placement. Owners or occupants who have temporary or portable signs in violation of this chapter shall be liable for those signs. It shall be the duty of the property owner or occupant to ensure that each temporary and/or portable sign placed on the owner’s or occupant’s property complies with this chapter and that noncompliant signs are promptly removed in accordance with SMC 18.58.066(D). Property owners upon whose property a private sign has been placed without permission, in order to rebut the above presumption, may remove any such private sign, may, but are not required to, notify the persons responsible for placement of the sign to remove it if the owner’s identification and contact information is on the sign, or may notify the city code compliance officer of the unpermitted sign.

B. Penalty. The penalty for a temporary or portable sign in violation of this chapter shall be a Class 2 infraction, currently $125.00, pursuant to RCW 7.80.120(1)(b) as may be amended. Each day or portion of a day in violation shall be considered a separate offense pursuant to SMC 1.12.010(B).

C. Penalty for Failure to Respond to or to Pay an Infraction. Any person who fails to respond to an infraction notice may be charged with a misdemeanor crime pursuant to RCW 7.80.160(1). Any person who fails to pay a monetary penalty and/or perform community restitution may be found in contempt of court pursuant to RCW 7.80.160(2). (Ord. 2012-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-013 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.58.050 Variances – Permanent signs.

The city recognizes that for certain parcels and buildings it may not be possible for an applicant to conform to all the foregoing requirements or strict adherence may deny the property of type of signs and/or sign area that was the intent of the code. Therefore, the hearing examiner may grant variances from these requirements for permanent signs when all of the following conditions are found to apply:

A. That any variances granted must not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitation upon other properties in the same zoning district and similar circumstances.

B. That because of special circumstances applicable to the subject property, including size, sight line, setbacks, location or surroundings, the strict literal application of this chapter is found to deprive the subject property of privilege enjoyed by other properties in the same zone and similar circumstances.

C. That under the circumstances of this particular case, the variance, rather than the literal application of this chapter, actually carries out the spirit and intent of this chapter. (Ord. 2019-004 (Exh. B); Ord. 2012-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-013 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2000-005 § 2)


18.58.060 Exemptions – Permanent signs.

The following nonilluminated signs shall be exempt from the permitting and fee requirements of this chapter, subject to the limitations provided in this chapter, or as otherwise provided by state law. Nothing in this chapter should be construed to exempt compliance with the latest building and sign codes adopted by the city.

A. Signs erected or posted within the right-of-way of a street or alley or elsewhere for public safety and welfare, or pursuant to any law or regulation or otherwise required or directed by the city of Sequim; this includes, but is not limited to, signs erected and maintained by federal, state, or local government, including the city of Sequim, and those erected and/or maintained on behalf of the federal, state, or local government, including the city of Sequim.

B. On-site directional sign (limited to one) not exceeding three square feet in area and three feet in height.

C. On-site nonadvertising signs relating to trespassing and hunting, not exceeding two square feet in area and with a minimum separation of 100 feet.

D. On-site signs indicating business hours and emergency contact information not exceeding two square feet in area.

E. On-site seasonal decorative banners containing no advertising or promotion of goods and services.

F. Signs identifying community service structures or containers such as phone booths, transit shelters, and solid waste and recycle collection containers.

G. Private parking and tow away signs.

H. Flags displayed from permanently located freestanding or wall-mounted flag poles designed for the raising and lowering of U.S., Washington State or city flags.

I. Noncommercial signs on residential property not to exceed 10 square feet total signage. (Ord. 2012-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-013 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2000-005 § 2)


18.58.065 Exemptions – Temporary signs.

A. All signs located within an enclosed structure are exempt.

B. The following nonilluminated signs shall be exempt from permitting and fee requirements. Signs erected or posted under this section shall not be regulated by content, but are typically and customarily used to advertise real estate for lease or sale, construction, sales or specials, political or ideological positions, etc. Signs must be removed within two days after the triggering event has ended. For the purposes of this section, multiple adjacent parcels that are legally described as individual lots and that are owned by the same person(s) or entity shall be considered a single lot. Each subset outlined below shall be limited to the signage allowed for that subset only. Political signs are allowed under this section and also under SMC 18.58.135. Governmental temporary signs are exempt.

1. Mixed Use Zones. Each use shall be governed by the signage regulations appropriate to that use delineated below, i.e., commercial signage for commercial use, residential signage for residential use.

2. Commercial Zones – On Site.

a. Individual Lots.

i. One sign not to exceed four square feet and two feet in height which must be removed after the structure is leased, sold, or rented, or the construction or remodel is completed.

b. Multi-Tenant Complex. For each business licensed with the city of Sequim:

i. One sign not to exceed four square feet and two feet in height which must be removed after the structure is leased, sold, or rented, or the construction or remodel is completed.

c. Multiple Businesses on a Single Lot. For each business licensed with the city of Sequim:

i. One sign not to exceed four square feet and two feet in height which must be removed after the structure is leased, sold, or rented, or the construction or remodel is completed.

3. Residential Zones – On Site.

a. Single-Family Residence – Individual Lots.

i. One sign not to exceed four square feet and two feet in height and must be removed after the structure is leased, sold, or rented, or the construction or remodel is completed.

b. Multifamily Residence. For each residence:

i. One sign not to exceed four square feet and two feet in height and must be removed after the structure is leased, sold, or rented, or the construction or remodel is completed.

4. Public Facilities – On Site. For each lot:

a. One sign not to exceed four square feet and two feet in height per frontage.

b. One sign not to exceed 15 square feet.

5. Research and Development Park – On Site. For each lot:

a. One sign not to exceed four square feet and two feet in height per frontage and must be removed after the structure is leased, sold, or rented, or the construction or remodel is completed.

6. All Commercial Zone Areas – Outdoor Product Displays – On Site. Signs shall not be regulated by content but are typically and customarily used to advertise specific products for sale on on-site outdoor displays. Signs may be placed on outdoor product displays if:

a. The sign does not exceed 25 percent of the face of the display on which the sign is located;

b. The display contains only products actually available for sale at that site by the owner or occupant of the property;

c. The displays are not located within the public right-of-way;

d. The sign is removed when the product display is not located outside;

e. Only one sign per product display shall be allowed;

f. The display does not interfere with pedestrian traffic or obstruct view of vehicular traffic.

7. All Commercial Zone Areas – Grand Opening or Going Out of Business Events.

a. Individual Lots.

i. One sign not to exceed four square feet and two feet in height which must be removed after 30 days.

b. Multi-Tenant Complex. For each business licensed with the city of Sequim:

i. One sign not to exceed four square feet and two feet in height which must be removed after 30 days.

c. Multiple Businesses on a Single Lot. For each business licensed with the city of Sequim:

i. One sign not to exceed four square feet and two feet in height which must be removed after 30 days.

8. Handheld Signs. Handheld signs, including sandwich board worn signs, are not exempt from permit requirements except for community and special events; provided, that, when authorized by a permit:

a. No handheld sign exceeds six square feet in area.

b. No person carrying a handheld sign interferes with, blocks, or impedes vehicular traffic or pedestrian movement. Such signs shall not be displayed in the traffic vision triangle at street corners.

c. Handheld signs may be on or off the site of the sign owner or proponent.

d. These requirements apply when the person is adjacent to a public roadway or is not participating in a permitted parade or other permitted special event.

e. Handheld signs shall comply with all requirements for off-site portable signs and shall be considered off-site portable signs.

f. Handheld signs, in addition to all other limits, shall be allowed only in the downtown subarea zone.

g. Handheld signs are considered temporary signs for purposes of determining the number of temporary signs allowed.

C. In addition to other time restrictions, all temporary signs shall be removed after 12 consecutive months regardless of whether the triggering event has ended. Each sign must have a minimum of 60 days or a duration equal to the length of time displayed, whichever is longer, between subsequent displays.

D. All signs must be placed and sized in a manner so as not to interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic, visibility, line of sight, or public safety, which includes but is not limited to vision triangles. All signs must be properly secured and comprised of quality materials to avoid causing litter or debris. Any sign that is faded, torn, damaged, or in disrepair shall be immediately repaired or removed.

E. Portable signs shall be considered temporary signs for purposes of determining the number of temporary signs allowed in this section.

F. Signs erected or posted under this section must be entirely on the private property pertaining to the sign content and shall not be placed in medians, roundabouts, or on trees or in rights-of-way except as otherwise permitted in this chapter. Signs may not be placed on utility poles, streetlight and/or traffic signal standards unless pursuant to an agreement or permit with the city, signed by the city, which outlines the specific parameters for such placement.

G. Temporary signs located on private property shall be the responsibility of the property owner or occupant of the property on which the sign is located. Signs placed on private property without the owner’s or occupant’s permission or in a manner that exceeds the scope of the owner’s or occupant’s permission may be taken down by the owner or occupant as specified in SMC 18.58.066(D).

H. City Not Responsible. The city and its officers, employees, or agents shall not be responsible for any lost or damaged signs erected or posted under this section.

I. Penalties for violation of this section shall be as described in SMC 18.58.045. (Ord. 2012-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-013 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.58.066 Exemptions – Portable signs.

The following nonilluminated portable signs, which shall not include handheld signs (see temporary signs in SMC 18.58.065(B)(8)), shall be exempt from permitting and fee requirements except that portable signs shall be considered temporary signs for purposes of determining the number of temporary signs allowed in SMC 18.58.065:

A. Portable signs may be placed on private property in all zones where retail commercial uses are permitted. Each sign shall not exceed six square feet. Governmental portable signs are exempt. Portable signs shall be subject to all of the following conditions:

1. Signs shall be placed and removed each day and shall be placed no earlier than 6:00 a.m. the day before the event and be removed within one-half hour after dusk on the last day of the event, or shall be placed and removed in accordance with regular business hours, whichever is less. Signs placed by event or activity sponsors pursuant to SMC 18.58.067(C) shall be placed and removed in accordance with a valid contract or permit.

2. Only one sign may be placed on a lot or rental frontage.

3. Shopping centers, shopping malls and other similar commercial or retail locations where such locations are permitted to have a permanent sign identifying tenants or occupants of leased or rental units may not have portable signs fronting a public road except as provided in subsection (A)(3)(a) of this section. Interior portable signs in front of individual units are permitted if located at least 40 feet from the front strip mall property line/edge of right-of-way, oriented to the street; provided, that such signs are pedestrian oriented signs and not readable from a public right-of-way or from a residential zone. 

a. The owner of a strip mall may prepare a written “tenant portable sign management” policy, and supply a copy to the DCD, providing for portable signs to be placed on mall property fronting the primary street that provides entry to the mall and not on city right-of-way. The number of allowed portable signs is one portable sign, rounded up, for every five tenants, excluding every business with a primary entrance within 50 feet of the primary street. Each sign shall not be greater than 12 square feet in area or more than five feet in height, shall not be illuminated, shall be removed during nonbusiness hours and shall comply with all location safety requirements of the sign code including setbacks from driveways, location outside of vision triangles and other sight-distance requirements for safety. Signs shall be neat, readable and of a professional design. 

4. Residential zoned property off-site directional signs are permitted. Each residential property is limited to two off-site signs which may be placed on private property with permission of the owner or which may be placed on the planting strip area of city right-of-way with permission of the underlying property owner or immediately adjacent owner. Where the planting strip is owned in fee by the city or other governmental agency such signs are prohibited. No signs are allowed for home occupations. All signs must be placed and sized in a manner so as not to interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic, visibility, line of sight, or public safety, which includes but is not limited to vision triangles. All signs must be properly constructed and comprised of quality materials to avoid causing litter or debris. Any sign that is faded, torn, damaged, or in disrepair shall be immediately repaired or removed. All such signs shall be posted for no longer than five consecutive days and shall be posted no more often than five times per year.

5. DC and DMU-I zoned property off-site directional signs are permitted only under the following circumstances:

a. The property is between Bell and Cedar Streets and between Fifth and Sunnyside Avenues, but does not have the right to a permanent location sign visible from Washington Street or Cedar Street or Bell Street.

b. The sign must clearly direct viewers to the location of the property which is not visible from Washington Street or Cedar Street or Bell Street.

c. Each such zoned premises is limited to two off-site signs which may be placed on private property with permission of the owner or which may be placed on the planting strip area of city right-of-way. All signs must be placed and sized in a manner so as not to interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic, visibility, line of sight, or public safety, which includes but is not limited to vision triangles. All signs must be properly constructed and comprised of quality materials to avoid causing litter or debris. Any sign that is faded, torn, damaged, or in disrepair shall be immediately repaired or removed.

6. Signs located on private property shall be the responsibility of the property owner or occupant on which the sign is located.

7. Signs placed on private property without the owner’s or occupant’s permission or in a manner that exceeds the scope of the owner’s or occupant’s permission may be taken down by the property owner or occupant as specified in subsection D of this section.

8. Legible contact information shall appear on the sign, including the sign owner’s name, address, and a telephone number where the sign owner can be reached during the entire time that the sign is displayed.

9. Failure to comply with these provisions may result in penalties prescribed under SMC 18.58.045.

B. City Not Responsible. The city and its officers, employees, or agents shall not be responsible for any lost or damaged signs located on public property, public rights-of-way, or public easements while on the property, right-of-way or easement, or in city custody.

C. All signs must be placed in a manner so as not to impede or interfere in any way with pedestrian or vehicular traffic, visibility, line of sight, or public safety.

D. Owners or occupants may take down unlawful signs placed on their property without permission.

E. All signs must be of durable construction and comprised of quality materials to avoid causing litter or debris. Any sign that is faded, torn, damaged, or in disrepair shall be immediately repaired or removed.

F. Penalties for violation of this section shall be as described in SMC 18.58.045. (Ord. 2014-006 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2012-017 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2012-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-013 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.58.067 Special events and temporary activities (community events).

A. Special event sponsors and temporary activity sponsors and community event sponsors may have signs as allowed under SMC 18.58.065 in accordance with the zoning of the property where the event or activity will be held. The total of all signs on any individual lot must not exceed the maximum number of signs otherwise allowed for that zoning district and must also comply with the special event or temporary activity permit signage requirements.

B. Special events, temporary activity and community event sponsors who have obtained a valid special event or temporary activity permit may have a maximum of 10 temporary and/or portable signs, each sign not to exceed eight square feet. These signs shall not be regulated by content but are typically and customarily used for way finding or traffic regulation. A valid temporary activity or special or community event permit is not an agreement for the purposes of subsection C of this section. All such signs shall comply with the terms of the permit.

C. Special event sponsors and temporary activity and community event sponsors who contract with the city as a co-sponsor for their event may have a maximum of 20 temporary and/or portable signs, each sign not to exceed eight square feet, as approved through their agreement with city council.

D. If subsection B or C of this section applies, sponsors may place portable signs on the sidewalk only as may be specified and allowed by a valid permit or agreement.

E. All portable signs shall conform to the time requirements specified in SMC 18.58.066(A)(1), and all temporary signs shall be removed within 24 hours of the end of the event, unless there is a valid contract in place that specifies different time requirements.

F. All signs relating to an exempt community or special event or temporary activity must have contact information on the sign as required under SMC 18.58.066(A)(8).

G. All signs erected under this section shall not be illuminated in any manner.

H. No sign shall be placed or located in any way that may interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic, visibility, line of sight, or public safety, which includes but is not limited to vision triangles.

I. Penalties for violation of this section shall be as described in SMC 18.58.045. (Ord. 2012-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-013 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.58.070 Prohibited signs.

While no sign is permitted, except as expressly stipulated by this chapter, the following signs are listed as prohibited in the interest of clarity, public interest and safety:

A. All off-premises signs, including billboards, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter.

B. Pole signs.

C. Signs which exceed the top of the roof or parapet on which they are attached.

D. Signs on vehicles, trailers, boats, or other similar property parked on private property, unless SMC 18.58.065(B)(6) applies.

E. Animated, rotating signs or those incorporating in any manner flashing or intermittent lighting.

F. Signs resembling in size, shape and/or color official safety and traffic signs and/or devices such as stop and turning signs and traffic signals.

G. Signs located in the public right-of-way, except as expressly permitted by this chapter.

H. Signs placed on utility poles, street light poles or traffic control device supports or trees, unless placement is allowed under SMC 18.58.065(E).

I. Festoons, unless placement is authorized as a community event.

J. Abandoned signs and structures, subject to provisions of SMC 18.58.150.

K. Any signs, devices, or structures which constitute a hazard to public safety. (Ord. 2012-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-013 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2000-005 § 2)


18.58.080 Washington State Department of Transportation signs.

Highway commercial follow-through signs for a legally established and licensed business in the city of Sequim may be permitted as defined and legally required by state of Washington statutory authority and, as consistent with that authority, required by the Washington State Department of Transportation (WSDOT) as a condition to participate in any established highway sign program and in compliance with the sections of this chapter, and in compliance with the following criteria:

A. Size. Meet minimum criteria by WSDOT for follow-through signs as may be legally required and defined by statutory authority.

B. Number. Minimum required by WSDOT as legally defined and established through statutory authority.

C. Color. Same as sign on highway.

D. Support Structure. Designed and owned by city of Sequim to hold multiple signs.

E. Location. To be determined by city in compliance with requirements of WSDOT Logo Program or other highway sign programs as may be legally required and defined by statutory authority. Signs shall be selected for posting on the city support structure on a first come; first served basis up to the limit of spaces available on the structure.

F. Material. Same as WSDOT specifications for logo signs.

G. Ownership. Signs shall be owned by business.

H. Purchase. By applicant as provided for by WSDOT program.

I. Maintenance. Sign is applicant’s responsibility; structure a city responsibility. 

J. Installation Fee and Annual Fee. An installation fee and an annual fee may be charged by the city for follow-through signs as set forth in the city fee ordinance. (Ord. 2015-013 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2012-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-013 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2000-005 § 2)


18.58.090 Temporary signs requiring a permit.

The purpose of this section is to provide an opportunity to obtain additional temporary on-site signage beyond what is exempted in SMC 18.58.065. Additional temporary signs shall be allowed as outlined below. This signage shall not be regulated by content, but is typically and customarily used to advertise special events, sales, store openings, and other similar, infrequent events on banners. For the purposes of this section, multiple, adjacent parcels that are legally described as individual lots and that are owned by the same person(s) or entity shall be considered a single lot.

A. Commercial Zones.

1. Number. Maximum of two signs per individual lot.

2. Size. Maximum total lot signage area of 24 square feet.

3. Display Period. Maximum of 15 consecutive days, four times per calendar year. Signs must have a minimum of 30 consecutive calendar days between each 15 days of display of a temporary sign.

B. Public Facilities Zones.

1. Number. Maximum of two signs per individual lot.

2. Size. Maximum total area of 24 square feet.

3. Display Period. Maximum of 15 consecutive days, four times per calendar year. Signs must have a minimum of 30 consecutive calendar days between each 15 days of display of a temporary sign.

C. All Other Zones.

1. Number. Maximum of one sign per lot.

2. Size. Maximum total area of eight square feet.

3. Duration. Maximum of seven consecutive days, four times per calendar year. Signs must have a minimum of 30 consecutive calendar days between each 15 days of display of a temporary sign.

D. Permits. Persons responsible for the sign(s) shall obtain a temporary sign permit prior to display of temporary signs under this section.

E. Penalties for violation of this section shall be as described in SMC 18.58.045. (Ord. 2012-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-013 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2000-005 § 2)


18.58.094 Garage sale signs.

A. Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the term “garage sale” shall include noncommercial yard sales, estate sales, patio sales, rummage sales, or other similar sales of 20 or more miscellaneous used household items, and which are advertised for the general public to attend. This definition is not meant to include new handcrafted items by the sponsor of the sale.

B. Restrictions. There shall not be conducted more than four garage sales at any one location during a calendar year. The length of time for each garage sale shall not exceed four consecutive days. Goods displayed in any garage sale may not be displayed in the public right-of-way. Signs may be posted only on the property where the sale is being held and on up to two other locations directing buyers to the location of the sale. The signs must be on private yards or on the planting strip of private property and must have the permission of the owner or tenant of the property upon which they are posted. The signs shall be no larger than four square feet and shall contain, on the front or back of the sign, the name of owner or tenant conducting the garage sale, the dates of the sale and the address and phone number of the sale location. The sign shall be posted no earlier than three days before the sale and shall be removed no later than the day after the sale. Signs in compliance with these restrictions for sales in compliance with these restrictions shall not require a permit. (Ord. 2012-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-013 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.58.100 General regulations.

A. Freestanding signs shall be centered along the street frontage as design and circumstances permit; however, no sign shall be placed within five feet of a property line, or driveway, except that a small monument sign may be placed within one foot of the street frontage property line.

B. Supports for pylon signs shall be at least four standard inches square for signs of eight feet in height or less with a clear area under the sign of no more than one-half the height of the sign; and for signs over eight feet in height, as may be authorized in SMC 18.58.110(D)(5), the supporting structures shall be at least two feet in width and total one-fourth the width of the sign.

C. Except as provided for in this chapter, no portion of any sign shall be located within five feet of a property line or be located in such a manner as to constitute a hazard to pedestrians or vehicles.

D. All freestanding signs shall include the address of the property in numerals and/or letters at least six inches high. Addresses over eight inches in height shall be counted as sign area. Addresses shall not be obscured by landscaping or other obstructions.

E. No commercial, freestanding signs shall be permitted on local low-density residential streets, unless the commercial property has no other street frontage.

F. All signs, except those specifically exempted under this chapter, shall be permanent in nature and be consistent with the latest version of the International Building Code adopted by the city of Sequim.

G. The size, number and locations of signs for uses approved in the “public facilities” zone or under the PUD and special property use provisions of the municipal code shall be provided for in the approval of those uses or for existing facilities as permitted with the underlying zoning district in which they are located as provided by this chapter.

H. Integrated commercial developments may be provided with relief from the strict application of the provisions of this chapter through a major use permit approving a uniform sign program which implements the intent of the chapter, is in keeping with the character, nature and location of the development and protects the public safety and property values of surrounding parcels and businesses.

I. Downtown Plan Area. The downtown plan area regulations, when adopted, may modify the regulations in this code chapter. Where the two are in conflict, the regulations in the downtown plan govern. (Ord. 2012-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-013 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2000-005 § 2)


18.58.110 Signs in commercial and industrial districts.

Signs shall be permitted in all commercial, professional office, industrial and mixed use zones of the city per the following regulations and as provided for elsewhere in this chapter:

A. Business in an integrated development with an approved master sign program shall comply with the conditions of that program.

B. No sign, except as otherwise permitted by this chapter, shall be permitted that does not pertain directly to an approved use or business conducted on the premises.

C. For mixed use projects permitted by the municipal code, a sign program, which implements the intent of this chapter, shall be approved as part of the discretionary approval of the planned unit development, binding site plan or other allowed application process.

D. Freestanding Signs.

1. Number. Each commercially developed parcel of land or commercial center shall be permitted one freestanding sign (consistent with the standards of this chapter) per street frontage.

2. Sign Area. For each sign, a sign area of 25 square feet or one square foot of sign area per each two lineal feet of street frontage up to a maximum sign area of 50 square feet, whichever is greater.

3. Height. The maximum height of a freestanding sign located within five feet of the public right-of-way or private street shall be four feet. Signs set back a minimum of five feet shall be permitted a height of five feet plus one-half foot of height for each additional foot of setback exceeding five feet up to a maximum of eight feet in height. Any sign in excess of eight feet as permitted by this code in subsection (D)(5) of this section shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet.

4. Location. No freestanding signs shall be located within any vision triangle or within 25 feet of the right-of-way of any street intersecting the street on which the freestanding sign fronts.

5. Multi-Tenant Properties. In addition to the above, signs shall be allowed as stipulated for the following multi-tenant properties:

a. Retail Center, Major. Shall be permitted, through approval of a major use permit for a master sign program, one monument sign per developed pad lot; one center identification sign on the primary frontage, with a sign area of 100 square feet plus 10 square feet for each acre to a maximum of 200 square feet and one center identification sign on each secondary street frontage of at least 100 linear feet with a maximum sign area of 50 square feet. Center identification signs shall not exceed the height of associated buildings or 25 feet, whichever is lower. The location of freestanding signs shall be determined by the master sign program.

b. Retail Center, Minor. Shall be permitted a single center identification sign in keeping with the limits on freestanding signs in commercial zones with an additional allowance of five square feet of sign area per tenant space on permitted freestanding signs to a maximum additional sign area of 45 square feet with a maximum sign height of 20 feet or the height of associated buildings, whichever is lower.

c. Multi-Tenant Professional and Office Buildings and Centers with More Than Four Tenants. Shall be permitted a tenant directory sign (which may be attached to a building wall) for each street frontage, with a sign area for each directory of two square feet per tenant with no additional height allowance. The sign, if not attached to the building, shall be set back from the street frontage property line a minimum of 20 feet.

E. Wall Signs.

1. Number. Each business shall be permitted one sign for each building or lease area frontage on a street or parking lot accessible to the public, except that each business in a multi-tenant property other than within the DC zone (see subsection (E)(5) of this section) with frontage on a street or parking lot accessible to the public shall be permitted only one wall sign on only one such frontage and such sign shall be on the facade of primary entry to the business.

2. Sign Area. The total sign area permitted per frontage shall not exceed one square foot for lineal foot of the frontage on which the sign is located or 25 square feet, whichever is greater, up to a maximum of 100 square feet. Frontages may not be combined to permit a larger sign.

3. Location. Signs placed on the building wall, parapet, fascia, or canopy shall be generally centered on the supporting structure or the lease area or over an entry but in no case shall a building sign be located within two feet of the end of the building wall, roof, canopy, parapet or lease area.

4. For properties zoned MU/C-III and west of 7th Avenue only, the following wall sign standards apply in lieu of subsections (E)(1) to (3) of this section:

a. The total allowed wall sign area for an individual business tenant is 100 square feet plus one square foot of area for every four feet of distance from the primary customer entry facade most oriented to Washington Street to the nearest edge of Washington Street right-of-way; provided, however, that in no case shall the total area allowance exceed eight percent of the area of the building facade of primary customer entry. 

b. The maximum number of wall signs permitted per business is two.

c. No individual sign shall be greater than provided in subsection (E)(4)(a) of this section or 80 percent of the total allowed sign area or 200 square feet, whichever is the least.

d. Any sign allowed shall be installed only on the facade of primary customer entry most oriented to Washington Street; provided, that for any business tenant in a retail center with no primary customer entry facade visible from Washington Street, one of the two allowed signs in subsection (E)(4)(b) of this section, not exceeding 20 percent of the total sign area allowance in subsection (E)(4)(a) of this section, may be installed on the facade most oriented to Washington Street. 

5. For properties zoned downtown core (DC), one wall sign shall be allowed per the standards of subsections (E)(2) and (3) of this section for any business with a facade abutting a public alley with a direct customer entrance from the alley. 

F. Window Signs. In addition to the sign area permitted above, each business may be permitted window signs; provided, that the sign area shall not exceed more than four square feet or 25 percent of each window area. (Ord. 2014-009 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2014-007 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2012-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-019 § 2; Ord. 2011-013 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2000-005 § 2)


18.58.115 Downtown sign standards.

In any case where specific regulations governing signs in Chapter 18.57 SMC differ and conflict with sign regulations in this chapter, regulations in Chapter 18.57 SMC shall control. All other applicable sign regulations in this chapter shall also apply to properties governed by Chapter 18.57 SMC. (Ord. 2012-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-013 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2000-005 § 2)


18.58.120 Signs in residential areas.

Signs shall be permitted in all residential zones of the city and on property developed exclusively with residential uses, including those residential units in commercial and mixed use zones, per the following regulations and as provided for elsewhere in this chapter.

A. In addition to signs permitted by this section, home occupations shall be permitted one nonilluminated, flush-mounted wall or window sign not to exceed six square feet in area.

B. Residential project entry signs shall be permitted as follows:

1. One sign at each road or driveway entry located outside of the public right-of-way and any required clear vision triangle;

2. Only where a property owner or homeowners’ association exists to maintain the sign;

3. Total area of each sign shall be no more than 32 square feet per sign face;

4. Maximum height shall be eight feet;

5. Shall be integrated into the landscape plan of the project. (Ord. 2012-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-013 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-003 § 1 (Att. 3); Ord. 2000-005 § 2)


18.58.130 Signs for uses with special needs.

The following additional sign area to that permitted elsewhere in this chapter is allowed for uses which have unique needs for signs which cannot or are not addressed elsewhere in this chapter.

A. Gasoline Service Stations. Shall be permitted additional sign area as necessary and/or as required by law for the display of the price of all petroleum fuels offered for sale.

B. Churches and Schools. Shall be permitted a freestanding sign on the primary street frontage of up to 50 square feet plus a reader board of up to 40 square feet. Religious symbols permanently affixed to the structure shall not be considered signs for the purposes of this chapter.

C. Vehicle Sales Lots. Shall be permitted to display the price and description of the vehicles offered for sale on each vehicle with numbers no greater than 12 inches in height.

D. Commercial Business with Drive-Through Windows. Shall also be permitted 20 square feet per drive-through lane for menu boards with a maximum total menu board area of 40 square feet. (Ord. 2012-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-013 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2000-005 § 2)


18.58.135 Political campaign signs.

A. Political campaign signs do not require sign permits.

B. Candidate signs may only be installed for candidates who either have publicly declared their intent to run for office or have filed with the appropriate authority to seek office.

C. Initiative signage may be displayed for any initiative in which there is an ongoing drive to collect signatures to place the initiative on a ballot or if the initiative has been filed with the Washington Secretary of State’s Office or county auditor’s office. All signs must be removed within 14 days following the election.

D. All political campaign signage shall be removed within 14 days following the general election. If a runoff election for a candidate or initiative is required, the signs may remain until 14 days following the runoff election.

E. Campaign signs may be placed by permission in the landscaped area or parking strip of a property in which the adjacent property owner controls and maintains the area. This may include rights-of-way. No political campaign sign shall be erected on private property without the permission of the property owner or his/her agent.

F. Campaign signs are in addition to any sign otherwise permitted under this chapter.

G. Campaign signs may not be located on real property owned and/or controlled by the city of Sequim except as set forth in subsection E of this section.

H. Campaign signs may not be located within street medians, roundabouts, or in right-of-way areas not maintained by the adjacent property owner, and may not obstruct sidewalks, streets or the view triangle at intersections.

I. The maximum size of political campaign signs shall be 32 square feet per parcel. (Ord. 2012-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-013 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.58.140 Nonconforming signs – Permanent signs.

A. Legal nonconforming signs and sign structures, i.e., permanent signs legally permitted, erected and maintained at the time of the original adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter (Ordinance No. 2000-005), although they do not conform to the regulations herein specified, shall be permitted to remain so long as they are safe and maintained; are used within the previous year for a minimum of six consecutive months; are not relocated; are not enlarged or structurally modified; and there is no change in the use of the site, or issuance of any land use approval.

B. Off-premises legal nonconforming signs and sign structures, i.e., permanent signs legally permitted, erected and maintained at the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, although they do not conform to the regulations herein specified, shall be permitted to remain and be used so long as they are safe and maintained; are used to advertise a business or product within the previous year; are not relocated; are not enlarged or structurally modified; and there is no major change in the nature of the use of the site, or issuance of any land use approval or major construction permit for the site on which the sign is located. (Ord. 2012-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-013 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2000-005 § 2)


18.58.150 Removal of abandoned or obsolete signs and structures.

A. Abandoned or obsolete sign structures shall be removed by the owner of the premises upon which the sign is located within 45 days of being notified by the city.

B. Abandoned or obsolete signs shall have the copy removed and replaced with a blank sign face of like material until such time as another use occupies the site and uses the sign, up to a maximum of 12 consecutive months. After 12 months, the sign and structure shall be removed pursuant to subsection A of this section. Intermittent sign usage and incomplete sign usage by temporary site occupants are insufficient to cause a sign to lose its abandoned status. (Ord. 2012-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-013 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2000-005 § 2)


18.58.160 Maintenance.

All signs and sign structures shall be periodically inspected and maintained at a reasonable interval, including replacement of defective parts and wiring, painting, cleaning and other acts required to maintain the sign in a safe and presentable manner. Any sign not maintained in compliance with the intent and requirements of this code shall be deemed to be in violation of this chapter and the administrator shall order its removal. (Ord. 2012-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-013 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2000-005 § 2)


18.58.170 Liability.

This chapter shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any person owning, building, altering, constructing, removing or moving any sign in the city for damages to anyone injured or damaged either in person or property by any defect or action in this chapter, nor shall the city, or any agent thereof, be held as assuming such liability by reason of permit or inspection authorized in this chapter or a certificate of inspection issued by the city or any of its agents. (Ord. 2012-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-013 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2000-005 § 2)


18.58.180 Constitutionality.

If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, word, or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The council declares that it would have passed this code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, word, and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, words, or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this code should be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinances or orders shall be in full force and effect. (Ord. 2012-011 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-013 § 1 (Exh. A))


Chapter 18.59 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES

Sections:

18.59.010    General provisions.

18.59.020    Residential garage, carport, shop, covered areas, and similar accessory structures.

18.59.030    Incidental food service.


18.59.010 General provisions.

A. All accessory uses and structures shall meet the following requirements:

1. Be an allowed use in the zoning classification in which they are located;

2. Be operated and maintained under the same ownership and use as the primary use or structure except as provided herein;

3. Be located on the same lot as the related primary use;

4. Not be erected prior to the occupancy of the primary use or structure; and

5. Not be located in a required yard except as provided herein.

B. All residential accessory uses attached to or part of the main structure must meet all minimum requirements established by Chapter 18.44 SMC. (Ord. 2013-002 § 1)


18.59.020 Residential garage, carport, shop, covered areas, and similar accessory structures.

A. The dimensional standards below rather than the standards in SMC 18.44.020 shall apply to structures such as garages, storage sheds or tool sheds that are accessory to detached single-family residential uses in R zones, exclusive of accessory dwelling units as provided in Chapter 18.66 SMC:

1. Setbacks. Detached accessory structures shall be a minimum of five feet from side and rear property lines, 10 feet from any street right-of-way or alley, 10 feet from any building on the same or adjacent properties, and no closer to the front property line than the distance to the primary residence facade element furthest from the street; provided, that the minimum setback from any alley 16 feet or greater in width is five feet; attached accessory structures are subject to the same setbacks as the primary residence;

2. Maximum Structure Coverage. Site coverage for any individual accessory structure, attached or detached, shall not exceed 1,000 square feet, except for lots of one acre or larger the maximum coverage is 3,000 square feet; and, the total coverage of all attached accessory structures including garages shall not exceed the coverage of the gross living area of the primary residence;

3. Maximum Site Coverage. Site coverage for all detached accessory structures combined is 1,200 square feet or 80 percent of the primary structure lot coverage, whichever is less, and 1,400 square feet if a ground level accessory dwelling unit is included; provided, that for lots of one acre or greater the maximum site coverage for all accessory structures combined is subject to the 40 percent maximum coverage for all structures on the site per SMC 18.44.020;

4. Maximum Structure Height. The height of any accessory structure shall not exceed the lesser of the elevation of the roof of the primary residence or 18 feet; provided, that for lots of one acre or greater the maximum permitted height may be increased by one foot of height over the 18-foot maximum for every four feet of additional setback from side and rear property lines to a maximum height of 35 feet; and

5. Maximum Structure Width. The combined width as measured parallel to the rear property line of all detached accessory structures over 10 feet in elevation shall not exceed 40 percent of the lot width.

B. Design. Any accessory structure greater than 200 square feet shall be designed so that it is visually consistent with the character of a residential neighborhood including the following:

1. Constructed of similar materials as the primary structure;

2. Presenting a roof of equal or greater pitch as the primary structure; and

3. Presenting exterior colors that match or harmonize with the color(s) of the primary structure.

C. Only accessory storage buildings defined in this chapter are permitted as accessory storage containers on property in any residential zone of the city, or on any property within the city where the primary use is residential. Cargo containers, railroad cars, truck vans, converted mobile homes, travel trailers, recreational vehicles, bus bodies, vehicles, and similar prefabricated items and structures originally built for purposes other than the storage of goods and materials are not considered to be accessory structures or buildings.

D. Notwithstanding the provisions set forth in subsection C of this section, the temporary placement of transport containers and/or portable site storage containers on residentially zoned properties, or on properties where the primary use of which is residential, for the limited purpose of loading and unloading household contents is permitted for a period of time not exceeding 30 days in any one calendar year.

E. Notwithstanding the provisions set forth in subsection C of this section, licensed and bonded contractors may use cargo containers for the temporary location of an office, equipment, and/or materials storage structure during construction which is taking place on the property where the cargo container is located, if the use of the cargo container is authorized pursuant to a city building permit. (Ord. 2018-006 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2016-007 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2013-008 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2013-002 § 1)


18.59.030 Incidental food service.

A. Incidental food service is allowed as an accessory use to a primary use only under the following conditions and limits:

1. The primary use must occupy a gross floor area of not less than 50,000 square feet;

2. The primary use is located within a zone that permits retail use; 

3. The total enclosed vendor space for an outdoor incidental food service shall not exceed 200 square feet in area;

4. If the incidental food service is outside the primary use structure, it shall be immediately adjacent to it;

5. The signing for any outdoor incidental food service shall not exceed 20 square feet of wall signs of which none shall be larger than 10 square feet and one portable sign not exceeding six square feet; and

6. The incidental food service shall not occupy required parking spaces or designated circulation lanes. (Ord. 2013-002 § 1)


Chapter 18.60 CONDITIONAL USES

Sections: 

18.60.010    Purposes.

18.60.020    Application requirements.

18.60.030    Review criteria.

18.60.040    Site development standards.

18.60.050    Repealed.


18.60.010 Purposes. 

Certain uses, because of their unusual size, rate of occurrence, special requirements, possible safety hazards or potentially detrimental effects on surrounding properties and/or other similar potentially adverse impacts, are classified as conditional uses for the purpose of this title. Conditional uses are those uses which are not permitted “by right” within specific zoning districts, but which may be considered, on an individual or case-by-case basis, as specified in Chapter 18.20 SMC.

A. These uses shall be allowed within certain zones, as specified herein above, after obtaining a conditional use permit (CUP) granted by the planning commission or director of the department of community development. Conditional use applications are classified as either minor or major and are processed consistent with the requirements of SMC Title 20. The planning commission shall review applications for major conditional uses. The director of the department of community development shall review minor conditional uses.

B. All conditional use permits approved by the planning commission or director of the department of community development shall certify the location, nature and extent of the conditional use, together with all conditions imposed and any other information necessary for the issuance of the permit. (Ord. 2011-017 § 2; Ord. 2004-015 § 10; Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


18.60.020 Application requirements.

A. Such forms require the following minimum information:

1. Signature of applicant.

2. Signature of landowners, if other than applicant.

3. Method of providing the development with stormwater management, water, power, sanitary and solid waste disposal and site circulation and access.

4. A vicinity sketch showing the relationship of the proposed development to existing streets and surrounding land uses and indicating the location of any nearby bodies of water, wetlands, or other significant natural features.

5. A plan of the proposed use showing existing and proposed streets, structures, open spaces, uses of each structure, parking areas, fencing, pedestrian paths and trails, buffers, and landscaping.

6. Such additional information as deemed materially necessary by the department of community development to enable the hearing examiner or director of the department of community development to take action pursuant to the requirements of this section.

B. Upon receipt of an application for a conditional use permit, the department reviews it for completeness. Upon determination that the application is complete, the department will forward the application to the director of the department of community development or hearing examiner for review. (Ord. 2019-004 (Exh. B); Ord. 2011-017 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


18.60.030 Review criteria.

In addition to the requirements prescribed herein below, conditional uses shall not be recommended or granted unless all of the following findings are made in the affirmative:

A. The proposal will not materially endanger the public health, safety, or general welfare, or generate undesirable impacts beyond the property boundaries.

B. The proposal will not substantially impact the reasonable use and enjoyment of surrounding properties.

C. The proposal is consistent with the overall goals and objectives of the comprehensive plan and any applicable subarea plans.

D. The cumulative effect of approving this and similar proposals will not cause an erosion of the purpose and intent of the comprehensive plan.

E. The character of the use is in harmony with the surrounding area, the applicant has demonstrated that the conditional use, with any proposed mitigations, will have no more impacts off-site than other uses which are permitted within the zoning district.

F. The proposed development meets all applicable noise, odor, lighting and buffer standards for the zone in which it is proposing to locate. (Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


18.60.040 Site development standards.

Conditional uses shall be developed consistent with all applicable development standards contained in this code. (Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


18.60.050 Conditional uses – Major and minor. 

Repealed by Ord. 2011-003. (Ord. 2009-046 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 98-004 § 2(C); Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


Chapter 18.61 WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES

Sections:

18.61.010    Purpose.

18.61.020    Definitions specific to wireless communication facilities.

18.61.030    Towers.

18.61.040    Collocation of antennas, DAS, and small cells.

18.61.050    Tower sharing, collocation and preferred tower locations.

18.61.060    Application submittal requirements.

18.61.070    General development standards applicable to WCFs.

18.61.080    Regulations for facilities subject to a conditional use permit.

18.61.090    Exception from standards.

18.61.100    Final inspection.

18.61.110    FCC permit revocation.

18.61.120    Discontinuation of use.

18.61.130    Independent technical review.

18.61.140    Exempt facilities.

18.61.150    Indemnification.


18.61.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the development and operation of wireless communication facilities within the city and accommodate the balanced provision of wireless communication services that meet community’s needs while promoting and protecting the public health, safety and welfare, including the community’s natural beauty, visual quality and environmental health. (Ord. 2016-015 § 3 (Exh. A § 2))


18.61.020 Definitions specific to wireless communication facilities.

In addition to the definitions provided in Chapter 18.08 SMC, the definitions set forth below shall apply to this chapter:

A. “A” Definitions.

“Antenna” means one or more rods, panels, discs or similar devices used for wireless communication, which may include, but is not limited to, omni-directional antenna (whip), directional antenna (panel), and parabolic antenna (dish).

“Antenna array” means a single or group of antenna elements and associated mounting hardware, transmission lines, or other appurtenances which share a common attachment device such as a mounting frame or mounting support structure for the sole purpose of transmitting or receiving electromagnetic waves.

B. “B” Definitions.

“Base station” means a structure or equipment at a fixed location that enables Commission-licensed or authorized wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. The term does not encompass a tower as defined in this chapter or any equipment associated with a tower.

1. The term includes, but is not limited to, equipment associated with wireless communications services such as private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul.

2. The term includes, but is not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration (including distributed antenna systems and small cell networks).

3. The term includes any structure other than a tower that, at the time the relevant application is filed with the city under this section, supports or houses equipment described in this section that has been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under Washington or local regulatory review process, even if the structure was not built for the sole or primary purpose of providing such support.

4. The term does not include any structure that, at the time the relevant application is filed with Washington or the city under this section, does not support or house equipment described in this section.

C. “C” Definitions.

“Collocation” means the mounting or installation of transmission equipment on an eligible support structure for the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving radio frequency signals for communications purposes.

“Commission” means the Federal Communications Commission (“FCC”).

D. “D” Definitions.

“Deemed approved” means and refers to an eligible facilities modification application that has been deemed approved upon the city’s failure to act, and has become effective, as provided pursuant the FCC Eligible Facilities Request Rules.

“Distributed antenna system” or “DAS” means a network consisting of transceiver equipment at a central hub site to support multiple antenna locations throughout the desired coverage area.

E. “E” Definitions.

“Eligible facilities request” means any request for modification of an existing tower or base station that does not substantially change the physical dimensions of such tower or base station, involving collocation of new transmission equipment, removal of transmission equipment, or replacement of transmission equipment.

“Eligible support structure” means any tower or base station as defined in this section; provided, that it is existing at the time the relevant application is filed with the city under this section.

“Existing” means a constructed tower or base station is existing for purposes of this chapter if it has been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under another state or local regulatory review process; provided, that a tower that has not been reviewed because it was not in a zoned area when it was built, but was lawfully constructed, is existing for purposes of this section.

F. “F” Definitions. Reserved.

G. “G” Definitions. Reserved.

H. “H” Definitions. Reserved.

I. “I” Definitions. Reserved.

J. “J” Definitions. Reserved.

K. “K” Definitions. Reserved.

L. “L” Definitions. Reserved.

M. “M” Definitions. Reserved.

N. “N” Definitions. Reserved.

O. “O” Definitions. Reserved.

P. “P” Definitions. Reserved.

Q. “Q” Definitions. Reserved.

R. “R” Definitions. Reserved.

S. “S” Definitions.

“Site” means for towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, the current boundaries of the leased or owned property surrounding the tower and any access or utility easements currently related to the site, and, for other eligible support structures, further restricted to that area in proximity to the structure and to other transmission equipment already deployed on the ground.

“Small cells” mean compact wireless base stations containing their own transceiver equipment and function like cells in a mobile network but provide a smaller coverage area than traditional macrocells. Small cells will meet the two parameters in subsections (1) and (2) of this definition. For purposes of these definitions, volume is a measure of the exterior displacement, not the interior volume of the enclosures. Antennas or equipment concealed from public view in or behind an otherwise approved structure or concealment are not included in calculating volume.

1. Small Cell Antenna. Each antenna shall be no more than three cubic feet in volume.

2. Small Cell Equipment. Each equipment enclosure shall be no larger than 17 cubic feet in volume. Associated conduit, mounting bracket or extension arm, electric meter, concealment, telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, battery back-up power systems, grounding equipment, power transfer switch, and cut-off switch may be located outside the primary equipment enclosure(s) and are not included in the calculation of equipment volume.

“Stealth design” means technology that minimizes the visual impact of wireless communications facilities by camouflaging, disguising, screening, and/or blending into the surrounding environment. Examples of stealth design include but are not limited to facilities disguised as trees, flagpoles, bell towers, and architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas.

T. “T” Definitions.

“Tower” means any structure built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting any Commission-licensed or authorized antennas and their associated facilities, including structures that are constructed for wireless communications services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul, and the associated site.

“Tower height” means the vertical distance measured from the base of the tower structure at grade to the highest point of the structure including the antenna.

“Transmission equipment” means equipment that facilitates transmission for any Commission-licensed or authorized wireless communication service, including, but not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, and regular and backup power supply. The term includes equipment associated with wireless communications services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul.

U. “U” Definitions.

“Utility support structure” means utility poles or utility towers supporting electrical, telephone, cable or other similar facilities; street light standards; pedestrian light standards; traffic light structures; traffic sign structures; or water towers.

V. “V” Definitions. Reserved.

W. “W” Definitions.

“Wireless communication facilities” or “WCF” means a staffed or unstaffed facility or location for the transmission and/or reception of radio frequency (RF) signals or other wireless communications or other signals for commercial communications purposes, typically consisting of one or more antennas or group of antennas, a tower or attachment support structure, transmission cables and other transmission equipment, and an equipment enclosure or cabinets.

X. “X” Definitions. Reserved.

Y. “Y” Definitions. Reserved.

Z. “Z” Definitions. Reserved. (Ord. 2016-015 § 3 (Exh. A § 2))


18.61.030 Towers.

A. Towers shall be located only in those areas and pursuant to the process and standards prescribed in Table 18.61.0301; provided, that towers that are proposed to be located in a residential zone or within 150 feet of a residential zone shall be subject to the siting priorities set forth for preferred tower locations in SMC 18.61.050.

Table 18.61.0301 – Zones, Types/Heights, Setbacks, and Permit Type  

	Plan District	Zone	Type and Max. Height	Setback: Non-ROW	Permit Type

	Single-Family Residential	R4-8	Stealth or DAS only; 30 feet	20 feet	C-2

	Lifestyle District	LD (R-III; C-II(M)	Stealth or DAS only; 40 feet	20 feet	A-1

	Neighborhood Center	NC (C-1)	Stealth or DAS only; 30 feet	20 feet	C-2

	Community/General Business	CB (C-II, C-III)	Stealth or DAS only; 40 feet	20 feet	C-2

	Downtown	DC; DMU-I/-II	Stealth or DAS only; 40 feet	n/a	C-2

	Regional Commercial	RC (C-III)	Stealth or DAS only; 35 feet	20 feet	A-1

	Highway Commercial	HC	100 feet / 150 feet	100 feet	C-2

	Schools	R4-8	Stealth or DAS only; 60 feet	20 feet	C-2

	High Tech/Light Industry	HTLI	Stealth or DAS only; 60 feet	20 feet	C-2

	Heavy Commercial/Warehouse	HC-W	100 feet / 150 feet	100 feet	C-2

	Economic Opportunity Area	EOA	Stealth or DAS only; 60 feet	n/a	A-1

	Planned Resort Community	PRC	Any (decided by master plan)	n/a	A-1

	Major Parks/Open Space	POS	Any (decided by contract)	Equal to tower height	C-2

[1] See adjusted standards for locations adjacent to a residence in SMC 18.61.070(B).

[2] If an applicant wants to construct a tower in a residential zone or within 50 feet of a residential zone, then stealth design is required.

[3] See exceptions for locations adjacent to a residence in SMC 18.61.070(B).

[4] An additional 20 feet in height is allowed if applicant uses stealth design.

(Ord. 2016-015 § 3 (Exh. A § 2))


18.61.040 Collocation of antennas, DAS, and small cells.

A. To the extent not otherwise covered by Chapter 18.61A SMC (Eligible Facilities Modifications), collocation and new wireless communication antenna arrays are permitted in all zones via administrative approval; provided, that they are attached to or inside of an existing structure that provides the required clearances for the array’s operation without the necessity of constructing a tower or other apparatus to extend the antenna array more than 15 feet above the structure; however, in no case shall the tower height exceed the maximum height allowance in the underlying zone.

B. Installation requires the granting of development permits prescribed by Chapter 20.01 SMC and SMC Title 15.

C. For antenna arrays on city-owned property, the execution of necessary agreements is also required.

D. If any support structure must be constructed to achieve the needed elevation or if the attachment adds more than 15 feet above the existing structure, the proposal is subject to Type A-1 review. The limitation to 15 feet applies to cumulative increases and any previously approved additions to height made under this section must be included in its measurement.

E. Any equipment shelter or cabinet and other ancillary equipment are subject to the general development standards of SMC 18.61.070.

F. Distributed Antenna Systems and Small Cells.

1. Distributed antenna systems (DAS) and small cells are allowed in all land use zones, regardless of the siting preferences listed in SMC 18.61.050.

2. DAS and small cells that meet the requirement of stealth technology as provided in SMC 18.61.030 are subject to approval via administrative review only if their installation requires the construction of a new utility support structure or building. Type A-1 review is always required when the applicant proposes a new utility support structure or building.

3. Multiple Site DAS and Small Cells.

a. A single permit may be used for multiple distributed antennas that are part of a larger overall DAS network.

b. A single permit may be used for multiple small cells spaced to provide wireless coverage in a contiguous area. (Ord. 2016-015 § 3 (Exh. A § 2))


18.61.050 Tower sharing, collocation and preferred tower locations.

A. Tower Sharing and Collocation. New WCF facilities must collocate on existing towers or other structures of a similar height to avoid construction of new towers, unless precluded by zoning constraints such as height, structural limitations, inability to obtain authorization by the owner of an alternative location, or where an alternative location will not meet the service coverage objectives of the applicant. Applications for a new tower must address all existing towers or structures of a similar height within one-half mile of the proposed site as follows: (1) by providing evidence that a request was made to locate on the existing tower or other structure, with no success; or (2) by showing that locating on the existing tower or other structure is infeasible.

B. Preferred Tower Locations. All new towers proposed to be located in a residential zone or within 150 feet of a residential zone are permitted only after application of the following siting priorities, ordered from most-preferred (1) to least-preferred (8):

1. City-owned or operated property and facilities, not including right-of-way and right-of-way facilities, that are not in residential zones or located within 150 feet of residential zones;

2. City-owned or operated property and facilities in any zone, as long as the tower is inconspicuous from a public street, public open areas, or property that is being used for residential purposes;

3. Regional commercial zone (RC);

4. Highway commercial (HC) and heavy commercial/warehouse (HC-W) zones;

5. Employment opportunity area (EOA) and planned resort community (PRC) pursuant to a sub-area plan;

6. Community business (CB) and high tech/light industry (HTLI) zones;

7. Other city-owned or operated property and facilities; and

8. Sites in residential zones.

The applicant for a tower located in a residential zone or within 150 feet of a residential zone shall address these preferences in an alternative sites analysis meeting the requirements of SMC 18.61.060. (Ord. 2016-015 § 3 (Exh. A § 2))


18.61.060 Application submittal requirements.

In addition to the application materials identified in SMC 20.01.120, applications submitted under this chapter shall include the following materials:

A. Requirement for FCC Documentation. The applicant shall provide a copy of:

1. Its documentation for FCC license submittal or registration; and

2. The applicant’s FCC license or registration.

B. Site Plans. Complete and accurate plans and drawings to scale, prepared, signed and sealed by a Washington-licensed engineer, land surveyor and/or architect, including (1) plan views and all elevations before and after the proposed construction with all height and width measurements called out; (2) a depiction of all proposed transmission equipment; (3) a depiction of all proposed utility runs and points of contact; and (4) a depiction of the leased or licensed area with all rights-of-way and/or easements for access and utilities in plan view.

C. Visual Analysis. A color visual analysis that includes to-scale visual simulations that show unobstructed before-and-after construction daytime and clear-weather views from at least four angles, together with a map that shows the location of each view.

D. Statement of Purpose/RF Justification. A clear and complete written statement of purpose shall minimally include: (1) a description of the technical objective to be achieved; (2) a to-scale map that identifies the proposed site location and the targeted service area to be benefited by the proposed project; and (3) full-color signal propagation maps with objective units of signal strength measurement that show the applicant’s current service coverage levels from all adjacent sites without the proposed site, predicted service coverage levels from all adjacent sites with the proposed site, and predicted service coverage levels from the proposed site without all adjacent sites. These materials shall be reviewed and signed by a Washington-licensed professional engineer or a qualified employee of the applicant. The qualified employee of the applicant shall submit his or her qualifications with the application.

E. Design Justification. A clear and complete written analysis that explains how the proposed design complies with the applicable design standards under this chapter. A complete design justification shall identify all applicable design standards under this chapter and provide a factually detailed reason why the proposed design either complies or cannot comply.

F. Collocation and Alternative Sites Analysis.

1. All Towers. All applications for a new tower will demonstrate that collocation is not feasible, consistent with SMC 18.61.050.

2. Towers in a Residential Zone or within 150 Feet of a Residential Zone.

a. For towers in or within 150 feet of a residential zone, the applicant must address the city’s preferred tower locations in SMC 18.61.050 with a detailed explanation justifying why a site of higher priority was not selected. The city’s tower location preferences shall be addressed in a clear and complete written alternative site analysis that shows at least five higher ranked, alternative sites considered that are in the geographic range of the service coverage objectives of the applicant, together with a factually detailed and comparative analysis between each alternative candidate and the proposed site that explains the substantive reasons why the applicant rejected the alternative candidate. An applicant may reject an alternative tower site for one or more of the following reasons:

i. Preclusion by structural limitations;

ii. Inability to obtain authorization by the owner;

iii. Failure to meet the service coverage objectives of the applicant;

iv. Failure to meet other engineering requirements for such things as location, height and size;

v. Zoning constraints, such as the inability to meet setbacks;

vi. Analysis or documented evidence of physical or environmental constraints, such as unstable soils or wetlands, that qualify sites as unsuitable critical areas; and/or

vii. Being a more intrusive location despite the higher priority in this chapter as determined by the community development director or hearing examiner, as applicable.

b. A complete alternative sites analysis provided under this subsection (F)(2) may include less than five alternative sites so long as the applicant provides a factually detailed written rationale for why it could not identify at least five potentially available, higher ranked, alternative sites.

3. Required Description of Coverage Objectives. For purposes of disqualifying potential collocations and/or alternative sites for the failure to meet the applicant’s service coverage objectives, the applicant shall provide (a) a description of its objective, whether it be to close a gap or address a deficiency in coverage, capacity, frequency and/or technology; (b) detailed technical maps or other exhibits with clear and concise RF data to illustrate that the objective is not met if using the alternative (whether it be collocation or a more preferred location); and (c) a written statement based on the site analyses of why the alternative (collocation or a more preferred location) does not meet the objective.

G. Radio Frequency Emissions Compliance Report. A written report, prepared, signed and sealed by a Washington-licensed professional engineer or a competent employee of the applicant, which assesses whether the proposed WCF demonstrates compliance with the exposure limits established by the FCC. The report shall also include a cumulative analysis that accounts for all emissions from all WCFs located on or adjacent to the proposed site, identifies the total exposure from all facilities and demonstrates planned compliance with all maximum permissible exposure limits established by the FCC. The report shall include a detailed description of all mitigation measures required by the FCC. Any report supplied by an applicant’s employee must also submit the qualifications for the employee responsible for the report. Such documentation must include a copy of the fully completed FCC form “A Local Government Official’s Guide to Transmitting Antenna RF Emission Safety: Rules, Procedures, and Practical Guidance: Appendix A” titled “Optional Checklist for Determination Of Whether a Facility is Categorically Excluded” for each frequency band of RF emissions to be transmitted from the proposed facility upon the approval of the application. All planned radio frequency emissions on all frequency bands must be shown on the Appendix A form(s) attached to the application. All planned radio frequency emissions are to be entered on each Appendix A form only in wattage units of “effective radiated power.”

H. Noise Study. A noise study, prepared, signed and sealed by a Washington-licensed engineer, for the proposed WCF and all associated equipment in accordance with the Sequim Municipal Code.

I. Collocation Consent. A written statement, signed by a person with the legal authority to bind the applicant and the property owner, allowing the applicant to collocate on facilities.

J. Collocation Engineering Requirements. All applications for collocations must include a site determination by an engineer licensed to conduct business within Washington State that the structure is designed to accommodate the additional load. The determination must take into account, at a minimum, all facilities currently located on the roof/structure, the cumulative load after accounting for all existing facilities, and the cumulative load with the proposed facilities, and any required engineering changes to the structure needed to accommodate additional load. (Ord. 2016-015 § 3 (Exh. A § 2))


18.61.070 General development standards applicable to WCFs.

The following criteria shall be applied in approving, approving with conditions or denying a WCF. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, WCF construction shall be consistent with the development standards of the zoning district in which it is located.

A. Height. Refer to Table 18.61.0301.

B. Setback Requirements. Refer to Table 18.61.0301 for towers. All equipment shelters, cabinets or other on-the-ground ancillary equipment shall be buried or meet the setback requirement of the zone in which located. Notwithstanding the setbacks provided for in Table 18.61.0301, when a residence is located on an adjacent parcel, the minimum side setback from the lot line for a new tower must be equal to 110 percent of the height of the proposed antenna support structure, unless the following are met:

1. The tower is constructed with breakpoint design technology. If the tower has been constructed using breakpoint design technology, the minimum setback distance shall be equal to 110 percent of the distance from the top of the structure to the breakpoint level of the structure, or the applicable zone’s minimum side setback requirements, whichever is greater. (For example, on a 100-foot tall monopole with a breakpoint at 80 feet, the minimum setback distance would be 22 feet (110 percent of 20 feet, the distance from the top of the monopole to the breakpoint) or the minimum side yard setback requirements for that zone, whichever is greater.)

2. The issuance of building permits for the tower shall be conditioned upon approval of the tower design by a structural engineer.

C. Landscaping. All landscaping shall be installed and maintained in accordance with this chapter. Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved and/or improved, and disturbance of the existing topography shall be minimized. The community development director may grant a minor deviation from the required landscaping based on written findings and conclusions that a different design better serves the intent of this chapter; provided, that the total landscape area is not reduced.

1. Tower bases, when fenced (compounds), or large equipment shelters (greater than three feet by three feet by three feet), shall be landscaped following the provisions of this section. In all R zones, all C zones (including HC and RC), downtown zones, and all other nonresidential zones, landscaping shall consist of a six-foot-wide strip of landscaping as described in SMC 18.24.130. Street frontage and perimeter property landscaping where required shall follow these standards:

a. The six-foot-wide strip of plantings shall provide a continuous three- to four-foot tall screen (the plants shall be evergreen when adjacent to parking areas in order to block headlights), while maintaining buffered views into and out of the site. Shrubs of a species that will achieve a minimum approximate height of three feet and maximum approximate height of four feet shall be included for the entire length of the planting area. Groundcovers shall be included as necessary to fill in the width of the planting area. Trees shall cover the length of the planting strip and be spaced at intervals resulting in touching of branches after 10 years of normal growth.

2. If fencing is installed, it shall meet the standards of SMC 18.24.140.

3. Applicant shall ensure the full establishment of plantings for two years.

4. Landscaping and buffering requires landscape design plans shall incorporate a mix of indigenous and native plants that are hardy and drought-tolerant, and shall include a minimum of 40 percent evergreen plantings (trees, shrubs, groundcovers, ornamental grasses, and evergreen herbs). Permanently installed irrigation systems are required.

5. Minimum planting specifications are:

	CATEGORY	SPECIFICATIONS

	Deciduous shade trees	2-1/2 to 3 inch caliper measured 6 inches above ground

	Evergreen trees	6 to 8 feet in height

	Small deciduous or ornamental trees	1 to 1-1/2 inch caliper measured 6 inches above ground

	Multi-trunk clusters (3 or more trunks)	The smallest trunk shall be 3/4 inch

	Deciduous and evergreen shrubs	24 inch high plant size. Spacing from 3 to 5 feet apart depending upon species

6. The developer, its successor and/or subsequent owners and their agents, shall maintain landscaping on the property on a continuing basis for the life of the development.

7. The property owner shall maintain landscape areas in good condition and in a way that presents a healthy, neat and orderly appearance. This maintenance shall include weeding, watering, fertilizing, pruning, mowing, edging, mulching or other maintenance, in accordance with acceptable horticultural practices. Plant materials which exhibit evidence of insect pests, disease and/or damage shall be appropriately treated. Dead plants shall be promptly removed and replaced within the next planting season after installation.

D. Visual Impact. All WCFs in residential zones and within 150 feet of residential zones, including equipment enclosures, shall be sited and designed to minimize adverse visual impacts on surrounding properties and the traveling public, consistent with the proper functioning of the WCF. Such WCFs and equipment enclosures shall be integrated through location and design to blend in with the existing characteristics of the site. Such WCFs shall also be designed to either resemble the surrounding landscape and other natural features where located in proximity to natural surroundings; be compatible with the urban, built environment, through matching and complimentary existing structures and specific design considerations such as architectural designs, height, scale, color and texture; and/or be consistent with other uses and improvements permitted in the relevant zone.

E. Use of Stealth Design/Technology. The applicant shall make an affirmative showing as to why they are not employing stealth technology. More specifically:

1. Stealth design is required in residential zones and to the extent shown in Table 18.61.0301. Stealth and concealment techniques must be appropriate given the proposed location, design, visual environment, and nearby uses, structures, and natural features. Stealth design shall be designed and constructed to substantially conform to surrounding building designs or natural settings, so as to be visually unobtrusive. Stealth design that relies on screening wireless communications facilities in order to reduce visual impact must screen all substantial portions of the facility from view. Stealth and concealment techniques do not include incorporating faux-tree designs of a kind that are not native to the Pacific Northwest.

F. Lighting. For new wireless communication support towers, only such lighting as is necessary to satisfy FAA requirements is permitted. All FAA-required lighting shall use lights that are designed to minimize downward illumination. Security lighting for the equipment shelters or cabinets and other on-the-ground ancillary equipment is also permitted as long as it complies with SMC 18.24.170 to keep light within the boundaries of the site.

G. Noise. At no time shall transmission equipment or any other associated equipment (including, but not limited to, heating and air conditioning units) at any wireless communication facility emit noise that exceeds the applicable limit(s) established in WAC 173-60-040 as currently enacted and as may be amended.

H. Signage. No facilities may bear any signage or advertisement(s) other than signage required by law or expressly permitted/required by the city.

I. Code Compliance. All facilities shall at all times comply with all applicable federal, state and local building codes, electrical codes, fire codes and any other code related to public health and safety.

J. Building-Mounted WCFs.

1. In residential zones, all transmission equipment shall be concealed within existing architectural features. Any new architectural features proposed to conceal the transmission equipment shall be designed to mimic the existing underlying structure, shall be proportional to the existing underlying structure or conform to the underlying use and shall use materials in similar quality, finish, color and texture as the existing underlying structure.

2. In residential zones, all roof-mounted transmission equipment shall be set back from all roof edges to preclude visibility from public streets and ground elevation of adjacent properties.

3. In all other zones, antenna arrays and supporting transmission equipment shall be installed so as to camouflage, disguise or conceal them to make them closely compatible with and blend into the setting and/or host structure.

K. WCFs in the Public Rights-of-Way.

1. Preferred Locations. Facilities shall be located as far from residential uses as feasible, and on main corridors and arterials to the extent feasible. Facilities in the rights-of-way shall maintain at least a 200-foot separation from other wireless facilities (except with respect to DAS or small cells), except when collocated or on opposite sides of the same street.

2. Pole-Mounted or Tower-Mounted Equipment. All pole-mounted and tower-mounted transmission equipment shall be mounted as close as possible to the pole or tower so as to minimize the overall visual profile to surrounding streets and properties. All pole-mounted and tower-mounted transmission equipment shall be painted with flat, nonreflective colors that blend with the visual environment.

3. For all WCFs to be located within the right-of-way, prior to submitting for a building permit, the applicant must have a valid municipal franchise or exemption otherwise granted by applicable law, to the extent consistent with RCW 35.21.860.

L. Accessory Equipment. In residential zones, all equipment shall be located or placed in an existing building, underground, or in an equipment shelter that is (1) designed to blend in with existing surroundings, using architecturally compatible construction and colors; and (2) located so as to be minimize obtrusiveness while maintaining proper functioning of the WCF.

M. Spacing of Towers. A tower over 40 feet in height shall maintain a minimum spacing of one-half mile from any other tower over 40 feet in height, unless it is proven that physical limitations (such as topography, terrain, tree cover or location of buildings) in the immediate service area prohibit adequate service by the existing facilities or that collocation is not feasible under SMC 18.61.050.

N. Site Design Flexibility. Individual WCF sites vary in the location of adjacent buildings, existing trees, topography and other local variables. By mandating certain design standards, there may result a project that could have been less intrusive if the location of the various elements of the project could have been placed in more appropriate locations within a given site. Therefore, the WCF and supporting equipment may be installed so as to best camouflage, disguise, or conceal them to make the WCF more compatible with and blend into the setting and/or host structure, upon approval by the planning director or the hearing examiner. The design flexibility allowed under this subsection includes additional height for a tower located within tall trees on (1) city property or (2) other parcels at least five acres in size, so that the impact of the tower may be minimized by the trees while still allowing for the minimum clearance needed for the tower to achieve the applicant’s coverage objectives. A formal exception from standards under SMC 18.61.090 is not required for proposals meeting this subsection by being a less intrusive design option.

O. Structural Assessment. The owner of a proposed tower shall have a structural assessment of the tower conducted by a professional engineer, licensed in the state of Washington, which shall be submitted with the application for a building permit. (Ord. 2016-015 § 3 (Exh. A § 2))


18.61.080 Regulations for facilities subject to a conditional use permit.

A. Approval Criteria. In addition to the development standards in this chapter and the approval criteria in SMC 20.01.170, the following additional approval criteria apply:

1. The need for the proposed tower shall be demonstrated if it is to be located in a residential zone or within 150 feet of an existing residential lot. An evaluation of the operational needs of the wireless communications provider, alternative sites, alternative existing facilities upon which the proposed antenna array might be located, and collocation opportunities on existing support towers within one-half mile of the proposed site shall be provided. Evidence shall demonstrate that no practical alternative is reasonably available to the applicant.

2. The proposed tower satisfies all of the provisions and requirements of this chapter.

B. Public Notice. In addition to the notice requirements of SMC 20.01.140, for proposals in residential zones and within 150 feet of a residential zone public notice shall include:

1. A black and white architectural elevation and color photo simulation rendering of the proposed WCF.

2. The sign required by SMC 20.01.140 shall include that same architectural elevation and color photo simulation combination selected by the city that depicts the visual impact of the WCF. (Ord. 2016-015 § 3 (Exh. A § 2))


18.61.090 Exception from standards.

A. Applicability. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter (under SMC 18.61.070(N), Site Design Flexibility), no WCF shall be used or developed contrary to any applicable development standard unless an exception has been granted pursuant to this section. These provisions apply exclusively to WCFs and are in lieu of the generally applicable variance and design deviation provisions in this title, provided this section does not provide an exception from this chapter’s visual impact and stealth design requirements or the approval criteria set forth in SMC 18.61.080.

B. Procedure Type. A wireless communications facility exception is a Type C-2 procedure.

C. Submittal Requirements. In addition to the general submittal requirements for a Type C-2 application, an application for a wireless communication facility exception shall include:

1. A written statement demonstrating how the exception would meet the criteria.

2. A site plan that includes:

a. Description of the proposed facility’s design and dimensions, as it would appear with and without the exception.

b. Elevations showing all components of the wireless communication facility as it would appear with and without the exception.

c. Color simulations of the wireless communication facility after construction demonstrating compatibility with the vicinity, as it would appear with and without the exception.

D. Criteria. An application for a wireless communication facility exception shall be granted if the following criteria are met:

1. The exception is consistent with the purpose of the development standard for which the exception is sought.

2. Based on a visual analysis, the design minimizes the visual impacts to residential zones through mitigating measures, including, but not limited to, building heights, bulk, color, and landscaping.

3. The applicant demonstrates the following:

a. A significant gap in the coverage, capacity, or technologies of the service network exists such that users are regularly unable to connect to the service network, or are regularly unable to maintain a connection, or are unable to achieve reliable wireless coverage within a building;

b. The gap can only be filled through an exception to one or more of the standards in this chapter; and

c. The exception is narrowly tailored to fill the service gap such that the wireless communication facility conforms to this chapter’s standards to the greatest extent possible.

4. Exceptions in Residential Zones. For a new tower proposed to be located in a residential zone or within 150 feet of a residential zone, unless the proposal qualifies as a preferred location on city-owned or operated property or facilities under SMC 18.61.050(B)(2), the applicant must also demonstrate that the manner in which it proposes to fill the significant gap in coverage, capacity, or technologies of the service network is the least intrusive on the values that this chapter seeks to protect. (Ord. 2016-015 § 3 (Exh. A § 2))


18.61.100 Final inspection.

A. A certificate of occupancy will only be granted upon satisfactory evidence that the WCF was installed in substantial compliance with the approved plans and photo simulations. WCFs may not become operational until a certificate of occupancy has been granted.

B. Failure to Comply. If it is found that the WCF installation does not substantially comply with the approved plans and photo simulations, the applicant immediately shall make any and all such changes required to bring the WCF installation into compliance. (Ord. 2016-015 § 3 (Exh. A § 2))


18.61.110 FCC permit revocation.

If any FCC, state or other governmental license or any other governmental approval to provide communication services is ever revoked as to any site permitted or authorized by the city, the permittee must inform the city of the revocation within 30 days of receiving notice of such revocation. (Ord. 2016-015 § 3 (Exh. A § 2))


18.61.120 Discontinuation of use.

A. Any wireless communication facility that is no longer needed and its use is discontinued shall be reported immediately by the service provider to the planning director. Discontinued facilities shall be completely removed within six months and the site restored to its preexisting condition.

B. There shall also be a rebuttable presumption that any WCF that is regulated by this chapter and that is not operated for a period of six months shall be considered abandoned. This presumption may be rebutted by a showing that such WCF is an auxiliary back-up or emergency utility or device not subject to regular use or that the WCF is otherwise not abandoned. For those WCFs deemed abandoned, all equipment, including, but not limited to, antennas, poles, towers, and equipment shelters associated with the WCF shall be removed within six months of the cessation of operation. Irrespective of any agreement among them to the contrary, the owner or operator of such unused facility, or the owner of a building or land upon which the WCF is located, shall be jointly and severally responsible for the removal of abandoned WCFs. If the WCF is not thereafter removed within 90 days of written notice from the city, the city may remove the WCF at the owner of the property’s expense or at the owner of the WCF’s expense, including all costs and attorneys’ fees. If there are two or more wireless communications providers collocated on a single support structure, this provision shall not become effective until all providers cease using the WCF for a continuous period of six months. (Ord. 2016-015 § 3 (Exh. A § 2))


18.61.130 Independent technical review.

Although the city intends for city staff to review administrative matters to the extent feasible, the city may retain the services of an independent, radio frequency technical expert of its choice to provide technical evaluation of permit applications for WCFs, including administrative and conditional use permits. The technical expert review may include, but is not limited to (A) the accuracy and completeness of the items submitted with the application; (B) the applicability of analysis and techniques and methodologies proposed by the applicant; (C) the validity of conclusions reached by the applicant; and (D) whether the proposed WCF complies with the applicable approval criteria set forth in this chapter. The applicant shall pay the cost for any independent consultant fees, along with applicable overhead recovery, through a deposit, estimated by the city, paid within 10 days of the city’s request. When the city requests such payment, the application shall be deemed incomplete for purposes of application processing timelines. In the event that such costs and fees do not exceed the deposit amount, the city shall refund any unused portion within 30 days after the final permit is released or, if no final permit is released, within 30 days after the city receives a written request from the applicant. If the costs and fees exceed the deposit amount, then the applicant shall pay the difference to the city before the permit is issued. (Ord. 2016-015 § 3 (Exh. A § 2))


18.61.140 Exempt facilities.

The following are exempt from this chapter:

A. FCC licensed amateur (ham) radio facilities;

B. Satellite earth stations, dishes and/or antennas used for private television reception not exceeding one meter in diameter;

C. A government-owned WCF installed upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the federal, state or local government, or a written determination of public necessity by the city; except that such facility must comply with all federal and state requirements. The WCF shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter for up to one week after the duration of the state of emergency; and

D. A temporary, commercial WCF installed for providing coverage of a special event such as news coverage or sporting event, subject to approval by the city. The WCF shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter for up to one week before and after the duration of the special event.

E. In locations more than 150 feet from a residential zone, other temporary, commercial WCFs installed for a period of 90 days, subject to renewals at the city’s discretion; provided, that such temporary WCF will comply with applicable setbacks and height requirements.

F. Eligible facilities requests permitted under Chapter 18.61A SMC. (Ord. 2016-015 § 3 (Exh. A § 2))


18.61.150 Indemnification.

Each permit issued shall have as a condition of the permit a requirement that the applicant defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city and its officers, agents, employees, volunteers, and contractors from any and all liability, damage, or charges (including attorneys’ fees and expenses) arising out of claims, suits, demands, or causes of action as a result of the permit process, granted permit, construction, erection, location, performance, operation, maintenance, repair, installation, replacement, removal, or restoration of the WCF on city property or in the public right-of-way. (Ord. 2016-015 § 3 (Exh. A § 2))


Chapter 18.61A ELIGIBLE FACILITIES MODIFICATIONS

Sections:

18.61A.010    Adoption of findings and conclusions.

18.61A.020    Definitions.

18.61A.030    Applicability – Relationship to other rules and regulations.

18.61A.040    Permit classification.

18.61A.050    Submittal requirements.

18.61A.060    Application review.

18.61A.070    Nonconforming structure – Termination.

18.61A.080    Enforcement – Violation.


18.61A.010 Adoption of findings and conclusions.

The recitals set forth in the ordinance adopting this code are adopted as findings and conclusions of the city council. (Ord. 2016-015 § 4 (Exh. A § 3))


18.61A.020 Definitions.

Definitions applicable to this chapter are included in Chapter 18.61 SMC. (Ord. 2016-015 § 4 (Exh. A § 3))


18.61A.030 Applicability – Relationship to other rules and regulations.

A. Sole and Exclusive Procedure. Except as may be otherwise provided in this chapter, and not withstanding any other provisions in the city code, the provisions of this chapter shall be the sole and exclusive procedure for review and approval of a proposed facilities modification which the applicant asserts is subject to review under Section 6409 of the Spectrum Act. To the extent that other provisions of the city code establish a parallel process for review and approval of a project permit application for a proposed facilities modification, the provisions of this chapter shall control. In the event that any part of an application for project permit approval includes a proposed facilities modification, the proposed facilities modification portion of the application shall be reviewed under the provisions of this chapter. In the event that an application for project permit approval includes a proposal to modify an eligible support structure, and the applicant does not assert in the application that the proposal is subject to review under Section 6409 of the Spectrum Act, such proposal shall not be subject to review under this chapter and may be subject to review under other applicable provisions of the city code.

B. Nonconforming Structures. This chapter shall not apply to a proposed facility modification to an eligible support structure that is not a legal conforming, or legal nonconforming, structure at the time a completed eligible facilities modification application is filed with the city. To the extent that the nonconforming structures and use provisions of the city code would operate to prohibit or condition approval of a proposed facilities modification application otherwise allowed under this chapter, such provisions are superseded by the provisions of this chapter and shall not apply.

C. Replacement of Eligible Support Structure. This chapter shall not apply to a proposed facility modification to an eligible support structure that will involve replacement of the tower or base station.

D. First Deployment – Base Station. This chapter shall not apply to a proposed facility modification to a structure, other than a tower, that does not, at the time of submittal of the application, already house or support transmission equipment lawfully installed within or upon, or attached to, the structure.

E. Interpretation. Interpretations of this chapter shall be guided by Section 6409 of the Spectrum Act; the FCC Eligible Facilities Request Rules, the FCC’s Report and Order in In re Acceleration of Broadband Deployment by Improving Wireless Facilities Siting Policies, WT Docket Nos. 13-238, 13-32; WC Docket No. 11-59; FCC 14-153; and other applicable laws, regulations, and associated guidance.

F. SEPA Review. Unless otherwise provided by law or regulation, decisions pertaining to an eligible facilities modification application are not subject to, and are exempt from, the requirements of RCW 43.21C.030(2)(c), if:

1. The proposed facilities modification would not increase the height of the eligible support structure by more than 10 percent, or 20 feet, whichever is greater; or

2. The mounting of equipment that would involve adding an appurtenance to the body of the eligible support structure would not protrude from the edge of the structure more than 20 feet, or more than the width of the structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater;* or

3. The authority to condition or deny an application pursuant to Chapter 43.21 RCW is preempted, or otherwise supplanted, by Section 6409 of the Spectrum Act.

*Note: See RCW 43.21C.0384 and WAC 197-11-800(25).

G. Reservation of Authority. Nothing herein is intended or shall operate to waive or limit the city’s right to enforce, or condition approval on, compliance with generally applicable building, structural, electrical, and safety codes and with other laws codifying objective standards reasonably related to health and safety. (Ord. 2016-015 § 4 (Exh. A § 3))


18.61A.040 Permit classification.

An eligible facilities modification permit shall be classified as an administrative permit subject to review and approval or denial by the approval authority. (Ord. 2016-015 § 4 (Exh. A § 3))


18.61A.050 Submittal requirements.

A. The purpose of the submittal requirements is to ensure that the city has all information and documentation that is reasonably necessary to determine if the applicant’s proposed facilities modification will substantially change the physical dimensions of an eligible support structure. The submittal requirements are not intended to require the applicant to establish the need for the proposed modifications or to justify the business decision to propose such modifications. No eligible facilities modification application shall be deemed complete unless it is, in writing, accompanied by the applicable application and review fee, includes the required submittals, and is attested to by the authorized person submitting the application on behalf of the applicant, certifying the truth and accuracy of the information provided in the application. The application shall include the following submittals, unless waived by the approval authority:

1. The following contact information for the authorized person:

a. Name;

b. Title;

c. Mailing address;

d. Phone number; and

e. Electronic mail address (optional).

2. The legal and dba names, mailing address, Washington tax number, and contact phone number(s) of applicant.

3. If a corporation, the name and address of the registered agent of applicant in Washington State, and the state of incorporation of applicant.

4. If applicant is an entity, other than a corporation, such as a partnership or limited liability company, the names and business addresses of the principals.

5. An assertion that the proposed facilities modification is subject to review under Section 6409 of the Spectrum Act.

6. If the applicant is not the owner or person in control of the eligible support structure and/or site, the following shall be required:

An attestation that the owner or person in control of the eligible support structure and/or site has consented to the proposed facilities modification. If the eligible support structure is located in a public right-of-way, the applicant must also attest that applicant has authorization to install, maintain and operate transmission equipment in, under and above the public right-of-way.

7. If the applicant proposes a modification involving collocation of transmission equipment or the replacement of transmission equipment, the following shall be required:

a. Complete copies of the underlying land use approvals for siting of the tower or base station proposed to be modified, establishing that, at the time of submittal of the application, such tower or base station constituted an eligible support structure.

b. For collocations, proof of current compliance with the FCC’s RF emissions standards before the collocation and written documentation signed under penalty of perjury under the laws of the state of Washington that the proposed collocation will still fall within the FCC’s RF emissions standards after collocation. For purposes of this section, “current compliance” means documentation within one calendar year of the date of submittal. Such documentation must include a copy of the fully completed FCC form “A Local Government Official’s Guide to Transmitting Antenna RF Emission Safety: Rules, Procedures, and Practical Guidance: Appendix A” titled “Optional Checklist for Determination Of Whether a Facility is Categorically Excluded” for each frequency band of RF emissions to be transmitted from the proposed facility upon the approval of the application. All planned radio frequency emissions on all frequency bands must be shown on the Appendix A form(s) attached to the application. All planned radio frequency emissions are to be entered on each Appendix A form only in wattage units of “effective radiated power.”

c. All applications for collocations must include a site determination by an engineer licensed to conduct business within Washington State that the structure is designed to accommodate the additional load. The determination must take into account, at a minimum, all facilities currently located on the roof/structure, the cumulative load after accounting for all existing facilities, and the cumulative load with the proposed facilities, and any required engineering changes to the structure needed to accommodate additional load.

8. If the applicant proposes a modification that will result in an increase in height of the eligible support structure, the following shall be required:

Record drawings, as-built plans, or the equivalent, showing the height of the eligible support structure, (a) as originally constructed and granted approval by the city or other applicable local zoning or similar regulatory authority, or (b) as of the most recent modification that received city, or other local zoning or regulatory approval, prior to the passage of the Spectrum Act, whichever height is greater.

9. If the applicant proposes a modification to an eligible support structure, which structure, or proposed modification of the same, is subject to preexisting restrictions or requirements imposed by a reviewing official or decision-making body pursuant to authority granted under the city code, or an ordinance or a municipal code of another local government authority, the following shall be required:

A copy of the document (e.g., CUP or SUP) setting forth such preexisting restrictions or requirements together with a certification that the proposed facilities modification conforms to such restrictions or requirements; provided, that such certification shall have no application to the extent the proposed facilities modification relates solely to an increase in height, increase in width, addition of cabinets, or new excavation, that does not result in a substantial change in the physical dimensions of the eligible support structure.

10. If the applicant proposes a modification to an eligible support structure, which structure, or proposed modification of the same, is subject to preexisting concealment restrictions or requirements, or was constructed with concealment elements, the following shall be required:

Applicant shall set forth the facts and circumstances demonstrating that the proposed modification would not defeat the existing concealment elements of the eligible support structure. If the proposed modification will alter the exterior dimensions or appearance of the eligible support structure, applicant shall include a detailed visual simulation depicting how the eligible support structure will appear after the proposed modification is complete. The visual simulation shall depict to scale the eligible support structure in relation to the trees, landscaping and other structures adjacent to, or in the immediate vicinity of, the eligible support structure.

11. If the applicant proposes a modification that will protrude from the edge of a nontower eligible support structure, the following shall be required:

Record drawings, as-built plans, or the equivalent, showing at a minimum the edge of the eligible support structure at the location of the proposed modification.

12. If the applicant proposes a modification to an eligible support structure that will (a) include any excavation, (b) would result in a protrusion from the edge of a tower that exceeds an existing protrusion of any transmission equipment attached to a tower, or (c) would protrude from the edge of a nontower eligible support structure, the following shall be required:

A description of the boundaries of the site together with a scale drawing based on an accurate traverse, with angular and lineal dimensions, depicting the boundaries of the site in relation to the tower or base station proposed to be modified and depicting the proposed location, elevation and dimensions of the new or replacement transmission equipment. The city may require a survey by a land surveyor licensed in the state of Washington when, in the judgment of the approval authority, a survey is reasonably necessary to verify the boundaries of the site to determine if the proposed facilities modification would result in a substantial change in the physical dimensions of the eligible support structure.

13. If the applicant proposes a modification to the eligible support structure that includes hardening through structural enhancement, the following shall be required:

A technical report by a qualified engineer accredited by the state of Washington demonstrating that the structural enhancement is performed in connection with and is necessary to support the proposed collocation, removal, or replacement of transmission equipment and conforms to applicable code requirements. The city may retain the services of an independent technical expert to review, evaluate, and provide an opinion regarding the applicant’s demonstration of necessity.

14. If the applicant proposes a modification to a tower, the following shall be required:

A stamped report by a state of Washington registered professional engineer demonstrating that the tower with the proposed modifications will comply with applicable structural, electrical and safety codes, including by way of example, and not limitation, EIA/TIA-222-Revision G, published by the American National Standards Institute (as amended), allowable wind speed for the applicable zone in which the tower is located, and describing the general structural capacity of the tower with the proposed modifications, including:

a. The number and type of antennas that can be accommodated;

b. The basis for the calculation of capacity; and

c. A written statement that the proposal complies with all federal guidelines regarding interference and ANSI standards as adopted by the FCC, including but not limited to nonionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER) standards. The city may retain the services of an independent technical expert to review, evaluate, and provide an opinion regarding the applicant’s demonstration of compliance.

15. If the applicant proposes a modification to a base station, the following shall be required:

A stamped report by a state of Washington registered professional engineer demonstrating that the base station, with the proposed modifications, will comply with applicable structural, electrical and safety codes.

16. If the applicant proposes a modification requiring alteration to the eligible support structure, excavation, installation of new equipment cabinets, or any other activities impacting or altering the land, existing structures, fencing, or landscaping on the site, the following shall be required:

A detailed site plan and drawings, showing the true north point, a graphic scale and, drawn to an appropriate decimal scale, indicating and depicting:

a. The location, elevation and dimensions of the existing eligible support structure;

b. The location, elevation and dimensions of the existing transmission equipment;

c. The location, elevation and dimensions of the transmission equipment, if any, proposed to be collocated or that will replace existing transmission equipment;

d. The location, elevation and dimensions of any proposed new equipment cabinets and the intended use of each;

e. Any proposed modification to the eligible support structure;

f. The location of existing structures on the site, including fencing, screening, trees, and other significant site features; and

g. The location of any areas where excavation is proposed showing the elevations, depths, and width of the proposed excavation and materials and dimensions of the equipment to be placed in the area excavated.

17. Copies of any environmental documents required by any federal agency. These shall include the environmental assessment required by 47 CFR Part 1 (Part 1 – Practice and Procedure), Section 1.1307, as amended, or, in the event than an FCC environmental assessment is not required, a statement that described the specific factors that obviate the requirement for an environmental assessment.

B. Waiver of Submittal Requirement. The approval authority may waive any submittal requirement upon determination that the required submittal, or part thereof, is not reasonably related to the substantial change criteria. A waiver, to be effective, must be in writing and signed by the approval authority.

C. When Received. An eligible facilities modification application, and any supplemental submittals, shall be deemed received by the city upon the date such application, or supplemental submittal, is filed. An application, and any supplemental submittals, must be filed in person during regular business hours of the city and must be accompanied by the applicable permit review fee(s). Any application received by the city without contemporaneous payment or prior deposit of the applicable permit review fees will be rejected. (Ord. 2016-015 § 4 (Exh. A § 3))


18.61A.060 Application review.

A. Review. The approval authority shall review an eligible facilities modification application to determine if the proposed facilities modification is subject to this chapter, and if so, if the proposed facilities modification will result in a substantial change to the physical dimensions of an eligible support structure.

B. Application. The department shall prepare and make publicly available an application form which shall be limited to the information necessary for the department to consider whether an application is an eligible facilities request. The application may not require the applicant to demonstrate a need or business case for the proposed modification.

C. Modification of Application. In the event that after submittal of the application, or as a result of any subsequent submittals, applicant modifies the proposed facilities modification described in the initial application, the application as modified will be considered a new application subject to commencement of a new application review period; provided, that applicant and the approval authority may, in the alternative, enter into a mutually agreeable tolling agreement allowing the city to request additional submittals and additional time that may be reasonably necessary for review of the modified application.

D. Approval – Denial.

1. An eligible facilities application shall be approved, and an eligible facilities permit issued, upon determination by the approval authority that the proposed facilities modification is subject to this chapter and that it does not substantially change the physical dimensions of an eligible support structure.

2. An eligible facilities application shall be denied upon determination by the approval authority that the proposed facilities modification is not subject to this chapter or will substantially change the physical dimensions of an eligible support structure. A denial of an eligible facilities modification application shall set forth in writing the reasons for the denial and shall be provided to the applicant. A proposed facilities modification will substantially change the physical dimensions of an eligible support structure if it meets any of the substantial change criteria.

E. Type of Review. Upon receipt of an application for an eligible facilities request pursuant to this chapter, the department shall review such application to determine whether the application so qualifies.

1. Substantial Change. A modification substantially changes the physical dimensions of an eligible support structure if it meets any of the following criteria:

a. For towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, it increases the height of the tower by more than 10 percent or by the height of one additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed 20 feet, whichever is greater; for other eligible support structures, it increases the height of the structure by more than 10 percent or more than 10 feet, whichever is greater;

b. For towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, it involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the tower that would protrude from the edge of the tower more than 20 feet, or more than the width of the tower structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater; for other eligible support structures, it involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the structure that would protrude from the edge of the structure by more than six feet;

c. For any eligible support structure, it involves installation of more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, but not to exceed four cabinets; or, for towers in the public rights-of-way and base stations, it involves installation of any new equipment cabinets on the ground if there are no preexisting ground cabinets associated with the structure, or else involves installation of ground cabinets that are more than 10 percent larger in height or overall volume than any other ground cabinets associated with the structure;

d. It entails any excavation or deployment outside the current site;

e. It would defeat the concealment elements of the eligible support structure; or

f. It does not comply with conditions associated with the siting approval of the construction or modification of the eligible support structure or base station equipment; provided, however, that this limitation does not apply to any modification that is noncompliant only in a manner that would not exceed the thresholds identified in this section.

2. For purposes of this section, changes in height should be measured from the original support structure in cases where deployments are or will be separated horizontally, such as on buildings’ rooftops; in other circumstances, changes in height should be measured from the dimensions of the tower or base station, inclusive of originally approved appurtenances and any modifications that were approved prior to the passage of the Spectrum Act. 47 CFR Section 1.40001(b)(7)(i)(A).

F. Time Frame for Review. Within 60 days of the date on which an applicant submits an application seeking approval under this chapter, the department shall approve the application unless it determines that the application is not covered by this chapter.

G. Tolling of the Time Frame for Review. The 60-day review period begins to run when the application is filed, and may be tolled only by mutual agreement by the department and the applicant, or in cases where the department determines that the application is incomplete. The time frame for review is not tolled by a moratorium on the review of applications. To toll the time frame for incompleteness, the department must provide written notice to the applicant within 30 days of receipt of the application, specifically delineating all missing documents or information required in the application. The time frame for review begins running again when the applicant makes a supplemental submission in response to the department’s notice of incompleteness.

H. Following a supplemental submission, the department will notify the applicant within 10 days that the supplemental submission did not provide the information identified in the original notice delineating missing information. The time frame is tolled in the case of second or subsequent notices pursuant to the procedures identified in subsection G of this section. Second or subsequent notices of incompleteness may not specify missing documents or information that were not delineated in the original notice of incompleteness.

I. Interaction with Section 332(c)(7). If the department determines that the applicant’s request is not covered by Section 6409(a) as delineated under this chapter, the presumptively reasonable time frame under Section 332(c)(7), as prescribed by the FCC’s Shot Clock order, will begin to run from the issuance of the department’s decision that the application is not a covered request. To the extent such information is necessary, the department may request additional information from the applicant to evaluate the application under Section 332(c)(7), pursuant to the limitations applicable to other Section 332(c)(7) reviews.

J. Failure to Act. In the event the department fails to approve or deny a request seeking approval under this chapter within the time frame for review (accounting for any tolling), the request shall be deemed granted. The deemed granted status does not become effective until the applicant notifies the applicable reviewing authority in writing after the review period has expired (accounting for any tolling) that the application has been deemed granted.

K. Deemed Approved Application. An application that has been deemed approved shall be and constitute the equivalent of an eligible facilities modification permit, except as may be otherwise determined by a court of competent jurisdiction, and shall be subject to generally applicable enforcement and compliance requirements in the same manner as an eligible facilities modification permit issued pursuant to this chapter.

L. Code Requirements. Any eligible facilities modification permit issued pursuant to this chapter, and any application that has been deemed approved, shall be and is conditioned upon compliance with any generally applicable building, structural, electrical, and safety codes and other laws codifying objective standards reasonably related to health and safety. Violation of any such applicable code or standard shall be deemed to be a violation of the eligible facilities modification or deemed approved application.

M. Term of Eligible Facilities Modification Permit. An eligible facilities modification permit issued pursuant to this chapter, and any deemed approved application, shall be valid for a term of 180 days from the date of issuance, or the date the application is deemed approved.

N. Remedies. Notwithstanding any other provisions in the city code, no administrative review is provided for review of a decision to condition, deny or approve an application. Applicant and the city retain any and all remedies that are available at law or in equity, including by way of example and not limitation, those remedies set forth in the FCC Eligible Facilities Request Rules and remedies available under the Land Use Petition Act. In the event no other time period is provided at law for bringing an action for a remedy, any action challenging a denial of an application or notice of a deemed approved remedy shall be brought within 30 days following the date of denial or following the date of notification of the deemed approved remedy.*

*Note: The FCC Report and Order in In re Acceleration of Broadband Deployment by Improving Wireless Facilities Siting Policies, WT Docket Nos. 13-238, 13-32; WC Docket No. 11-59; FCC 14-153, Par’s 234 – 236, provides that the city shall have 30 days from the date of notification by the applicant of a deemed granted remedy to bring a legal action in a court of competent jurisdiction to challenge the deemed granted remedy, and that the applicant shall have 30 days from the date of denial to bring a legal action in a court of competent challenging a denial of the application. (Ord. 2016-015 § 4 (Exh. A § 3))


18.61A.070 Nonconforming structure – Termination.

A. Application. The provisions of this section shall apply to any facilities modification constructed, installed, placed or erected pursuant to an eligible facilities modification permit, or pursuant to a deemed approved remedy, which facilities modification did not conform to zoning and/or development regulations, exclusive of this chapter, in effect at the time the completed eligible facilities modification application was filed.

B. Nonconforming Structure Determination. A facilities modification to which this section applies is subject to termination as a nonconforming structure upon the following conditions:

1. Final, Nonappealable Decision. An appellate court, in a final and nonappealable decision, determines that Section 6409(a)(1) of the Spectrum Act is unconstitutional or otherwise determined to be invalid or unenforceable; and

2. Notice of Nonconforming Structure Determination. The city provides written notice to the applicant that the city has determined that the facilities modification did not conform to zoning and/or development regulations, exclusive of this chapter, in effect at the time the completed eligible facilities modification application was filed and that the facilities modification constitutes a nonconforming structure pursuant to the provisions hereof and must be made conforming or the facilities modification terminated.

C. Conformance – Termination. Upon receipt of notice of the city’s nonconforming structure determination, applicant shall abate the nonconformance by either conforming the site to the zoning and development regulations in effect at the time the completed eligible facilities modification application was filed or removing the facilities modification and returning the site to the condition that existed prior to the construction, installation, placement or erection of the facilities modification. The time period for conformance shall be one year from the date of the city’s notice of the nonconforming structure determination.

D. Health and Safety Codes. Nothing in this section shall relieve the applicant from compliance with applicable building, structural, electrical, and safety codes and with other laws codifying objective standards reasonably related to health and safety.

E. Administrative Appeal. The applicant, or its successors or assigns, may appeal the city’s determination of nonconformance to the city hearing examiner by filing a notice of appeal within 21 calendar days of the date of the determination of nonconformance, excluding holidays. (Ord. 2016-015 § 4 (Exh. A § 3))


18.61A.080 Enforcement – Violation.

Compliance with the provisions of this chapter is mandatory. Any violation hereof is subject to enforcement under the code enforcement provisions set forth in Chapter 1.13 and/or 18.90 SMC. (Ord. 2019-013 (Exh. B); Ord. 2016-015 § 4 (Exh. A § 3))


Chapter 18.62 MOBILE HOME AND MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS

Sections:

18.62.010    Purpose.

18.62.020    Definitions.

18.62.030    Manufactured home standards.

18.62.035    Recreational vehicle and trailer parking and storage regulations.

18.62.040    Manufactured home park uses and standards.

18.62.045    Pre-existing nonconforming uses.


18.62.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards for the safe and compatible location of manufactured home parks and recreational vehicle parks. (Ord. 97-010 § 5; Ord. 97-004 § 1)


18.62.020 Definitions.

The following definitions shall be applicable to the provisions of this chapter. Detailed definitions relating to the construction of manufactured homes and recreational vehicles may be found in Chapters 296-150A and 296-150B WAC. HUD manufactured housing construction and safety standards are administered by the State Department of Labor and Industries promulgated pursuant to Chapter 43.22 RCW.

A. “Camper” means a structure designed to be mounted on a vehicle, usually a truck, which provides facilities for human habitation or temporary outdoor or recreational lodging.

B. “Canopy” means a structure designed to be mounted on a vehicle, usually a truck, which provides security for shelter of things or persons under the structure that is the canopy.

C. “Community facility” means an accessory building located in a manufactured home park or recreational vehicle park for the purpose of providing restroom, bathing and/or laundry facilities to residents or occupants of that park. Community facility buildings may also house the park office, shop or storage space, recreation facilities, or any commercial enterprise by this chapter.

D. “Mobile home” or “manufactured home” means a structure, originally constructed to be transportable in one or more sections, which:

1. Is built on a permanent chassis;

2. Designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities that include plumbing, heating, and electrical systems contained therein;

3. Is comprised of at least two fully enclosed parallel sections each of which is not less than 12 feet wide by 36 feet long;

4. Was originally constructed with and now has a composition or wood shake or shingle, or coated metal, or similar roof of not less than 3:12 pitch; and

5. Has exterior siding similar in appearance to siding materials commonly used on conventional site-built uniform building code single-family residences. 

The structure must comply with the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 as adopted by Chapter 43.22 RCW, if applicable. For purposes of titling and registration, a structure that met this definition when constructed, continues to be a manufactured home notwithstanding that it is no longer transportable when affixed to land.

E. “Manufactured home accessory structure” means an awning, storage structure, carport, fence windbreak, deck or porch or other similar structures as approved by the public works director located on a manufactured home lot, all of which must comply with the UBC or other applicable construction codes.

F. “Manufactured home lot” means any portion of a manufactured home park with a location for one manufactured home and its accessory structures.

G. “Manufactured home pad” means that portion of a manufactured home lot intended for the placement of a manufactured home. All foundation and blocking shall meet the standards set forth in WAC 296-150-200 through 296-150-225.

H. “Manufactured home park (MHP)” means real property under single ownership that is used as the location for two or more manufactured homes that are, or are intended to be, occupied as dwellings, upon lots which are not conveyable.

I. “Modular home” means a factory-assembled structure designed to International Building Code standards and primarily for use as a dwelling when connected to the required utilities that include plumbing, heating, and electrical systems contained therein, does not contain its own running gear, and must be mounted on a permanent foundation. A modular home does not include a mobile home or manufactured home.

J. “Park street” means a street or road within a manufactured home or recreational vehicle park that connects manufactured home lots or recreational vehicle sites with a street, road, or highway.

K. “Pedestrian walkway” means a cleared and improved path, trail, or sidewalk which accommodates pedestrian travel to, from, and within a manufactured home park.

L. “Recreational facilities” means a building or outdoor recreational structure located in a manufactured home or recreational vehicle park for the purpose of providing leisure time activities for the residents of that park and their guests.

M. “Recreational vehicle (RV)” means a motor home, travel trailer, truck camper, or camping trailer with or without motor power, built on a single chassis.

N. “Travel trailer” means a nonmotorized vehicle designed for being drawn or used in conjunction with a motorized vehicle and which is constructed so that no appreciable part of its weight rests upon or is carried by such motorized vehicle. The term travel trailer also includes what is most commonly known as a “fifth wheel.” (Ord. 97-010 § 5; Ord. 97-004 § 1)


18.62.030 Manufactured home standards.

This section establishes standards for the location of manufactured homes which conform with the definition of manufactured homes as defined by RCW 46.04.302.

A. Manufactured Homes in Manufactured Home Parks. Any manufactured home placed in a new or expanded MHP shall be installed to meet the site preparation and foundation requirements set forth in WAC 296-150B-225 through 296-150B-255, which are administered by the State Department of Labor and Industries.

B. Manufactured Homes in Existing Manufactured Home Parks. Any manufactured home which is to be placed in a manufactured home park existing at the time this title becomes effective shall be installed to meet the site preparation and foundation requirements set forth in WAC 296-150B-225 through 296-150B-255 which are administered by the State Department of Labor and Industries.

C. Manufactured Homes in Other Locations.

1. Manufactured Homes. Manufactured homes built to National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards and the Washington State Manufactured Housing Standards shall be permitted in all applicable zoning districts, provided they meet the following requirements:

a. The manufactured home shall meet the same requirements for a building permit as any other site-built home;

b. The manufactured home shall adhere to the bulk and dimensional standards established for the zoning district in which the manufactured home is located.

2. Manufactured homes permitted as accessory living quarters for security personnel or caretakers shall be installed in a way that meets the site preparation and foundation requirements as set forth in subsection (A) of this section.

3. Manufactured homes permitted on construction sites as temporary uses consistent with Chapter 18.68 SMC, and shall be installed in a way that meets the site preparation and foundation requirements as set forth in subsection (A) of this section or a lesser standard appropriate for the duration of use that is approved by the building official.

D. Running Gear Removal. The hitch, wheels, and other running gear shall be removed or totally screened from view on all new or relocated manufactured homes, except those permitted for construction or emergency use.

E. Steps. Steps and/or landings shall be provided at all entrances in any new or relocated manufactured home in accordance with the UBC as amended. (Ord. 97-010 § 5; Ord. 97-004 § 1)


18.62.035 Recreational vehicle and trailer parking and storage regulations.

All recreational vehicle and trailer parking and storage within manufactured home parks shall be in conformance with Chapter 18.48 SMC as amended. (Ord. 97-010 § 5; Ord. 97-004 § 1)


18.62.040 Manufactured home park uses and standards.

The uses permitted in a development, alteration, or expansion of any manufactured home park shall be in accordance with the following:

A. Uses Permitted. The following uses are permitted in a manufactured home park:

1. Manufactured homes used as dwellings and accessory uses;

2. Recreational vehicles used as dwellings in manufactured home park that were in existence prior to the effective date of this title;

3. Manufactured home accessory structures as defined in SMC 18.62.020(E);

4. Community and recreational facilities as defined by SMC 18.62.020(C);

5. A manufactured home park office and storage buildings necessary for the maintenance or operation of the manufactured home park;

6. A residence for the use of a manager or caretaker which may be a manufactured, modular, or site built home; and

7. Storage buildings limited to use by the tenants of the manufactured home park only.

B. Development Standards. Manufactured home parks must comply with applicable state laws and regulations, and the requirements of this title. The standards established in this subsection are minimum standards.

1. Residential Density. The maximum density of development in any MHP may not exceed nine manufactured homes per gross acre of MHP area.

2. Lot Size. The minimum lot size for any manufactured home lot is:

a. Two thousand four hundred square feet, with a minimum lot dimension of 34 feet if designed to accommodate a single or double wide manufactured home not exceeding 960 square feet within its walls.

b. Three thousand six hundred square feet, with a minimum lot dimension of 40 feet if designed to accommodate a double or triple wide manufactured home exceeding 960 square feet within its walls.

	Minimum Lot Sizes

	Mobile Home Size	Minimum Lot Size	Minimum Lot Dimension

	Single wide: that does not exceed 960 sq. ft.	2,400 sq. ft. 	34 feet

	Double or triple wide: that exceeds 960 sq. ft.	3,600 sq. ft. 	40 feet

3. Building Coverage. For each manufactured home park lot, the maximum lot coverage for any manufactured home lot located within a manufactured home park may not exceed 60 percent.

4. Building Height. No building or structure within a manufactured home park may exceed 35 feet in height.

5. Required Setbacks. A manufactured home, manufactured home accessory structure, and other structures within a manufactured home park may not be located within the following minimum required setbacks:

 

	Setbacks

	From public right-of-way	From MHP street	From MHP boundary that is not a public right-of-way

	22 feet	10 feet	15 feet

	Structural Separation

	Manufactured home or any part thereof	MHP office, storage, store, community or recreational center

	6 feet from any lot line	10 feet from manufactured home lot line

6. Automobile Access and Circulation.

a. Ownership. All streets located within the manufactured home park will be privately owned and maintained except for arterial streets and local access streets within the manufactured home park which could be, in the future, extended to serve adjacent properties. All arterial streets and local access streets within the manufactured home park must be constructed to the city of Sequim design standards, and ownership thereof conveyed to the city at the time of final plat approval.

b. Park Street Construction and Width. All manufactured home park streets must be constructed and paved in accordance with the city of Sequim design standards as adopted.

c. Grade. MHP streets may not have a grade over eight percent on approaches to intersections with public ways. Prior to the intersection for a distance of 50 feet, the maximum slope is five percent. Grades up to 12 percent may be approved by the city engineer when necessitated by topographic constraints.

d. Cul-de-Sacs. Cul-de-sacs must have a minimum radius of 50 feet, of which 45 feet must be paved. The maximum cul-de-sac length is 400 feet. They may have a central planting, but the paved street width within the cul-de-sac is 35 feet. The maximum length to an intersection or cross road is 660 feet.

e. Access to Public Streets. Points of access with any manufactured home park to public streets, roads, or highways must be designed and constructed in accordance with the city of Sequim design standards.

f. Street Names. Each manufactured home park street must be named and the street name sign must be provided at all intersections. Each manufactured home must have a clearly visible address number.

g. Directory Signs (Map). Every manufactured home park must have at each principal access point an identification sign that includes a directory of park, streets and manufactured home numbers in map form.

7. Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking facilities may not be less than 20 feet long nor eight and one-half feet wide, exclusive of drives and aisles. The off-street parking area must be located on the same lot as the building(s) they are to serve, with the exception of parking areas intended to serve as guest parking for individual residences. Parking facilities may be no further than 400 feet from the building(s) they serve and no off-street parking facilities may be located within the public right-of-way.

8. Pedestrian Circulation. Manufactured home parks must have pedestrian walkways, a minimum of five feet wide, located on at least one side of the access road serving manufactured homes, community center and the recreational facilities. Where practicable, the pedestrian walkways must be located adjacent to streets serving the homes, community centers and recreational facilities.

9. Easements. Manufactured home parks must provide for easements and dedications necessary to accommodate planned and existing city roads, regional trails, and utilities.

10. Utilities. All water mains and rights-of-way therefor, and sewer mains and storm drain mains and rights-of-way therefor, which could be extended in the future to adjacent or other property, are required to be constructed to the city of Sequim design standards and ownership thereof conveyed to the city at the time of final plan approval. Other utilities may be private. Adequate utility capacity to serve a proposed MHP or MHP expansion must be available. Additional standards for MHP utility services are as follows:

a. Connections at Manufactured Home Pad. Permanent power, water, and sewer connections that meet the requirements of this code and state law must be provided at each manufactured home pad.

b. Underground Utilities Required. All utility service mains or lines in manufactured home parks must be underground.

c. Access to Utilities. No water meter, regulator, or shut-off valve may be located beneath a manufactured home.

11. Stormwater Runoff. Storm drainage discharge must be designed and engineered to city of Sequim development standards, which include a temporary erosion and sedimentation control plan for the development of the manufactured home park and the placement of manufactured homes on individual lots.

12. Waste Disposal. Manufactured home parks must be connected to the sanitary sewer system and provide for garbage collection and location for pickup as required by the city of Sequim development standards.

13. Common Open Space. An amount of land roughly proportionate to the impact created by the proposed development must be set aside as open space. Common open space may be designed for active or passive recreation. Driveways, parking lots, and required yard areas are not open space. The city council may reduce this requirement if it finds that the manufactured home park is located adjacent to or within one-quarter mile of a public park which provides recreational facilities, and the manufactured home park provides an easement for and develops a pedestrian trail to the park.

14. Outdoor Lighting. Manufactured home parks must provide and maintain downward facing or shielded illumination for the night use of park streets, parking, storage areas, pedestrian walkways, and community and recreational facilities.

15. Landscaping. Landscaping requirements are provided as follows:

a. All landscaping must include native and drought-tolerant vegetation.

b. All areas of the required open space must be landscaped except for those portions of the area covered by sidewalks and/or recreational facilities.

c. Parking and storage areas for manufactured home parks must have a landscaping screen with a minimum height of four feet at the time of planting. Planting will be chosen and spaced so as to grow together within three years of their planting in a manner that is sufficient to obscure sight throughout the barrier. The parking and storage landscaped area must be contained by a bumper rail or curb which is at least four inches high.

d. When a MHP abuts a nonresidential use, a minimum six-foot-high screening device such as a sight-obscuring fence and a minimum five-foot-wide planting area must be installed along the abutting property line of the new MHP.

e. A landscaping plan for the manufactured home park must be submitted to the community development director or his/her designee for review and approval. Landscaping plans must be drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 40 feet and clearly delineate the following:

i. Boundaries and dimensions of the site.

ii. Location and identification of all streets, alleys, and easements that are on the abutting site.

iii. Proposed locations and dimensions of all lots.

iv. Existing and proposed topography at maximum of five-foot contour intervals.

v. Proposed landscaping including location, size at time of planting, and description of landscape materials, using both botanical and common names.

vi. Location of existing and proposed driveways, parking surfaces, curbs, and sidewalks.

vii. Type and location of the proposed irrigation system to maintain the landscaping.

viii. Typical individual site layout.

ix. Covenants, conditions and restrictions which ensure that individual homesites will be landscaped and maintained. (Ord. 2018-006 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 97-010 § 5; Ord. 97-004 § 1)


18.62.045 Pre-existing nonconforming uses.

Manufactured and mobile homes and manufactured home parks established prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and inconsistent with the standards developed in SMC 18.62.040 herewithin, shall be considered pre-existing, nonconforming uses consistent with the requirements found in Chapter 18.64 SMC, excepting that SMC 18.64.030(B) shall not apply when the pre-existing, nonconforming home is moved to and/or within a mobile home park established prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 97-010 § 5; Ord. 97-004 § 1)


Chapter 18.64 NONCONFORMING CONDITIONS, USES AND STRUCTURES

Sections: 

18.64.010    Purpose.

18.64.020    Nonconforming lots.

18.64.030    Nonconforming use of land.

18.64.040    Nonconforming structures.

18.64.050    Nonconforming uses of structures.

18.64.060    Repairs and maintenance.

18.64.070    Sale of a nonconforming use.


18.64.010 Purpose.

A. The purpose of this chapter is to establish reasonable regulations for the control and eventual elimination of conditions and uses of land and structures which are nonconforming, i.e., which are lawful prior to the adoption of this title, or applicable amendments thereto, but which do not conform to present regulations of the code in respect to size of lots, height, area or yard, dimensions of structures and permitted uses.

B. Such nonconformities are incompatible with those lots, structures and uses which are permitted in the districts involved. Their continued existence is allowed without specific time limitations, but the intent of this chapter is to encourage conformity over time. (Ord. 2010-011; Ord. 351 § 16, 1977)


18.64.020 Nonconforming lots.

In any zone permitting single-family dwellings, a single lot of record prior to the adoption of this title or applicable amendments thereto may be used for such purpose although it does not meet the minimum lot size requirement for the zone. (Ord. 2010-011; Ord. 351 § 16(A), 1977)


18.64.030 Nonconforming use of land.

A nonconforming use of land may be continued; provided, that:

A. It is not enlarged or increased, or extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied in the date of the adoption of this title, or applicable amendments thereto.

B. It is not moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot or parcel.

C. If the use ceases for a period of more than one year, any subsequent use of the land must be in conformance with this code. This period may be extended for one year if SMC 18.64.040(B) or (C) applies and reasonable construction progress is being made. (Ord. 2010-011; Ord. 351 § 16(B), 1977)


18.64.040 Nonconforming structures.

A nonconforming structure may remain and be used; provided, that:

A. It is not enlarged or altered unless the provision under subsection C of this section applies.

B. Nonconforming structures involuntarily damaged through accident, act of nature, or other similar, unforeseen circumstances, may be rebuilt without affecting the nonconforming status only if:

1. For a single-family residence or duplex in a commercial zoning district, the residence does not increase the degree of nonconformity, i.e., larger footprint, increased square footage, etc. Nonconforming structures damaged in an amount greater than 50 percent can be rebuilt and shall comply with all current residential bulk and dimensional requirements.

2. For any structure, if damaged to an extent less than 50 percent of replacement cost.

3. Any structure intended to be rebuilt under the provisions of subsection (B)(1) or (2) of this section must have submitted the required permit applications and the applications must be deemed complete within one year of the occurrence of the involuntary event causing the damage.

C. Structural remodels, alterations, or other additions shall be allowed only if the change increases the degree of conformity. Interior remodels or alterations that do not increase the degree of nonconformity shall also be allowed. For residential uses, the degree of nonconformity is not increased when the remodel, alteration, or addition merely aligns with the structure’s current setback only if no additional dwelling unit is created.

D. If moved, the structure is made to conform to regulations of this title for the zone of the new location.

E. If a nonconforming structure is voluntarily or purposefully demolished, or any lot is vacant, any structure built or rebuilt loses its nonconforming status and must conform to current code.

F. If any structure other than a single-family residence or duplex is damaged to an extent exceeding 50 percent of replacement cost, it is reconstructed only in accordance with regulations of this title for the zone of its location. (Ord. 2010-011; Ord. 351 § 16(C), 1977)


18.64.050 Nonconforming uses of structures.

A nonconforming use of a structure may be continued as provided for in this statute; provided, that:

A. If it is superseded by a conforming use, the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed.

B. If it is discontinued for a period of one year, it may not thereafter be resumed except as provided in SMC 18.64.030(C). (Ord. 2010-011; Ord. 351 § 16(D), 1977)


18.64.060 Repairs and maintenance.

Regular repair and maintenance, including but not limited to reroofing or painting, is allowed without affecting the nonconforming use status. Strengthening or restoring to safe condition of any structure shall also be allowed if the degree of nonconformity is not increased. (Ord. 2010-011; Ord. 351 § 16(E), 1977)


18.64.070 Sale of a nonconforming use.

Legally nonconforming property may be sold or transferred without affecting the right to continue the nonconforming use or use of a nonconforming structure. (Ord. 2010-011)


Chapter 18.65 MOBILE FOOD SERVICE VENDOR

Sections:

18.65.010    Purpose.

18.65.020    Definitions.

18.65.030    Permit required – Application and fees.

18.65.040    Location and duration.

18.65.050    Standards and operational requirements.

18.65.060    Revocation of license.


18.65.010 Purpose.

Mobile food service vendor is a subset of fast food restaurants that provides an alternative to traditional sit-down restaurants and by its mobile nature can respond to dynamic and spontaneous consumer demand. The operational nature of a mobile food service vendor warrants permitting procedures and standards tailored to the transient nature of this use. (Ord. 2012-010 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.65.020 Definitions.

“Mobile food service vendor” is a business that sells meals and non-alcoholic beverages for immediate on-site consumption that are prepared and dispensed from a vehicle (truck, car, trailer, van, or RV) that is not permanently affixed to real property and is not a mobile peddler as provided in Chapter 5.24 SMC, a food delivery truck, or a children’s lemonade stand. (Ord. 2012-010 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.65.030 Permit required – Application and fees.

A. A mobile food vendor permit is required to locate and operate a mobile food service within the city. Application is made to the director as a Type A-1 administrative approval as provided for in SMC 20.01.080. The permit application shall include:

1. Photos or detailed drawings of the proposed mobile food service vehicle, including any applied graphics;

2. A proposed mobility plan that lists where the mobile vendor intends to operate, accompanied by a written statement from the property owner of each location that provides permission for the mobile vendor to access and/or occupy the premises for the conduct of the specified business;

3. A basic sketch plan of each location of short-term occupancy that shows where the mobile food service will operate on the site; and

4. Payment of the application fee for a Type A-1 decision process as provided in the adopted fee schedule.

B. A separate permit is not required for a vendor that has a contract, franchise, or concession agreement with the city if the vendor sales are only those provided for in such contract, franchise or agreement.

C. All mobile food service vendors, including those under contract with the city, shall operate with a current business license, current environmental health services operating and food handler permits, and a current garbage service account. 

D. Vendor shall comply with WAC 246-215-061 and 246-215-121, as presently worded and as may be amended.

E. Permits are not transferable.

F. Expiration of License. A license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire at the end of the calendar year for which it was purchased. (Ord. 2012-010 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.65.040 Location and duration.

A. A permitted mobile food service vendor shall only locate and operate within nonresidential zones west of 5th Avenue and east of Brown Avenue; provided, that a vendor with a contractual agreement with the city is limited in location and operation by the terms of the contract.

B. A vendor is allowed only to locate and operate its business temporarily on a developed property with an improved parking lot.

C. A vendor shall leave the premises at the end of each business day and shall not return to the same location within 48 hours; provided, that this limitation does not apply if a vendor remains at a location less than four consecutive hours in any day and does not return to that same location within three hours. (Ord. 2012-010 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.65.050 Standards and operational requirements.

A. Parking and Vehicular Circulation. A mobile food service vendor vehicle cannot occupy any parking space that is required for a primary use on the same parcel or block any designated travel lane or aisle within a parking lot. 

B. Signs.

1. Business identification and promotional signs and graphics applied to the surfaces of a mobile food service vendor vehicle are exempt from a sign permit and not regulated in number or total area.

2. Each mobile food service vendor business is permitted one portable sign, not to exceed six square feet in area and no more than three feet in height, located within 15 lineal feet of the vendor vehicle service counter on private property.

C. Secure Trash Containers. A secure trash container of at least 15-gallon capacity shall be provided for business customer use at the location of the vendor and the vendor shall remove the container and its contents at the end of each business day for trash disposal.

D. Other Requirements.

1. No vehicle, other conveyance or temporary stand shall locate closer than 50 feet from flammable, combustible liquid or gas storage and dispensing structures.

2. Licensed stationary vendor sites shall be cleaned of all debris, trash and litter at the conclusion of daily business activities. At the conclusion of daily business activities at a given location, the mobile vendor shall clean all the public way surrounding his or her vehicle of all debris, trash and litter generated by the vendor’s business activities.

3. All merchandise, goods, wares or food shall only be displayed or offered for sale from the vendor’s vehicle.

4. The vendor vehicle shall be equipped with at least one 2A-40-BC fire extinguisher. (Ord. 2012-010 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.65.060 Revocation of license.

A license issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked, in writing, by the city manager for any of the following reasons:

A. Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for license;

B. Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in connection with the selling of products;

C. Any violation of this chapter;

D. Conviction of the licensee of a felony or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; or

E. Conducting the business licensed under this chapter in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. (Ord. 2012-010 § 1 (Exh. A))


Chapter 18.66 ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS

Sections:

18.66.010    Purpose.

18.66.020    Definitions.

18.66.030    Designation.

18.66.040    Procedure.

18.66.050    Standards.

18.66.060    Additional requirements.


18.66.010 Purpose.

Expand the mix of affordable housing opportunities within the city by permitting the creation of secondary dwelling units as an accessory use to existing single-family detached dwellings while maintaining the visual and functional character of single-family residential neighborhoods. (Ord. 2001-002 § 1)


18.66.020 Definitions.

A. “Accessory dwelling unit (ADU)” means a subordinate dwelling unit with complete and independent living facilities on the same lot as and detached from, attached to or contained within an existing single-family dwelling.

B. “Rental occupancy” means nonownership including long term lease ownership per Chapter 18.59 RCW. (Ord. 2001-002 § 1)


18.66.030 Designation.

One accessory dwelling unit shall be permitted only on parcels which meet the following conditions:

A. Is a legally created lot;

B. Contains one existing single-family detached dwelling which is a conforming use;

C. Contains no other accessory dwelling unit(s). (Ord. 2001-002 § 1)


18.66.040 Procedure.

Each accessory dwelling unit shall require an administrative permit as follows:

A. The permit for an accessory dwelling unit shall be considered a Type A-1 permit per SMC Title 20 to be approved by the director of the department of community development.

B. The required fee shall be submitted with the application for permit.

C. The application shall be made in accordance with submittal requirements on file with the department of community development.

D. Prior to submitting an application the applicant shall meet with the department of community development to determine compliance of the property with current zoning codes.

E. The permit shall be recorded prior to occupancy as a deed restriction to run with the land or until removed with the concurrence of the city. (Ord. 2011-017 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 2001-002 § 1)


18.66.050 Standards.

A. New construction for an accessory dwelling unit shall comply with all the development standards for a single-family detached dwelling including, but not limited to, setbacks, height limits and lot coverage and shall not increase any nonconforming aspect of any existing structure unless otherwise addressed by this chapter.

B. The following standards shall also apply:

1. The total floor area of the ADU shall not exceed 700 square feet or 50 percent of the area of the primary unit, whichever is less.

2. The ADU shall not reduce the size of the primary unit to less than two times the size of the ADU.

3. Both the ADU and the primary unit shall comply with the International Building Code regulations for smoke alarms.

4. If the ADU is attached to the primary unit, the main exterior entrances may not be on the same side of the building.

5. The architecture of the ADU shall match that of the primary unit.

6. One paved off-street parking space shall be provided in addition to those required for the primary unit.

7. There shall be no exterior stairway leading to the ADU on the front of the house.

8. There shall be no more than two bedrooms in an ADU.

9. Separate utility connections are not required by the city.

10. Any additions to the ADU shall meet the requirements of this chapter.

C. An accessory dwelling unit which conforms to the standards in this chapter shall not be considered to exceed the allowable density for the lot upon which it is located and shall be considered a residential use which is consistent with the comprehensive plan and zoning designation for the lot. (Ord. 2001-002 § 1)


18.66.060 Additional requirements.

Accessory dwelling units shall be subject to the following requirements:

A. Sale or ownership of such unit separate from the primary residential unit is prohibited.

B. The occupant of either the ADU or the primary unit shall be the owner of the entire property.

C. No more than three persons shall occupy an ADU. 

D. A permit for an ADU shall be subject to the payment of infrastructure impact or general facility fees equal to the established rate for a hotel/motel room.

E. Prohibited occupancy or sale, in addition to authorizing all other remedies available to the city, shall constitute a zoning violation and a nuisance subject to abatement. (Ord. 2001-002 § 1)


Chapter 18.67 HOME OCCUPATIONS

Sections:

18.67.010    Purpose.

18.67.020    Business license.

18.67.030    Permitted.

18.67.040    Criteria.

18.67.050    Approval process.


18.67.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to allow opportunities for employment and economic development by permitting the conduct of a business for gainful or income purposes in legal residential dwelling units in whatever zone they exist in a manner that is clearly accessory and ancillary to the primary residential use of the property and preserves the residential appearance or condition of the residence or neighborhood. It is the intent of this chapter that the accessory business should be so located and conducted that the average neighbor, under normal circumstances, would not be aware of its existence other than for permitted signs. This chapter is not intended to preclude any such business uses in single-family residential dwellings that the state of Washington has by law mandated or enabled and are reflected in other sections of this code, to be viewed by the city as permitted accessory uses such as small family day care and small group homes. (Ord. 2000-007 § 3).


18.67.020 Business license.

No person shall carry on a home occupation, or permit such use to occur on property which he/she owns or is in lawful control, without first obtaining a city of Sequim business license for such business. (Ord. 2000-007 § 3).


18.67.030 Permitted.

Home occupations shall be permitted through the process established by this chapter as an ancillary use in any occupied conforming or legally nonconforming dwelling unit except those constructed for transient occupancy. It is the responsibility of the occupant to conform with any private deed restrictions on the use of the property. (Ord. 2000-007 § 3).


18.67.040 Criteria.

A. Administrative Permit. The director of the department of community development may administratively issue a home occupation permit if the proposed home occupation complies with the following criteria:

1. Only members of the resident family may be employed at the site of the home occupation.

2. Sales of product or service at the residence shall be by appointment only.

3. Normal pedestrian and vehicle traffic for a residential neighborhood shall be maintained.

4. The use of commercial vehicles for transport or delivery of product or material to or from the home shall be limited to that normally found for the delivery of mail or parcel delivery in a residential neighborhood.

5. One room or 25 percent of the house square footage, whichever is less, may be used for the home occupation.

6. All materials, merchandise and equipment shall be stored inside the residence.

7. The residence shall maintain conformity with the municipal code and adopted development standards.

8. The appearance of the residence or property may be altered and the occupation be conducted only in a manner which would not would cause the premises to change from its residential character by the emission of sound, noises, vibrations or odors or for the purposes of advertising the business either by the use of colors, material, construction, lighting.

9. The home occupation will only use community facilities and services normal for a single household.

10. The home occupation shall not require the use of any hazardous processes or storage of hazardous materials.

11. Only one vehicle specifically associated with the business may be parked on the property. The vehicle shall be limited in size to a passenger car, van or pickup truck. The public street shall not be used to park commercial vehicles.

12. Signs shall be permitted as allowed by Chapter 18.58 SMC, Sign Code.

B. Use Permit. A home occupation may be approved through the conditional use permit process in this title subject to findings and special conditions that implement and meet the intent of this chapter, the zoning district in which the use is located and the comprehensive plan with primary consideration given to the preservation of residential neighborhoods and protection of the general welfare of surrounding properties and residents. (Ord. 2011-017 § 2; Ord. 2000-007 § 3)


18.67.050 Approval process.

A. Administrative.

1. Prior to issuance of a business license for any home occupation, the applicant shall first obtain a home occupation permit from the department of community development.

2. Such permit and the application for same shall be on a form or forms developed by the director of the department of community development.

3. The director of the department of community development shall approve or deny the application in conformance with the criteria established by this chapter and in conformance with the process for administrative level approvals in SMC Title 20. 

4. The decision of the director of the department of community development may be appealed per the process and requirements of SMC Title 20.

B. Use Permit. A use permit for a home occupation shall follow the procedures as stipulated in SMC Title 20 and Chapter 18.60 SMC, Conditional Uses. (Ord. 2011-017 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 2000-007 § 3)


Chapter 18.68 TEMPORARY ACTIVITIES

Sections: 

18.68.010    Temporary activity application and decision.

18.68.020    Temporary activity permit fees.

18.68.030    Classification of temporary activity.

18.68.040    General permit conditions.


18.68.010 Temporary activity application and decision.

All temporary activities require a temporary activity permit granted under the provisions of SMC 20.01.080 for a Type A-1 application and decision. (Ord. 2013-003 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2003-008; Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


18.68.020 Temporary activity permit fees.

Temporary activity permit fees are as established by resolution. (Ord. 2013-003 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-017 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 2005-029 § 2; Ord. 2003-008; Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


18.68.030 Classification of temporary activity.

A. Temporary activities are classified into five groups for the purposes of permit administration and assessment of fees. The classification is determined by the relative operational impact on the community and demand on city resources associated with the temporary activity. The five groups and types of temporary activities within each are as presented in Figure 18.68.030 – Classification of Activities.

Figure 18.68.030 – Classification of Activities 

	Group Classification	Activities2

	Group A1	political march/gathering; charity event/fundraiser; “drive” (food, blood, book, etc.); temporary stall (fireworks stand, Christmas tree lot, fall harvest stand); indoor show (dog, quilt, doll, hobby, home, sportsman)

	Group A21	store sales events/grand openings/tent sales; car show; customer appreciation day(s); family/kids fairs (nonprofit)

	Group B	commercial auctions; community-wide runs/walks; carnival; fireworks sales, outdoor dog show

	Group C	community displays (fireworks); markets/bazaars; major sport events/tournaments

	Group D	outdoor music festival/concert; parade; street dance; off-site assembly; festival3

Notes on Fig. 18.68.030

1 A Group A2 activity may be reclassified by the director as a Group B activity as determined by the classification worksheet specified in subsection B of this section.

2 Activities that are exempt from this chapter include: funeral procession, government meeting in normal places of assembly, conference/convention held in facilities designed for that purpose, and any other activity of limited nature and short-term duration that is conducted customarily as an incidental aspect of a primary use.

3 A festival is an application that combines two or more temporary activities and generates the highest level of community impact and draws on city resources due to the great number of tourists attracted to the event.

B. Classification Worksheet.

1. A completed classification worksheet provided by the department is required to accompany a Group A2 activity application and may be submitted with any application to request reclassification of an activity.

2. The classification worksheet assesses the proposed temporary activity’s relative operational impact on the community and its demand on the city’s services. The assessment criteria include: (a) number of participants/attendees, (b) effect on traffic and available parking, (c) generation of high noise or sound levels including loud music, (d) duration of the activity, (e) display of signs and other community-wide promotions, (f) need to confirm or monitor for public health or safety, (g) generation of light and glare not customary in the zone, and (h) need to monitor the availability and consumption of alcohol. 

3. The worksheet is completed by the applicant and submitted to the director for a determination.   

C. The  group classification for activities not listed in Figure 18.68.030 – Classification of Activities, shall be as determined by the director as provided in subsection B of this section.

D. The director may initiate a classification worksheet for any application to confirm or reclassify any temporary activity. (Ord. 2013-003 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-017 § 1; Ord. 2003-008; Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


18.68.040 General permit conditions.

Temporary activities may be located within all zones when consistent with the conditions set forth herein below and attached to a permit.

A. All temporary structures approved with a temporary activity permit shall be removed within 24 hours of the conclusion of the activity or as specified in conditions attached to the permit, leaving the site in the same condition as it was prior to the placement of the temporary use.

B. Setbacks. Temporary activities and structures shall be set back consistent with the zoning district in which the activity or structure is located unless another setback is specified as a condition of the permit.

C. Noise. Noise levels generated shall not be in excess of levels allowable in the zone that the temporary activity is located, consistent with Chapter 173-60 WAC, as may be amended, which is incorporated by reference herein.

D. Fumes, Odors, and Dust. Temporary activities that create noxious fumes, offensive odors, or excessive amounts of airborne dust shall not be permitted or shall be required to meet applicable state standards regarding the control of such nuisances.

E. Other Permit Requirements. The city may require proper insurance, indemnification and hold harmless agreements, proof of possession of any federal, state, county or local required permits or licenses, damage deposits, deposits for payment for cleanup, traffic control, security and other similar requirements, including any applicable provisions for business licenses and collection and reporting of sales tax; which shall be identified in the permit. (Ord. 2013-003 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2012-005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2003-008; Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


Chapter 18.69 DAY CARE FACILITIES

Sections:

18.69.010    Purpose.

18.69.020    Definitions.

18.69.030    Family day care homes.

18.69.040    Repealed.

18.69.050    Child day care centers.

18.69.055    Administrative review criteria.

18.69.060    Conditional use requirements.

18.69.065    Repealed.

18.69.070    Repealed.

18.69.075    Registration.

18.69.080    Repealed.


18.69.010 Purpose.

The city council finds that affordable, good quality, and licensed child day care within the city is critical to the well-being of parents and children in the community and is a needed community service. Further, it is the purpose of this chapter to facilitate the siting of licensed child day care facilities in the city in a manner which simplifies the review and approval process while ensuring conformance with the surrounding land uses. (Ord. 98-021 § 3; Ord. 96-001 § 2)


18.69.020 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

A. “Child day care” means the provision of supplemental parental care and supervision:

1. For a nonrelated child or children;

2. On a regular basis;

3. For less than 24 hours a day; and

4. Under license by the Washington State Department of Social and Health Services.

As used in this chapter, the term is not intended to include baby-sitting services of a casual, nonrecurring nature or in the child’s own home. Likewise, the term is not intended to include cooperative, reciprocative child care by a group of parents in their respective homes.

B. “Child day care facility” means a building or structure in which an agency, person or persons regularly provide care for a group of children for periods of less than 24 hours a day. Child day care facilities include family day care homes, out-of-home child mini day care centers and child day care centers regulated by the Washington State Department of Social and Health Services, as presently defined and hereafter amended (Chapter 74.15 RCW, WAC 388-73-422).

C. “Community service facility,” for the purposes of this chapter, means a building or structure where people with similar interests and values gather and which principal use serves a religious, sociocultural, or recreational need.

D. “Day care facility” means an agency regularly providing care for a group of children for periods of less than 24 hours. It includes the following subcategories:

1. “Family day care home” means a day care home for the care of 12 or fewer children, located in the family dwelling of the provider.

2. “Mini day care center” means a day care facility for the care of 12 or fewer children in a facility other than the family dwelling of the person(s) providing the care.

3. “Day care center” provides for the care of 13 or more children. If located in a private family residence, the portion where the children have access shall be separate from the family living quarters, or that portion where the children have access shall be exclusively used for their care during the hours that the child day care is operating.

E. “Preschool” means a nonresidential teacher-instructed, curriculum-based educational program of under four hours’ daily duration. Preschools have no state licensing procedure. For the purposes of this chapter, preschools shall be considered equivalent to “mini day care center” or “day care center” dependent on the number of children served.

F. “Primary day care facility” means a day care facility located outside a residential dwelling. The primary day care facility shall be the principal use of the lot or building.

G. “Secondary day care facility” means a day care facility located outside a residential dwelling. The hours of operation and frequency of use of a secondary day care facility are clearly secondary and incidental to the principal use of the lot or building. (Ord. 98-021 § 3; Ord. 96-001 § 2)


18.69.030 Family day care homes.

A. A family day care home shall be permitted by right in all zoning districts permitting residences, except where located in an existing accessory building which shall require administrative review and approval as provided in SMC 18.69.055, and shall be subject to the following requirements:

1. The home shall meet state child day care licensing requirements;

2. The home shall comply with all building, fire safety, health code and business licensing requirements;

3. Lot size, building size, setbacks and lot coverage shall conform to the standards of the zoning district in which the facility is located except if the structure is a legal nonconforming structure;

4. A safe passenger loading area shall be provided;

5. Signage, if any, shall conform to Chapter 18.58 SMC;

6. The operator of the home shall file a child day care registration form with the city;

7. No structural or decorative alteration which will alter the single-family character of an existing or proposed residential structure or incompatibility with surrounding residences is permitted.

B. A family day care home may be permitted to be located in an existing accessory building if it conforms with all of the requirements of subsection (A) of this section and receives administrative review and approval under the process specified in SMC 18.69.055. (Ord. 98-021 § 3; Ord. 96-001 § 2)


18.69.040 Child mini day care centers.

Repealed by Ord. 98-021. (Ord. 96-001 § 2)


18.69.050 Child day care centers.

A. A primary child day care center, as defined by state law, may be allowed in designated zoning districts as shown in the Use Tables, Chapter 18.20 SMC.

B. Limitation in Use of a Family Residence. No child day care center shall be located in a private family residence unless the portion of the residence to which the children have access is used exclusively for the children during the hours the center is in operation, or is separate from the usual living quarters of the family. (Ord. 98-021 § 3; Ord. 96-001 § 2)


18.69.055 Administrative review criteria.

The director of the department of community development or the hearing examiner reviews applications for a child day care facility and may approve, modify or deny the application subject to the following provisions:

A. The proposed use shall be compatible with the surrounding uses;

B. The site shall be landscaped in a manner compatible with adjacent residences;

C. If the director of the department of community development or hearing examiner, in reviewing the application or comments received, identifies sufficient issues regarding compatibility of the use with surrounding development, a public hearing may be called to receive testimony after publication and posting of a notice of public hearing on the site at least 10 days prior to such hearing;

D. The director of the department of community development or hearing examiner may grant, deny or grant the permit with conditions reasonably necessary to reduce conflicts between the day care facility and the surrounding neighborhood. The conditions may provide for, but not be limited to, noise attenuation, special parking needs and hours of operation. (Ord. 2019-004 (Exh. B); Ord. 2011-017 § 2; Ord. 98-021 § 3; Ord. 96-001 § 2)


18.69.060 Conditional use requirements.

The hearing examiner reviews applications for conditional use permits consistent with the following requirements:

A. The child day care center must meet state child day care licensing requirements;

B. The child day care center must comply with all building, fire safety, health code and business licensing requirements;

C. Lot size, building size, setbacks and lot coverage must conform to those applicable to the zoning district;

D. Signage, if any, must conform to the requirements for the applicable zoning district;

E. The operator of the child day care center must file a child day care registration form with the city as provided for in SMC 18.69.075;

F. Parking requirements must conform to Chapter 18.48 SMC;

G. A fence at least four feet high must be installed around the play yard;

H. The site must be landscaped in a manner compatible with adjacent residences;

I. No structural or decorative alteration which will alter the residential character of an existing residential structure used for a child day care center is permitted. Any new or remodeled structure must be designed to be compatible with the residential character of the surrounding neighborhood;

J. The child day care facility may not be located within 300 feet of another child day care center not located in the residence of the care provider, excluding any child day care center which is an accessory use pursuant to SMC 18.69.020(D)(3);

K. The child day care facility may not adversely affect current traffic volumes of the subject streets nor the capacity of the existing road network;

L. Streets serving the child day care facility must conform with city street standards set out in the streets and utilities developments regulations;

M. Streets serving the child day care facility must conform with emergency vehicle access standards. (Ord. 2019-004 (Exh. B); Ord. 98-021 § 3; Ord. 96-001 § 2)


18.69.065 Notice requirements.

Repealed by Ord. 98-021. (Ord. 96-001 § 2)


18.69.070 Appeals.

Repealed by Ord. 98-021. (Ord. 96-001 § 2)


18.69.075 Registration.

Each child care service provider shall register with the city department of community development by completing a child day care registration form as provided by the department prior to the initiation of the use. Upon registration, the child day care provider shall be able to demonstrate compliance with the applicable conditions of this chapter. (Ord. 2011-017 § 1; Ord. 98-021 § 3; Ord. 96-001 § 2)


18.69.080 Conflicting provisions.

Repealed by Ord. 98-021. (Ord. 96-001 § 2)


Chapter 18.70 WETLANDS PROTECTION

(Repealed by Ord. 2012-001)


Chapter 18.72 VARIANCES*

Sections: 

18.72.010    Purpose.

18.72.020    Scope.

18.72.030    Variances – Application procedure.

18.72.040    Variances – Review criteria.

18.72.050    Limitations on the granting of variances.

18.72.060    Variances – Effective period.

18.72.070    Extension of time.

18.72.080    Assurance device.

*Prior legislation: Ord. 97-019 and 2001-005.


18.72.010 Purpose.

To provide a mechanism whereby the city may grant relief from the provisions of this title and SMC Titles 16 and 17, where practical difficulties render compliance with the provisions of this title, or SMC Titles 16 and 17, an unnecessary hardship, where the hardship is the result of the physical characteristics of the subject property, and where the purpose of this title, or SMC Titles 16 and 17, and the comprehensive plan can be fulfilled. (Ord. 2007-010 § 3)


18.72.020 Scope.

This chapter shall apply to each application for a variance from any of the provisions of this title or SMC Titles 16 and 17. (Ord. 2007-010 § 3)


18.72.030 Variances – Application procedure.

Applications for a variance must be filed with the department of community development.

A. In those instances where review of an application for a variance has been consolidated with other development applications, the variance will be considered with the highest procedure required consistent with the requirements of SMC Title 20.

B. Prior to the authorization of a variance, the hearing examiner or city council must hold a public hearing. Notification of the required public hearing must be made consistent with the requirements of SMC Title 20. The decision of the hearing examiner or of the city council is final.

C. Applications for variance may be consolidated with other permits required, consistent with the requirements and procedures of SMC Title 20. (Ord. 2019-004 (Exh. B); Ord. 2011-017 § 1; Ord. 2007-010 § 3)


18.72.040 Variances – Review criteria.

The hearing examiner or the city council (if the reviewing body consistent with the requirements of SMC Title 20) may not authorize any variance to the provisions of this title unless all of the following facts and circumstances exist:

A. Such variance is necessary, because of special circumstances relating to the size, shape, topography, location or surroundings of the subject property, to provide it with use rights and privileges permitted to other similarly situated properties in the vicinity and in the zone in which the subject property is located;

B. The special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action of the applicant;

C. The granting of such variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the property or improvements in the vicinity and in the zone in which the subject property is situated;

D. The variance shall not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitation upon uses of other properties in the vicinity and in the zone in which the property is located and would not adversely affect the use of the neighboring properties; and

E. The granting of the variance will not be materially detrimental or contrary to the comprehensive plan and will not adversely affect the character of the neighborhood and the rights of neighboring and adjacent property owners. (Ord. 2019-004 (Exh. B); Ord. 2007-010 § 3)


18.72.050 Limitations on the granting of variances.

The hearing examiner or city council (if the reviewing body consistent with the requirements of SMC Title 20) may not recommend approval of any variance that would:

A. Change the use of a structure or land, or change the boundaries of a zoning district;

B. Change the zoning requirements regulating the use of land;

C. Change the procedural or administrative requirements of this code. (Ord. 2019-004 (Exh. B); Ord. 2007-010 § 3)


18.72.060 Variances – Effective period.

A. A decision granting a variance does not become effective until the expiration of five days from the date of such decision, unless it is found that an immediate effective date is necessary for the preservation of property or personal rights.

B. A variance automatically expires and is void if the applicant fails to file for a building permit or other necessary development permit within three years of the effective date of the variance unless:

1. The applicant has received an extension for the variance pursuant to other provisions of this code.

2. The variance approval provides for a greater time period. (Ord. 2007-010 § 3)


18.72.070 Extension of time.

A. The city manager or his/her designee may extend a variance, not to exceed one year, if:

1. Unforeseen circumstances or conditions necessitate the extension of the variance; and

2. Termination of the variance would result in unreasonable hardship to the applicant, and the applicant is not responsible for the delay; and

3. An extension of the variance will not cause substantial detriment to existing uses in the immediate vicinity of the subject property.

B. The city manager or his/her designee may grant no more than two extensions. A second extension may be granted only if:

1. The criteria listed in subsection A of this section are met; and



2. The applicant has demonstrated reasonable diligence in attempting to meet the time limit imposed; and

3. Conditions in the immediate vicinity of the subject property have not changed substantially since the variance was first approved. (Ord. 2007-010 § 3)


18.72.080 Assurance device.

In appropriate circumstances, the city manager or his/her designee may require a reasonable performance or maintenance assurance device, in a form acceptable to the city attorney, to assure compliance with the provisions of this title and the variance as approved. (Ord. 2007-010 § 3)


Chapter 18.80 CRITICAL AND ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREAS PROTECTION

Sections: 

18.80.010    Purpose.

18.80.030    Definitions.

18.80.040    Applicability.

18.80.045    Critical area review.

18.80.050    Permitted uses and development restrictions.

18.80.055    Exempt activities.

18.80.060    Submittal requirements and support information required.

18.80.070    Development standards.

18.80.075    Buffer and setback on sites with existing primary structure(s).

18.80.080    Development exceptions.

18.80.090    Notice to title and protective tracts.

18.80.100    Critical aquifer recharge areas.

18.80.110    Securities and enforcement.


18.80.010 Purpose.

Wetlands, streams, flood hazards, geologic hazards (erosion, landslide, seismic), steep slopes, fish and wildlife habitat areas, locally unique features (ravines, marine bluffs, beaches) and protective buffers, and critical aquifer recharge areas constitute critical areas that are of special concern to the city. The purpose of this chapter is to protect critical areas as required by the Growth Management Act and as provided in the guidelines promulgated by the Washington Department of Commerce. Accordingly, the intent of this chapter is to use a performance-based approach and establish minimum standards for development of properties that contain or adjoin critical areas and to protect the public health, safety and welfare in regard to critical areas by:

A. Mitigating unavoidable impacts by regulating alterations;

B. Protecting from impacts of development by regulating alterations;

C. Protecting the public from personal injury, loss of life or property damage due to flooding, erosion, landslides, seismic events or soil subsidence;

D. Protecting against publicly financed expenditures in the event critical areas are misused, which causes:

1. Unnecessary maintenance and replacement of public facilities,

2. Publicly funded mitigation of avoidable impacts,

3. Cost for public emergency rescue and relief operations where the causes are avoidable, or

4. Degradation of the natural environment;

E. Protecting the public trust in navigable waters and as to aquatic resources;

F. Preventing adverse impacts to water availability, water quality and streams;

G. Protecting unique, fragile and valuable elements of the environment, including wildlife and its habitat;

H. Alerting appraisers, assessors, owners, potential buyers or lessees to the development limitations of critical areas;

I. Providing city officials with sufficient information to adequately protect critical areas when approving, conditioning or denying public or private development proposals; and

J. Implementing the policies of the State Environmental Policy Act, Chapter 43.21C RCW; the city comprehensive plan; this chapter; and all updates and amendments, functional plans, and other land use policies formally adopted or accepted by the city. (Ord. 2012-001 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 631 § 1, 1992)


18.80.030 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply:

A. A Definitions.

“Anadromous” means fish that live part or the majority of their lives in saltwater, but return to freshwater to spawn.

B. B Definitions.

“Beaches and associated coastal-drift process areas” means the areas that encompass marine shorelines that contain important sites of material supply, transport and deposition that define the present landforms and natural character of the Sequim shoreline.

“Best management practices” means conservation practices or systems of practices and management measures that:

1. Control soil loss and reduce water quality degradation caused by nutrients, animal waste, toxins, and sediment; and

2. Minimize adverse impacts to surface water and ground water flow, circulation patterns, and to the chemical, physical and biological characteristics of wetlands.

C. C Definitions.

“Category I wetlands” means wetlands that (1) represent a unique or rare wetland type; (2) are more sensitive to disturbance than most wetlands; (3) are relatively undisturbed and contain ecological attributes that are impossible to replace within a human lifetime; or (4) provide a high level of functions. This category includes: relatively undisturbed estuarine wetlands of one or more acres; national heritage wetlands; bogs; mature forested wetlands of one or more acres; wetlands in coastal lagoons; and high-functioning wetlands that score 70 or more points on a scale of one to 100 based on the Department of Ecology’s Wetland Rating System for Western Washington, publication 04-06-025, or as revised and approved by the Department of Ecology.

“Category II wetlands” means wetlands that may have some level of disturbance, but still retain high function in some areas. This category includes, but is not limited to: estuarine wetlands less than one acre or those that have been disturbed and are greater than one acre; interdunal wetlands greater than one acre and wetlands that score 51 to 69 points on a scale of one to 100 based on the Department of Ecology’s Wetland Rating System for Western Washington, publication 04-06-025, or as revised and approved by the Department of Ecology.

“Category III wetlands” means wetlands that score 30 to 50 points on a scale of one to 100 based on the Department of Ecology’s Wetland Rating System for Western Washington, publication 04-06-025, or as revised and approved by the Department of Ecology.

“Category IV wetlands” means wetlands that have low functions and score less than 30 points on a scale of one to 100 based on the Department of Ecology’s Wetland Rating System for Western Washington, publication 04-06-025, or as revised and approved by the Department of Ecology.

“Closed stream segments” are those segments of streams, regardless of their type, that are fully enclosed in an underground pipe or culvert.

“Compensatory mitigation” means replacing project-induced wetland losses or impacts, and includes, but is not limited to, the following:

1. “Creation,” meaning actions performed to establish wetland functional characteristics and processes which have been lost by alterations, activities or catastrophic events within an area which no longer meets the definition of a wetland.

2. “Restoration,” meaning actions performed to reestablish or rehabilitate wetland functional characteristics and processes which have been lost by alterations, activities or catastrophic events within an area which no longer meets the definition of a wetland.

3. “Enhancement,” meaning actions performed to improve the condition of existing degraded wetlands so that the functions they provide are of a higher quality.

“Critical aquifer recharge areas” are areas with a critical recharging effect on aquifers used for potable water, including areas where an aquifer that is a source of drinking water is vulnerable to contamination that would affect the potability of the water, or is susceptible to reduced recharge.

“Critical areas” and “environmentally sensitive areas” mean and include any of the following areas and ecosystems:

1. Wetlands;

2. Streams or stream corridors;

3. Frequently flooded areas;

4. Geologically hazardous areas:

a. Erosion hazard areas,

b. Landslide hazard areas,

c. Seismic hazard areas;

5. Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas; “fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas” does not include such artificial features or constructs as irrigation delivery systems, irrigation infrastructure, irrigation canals, or drainage ditches that lie within the boundaries of, and are maintained by, a port district or an irrigation district or company;

6. Locally unique features:

a. Ravines,

b. Marine bluffs,

c. Beaches and associated coastal-drift processes;

7. Critical aquifer recharge areas; and

8. Buffers as established under SMC 18.80.070.

D. D Definitions. Reserved.

E. E Definitions.

“Erosion hazard areas” means those areas containing soils which, according to the United States Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service Soil Classification System, may experience severe to very severe erosion. Erosion hazard areas also include coastal erosion-prone areas and channel migration zones.

F. F Definitions. Reserved.

G. G Definitions.

“Geologically hazardous areas” means areas that, because of their susceptibility to erosion, sliding, earthquake, or other geological event, are not normally suited to siting commercial, residential or industrial development consistent with public health or safety concerns.

H. H Definitions. Reserved.

I. I Definitions. Reserved.

J. J Definitions. Reserved.

K. K Definitions. Reserved.

L. L Definitions.

“Land use permit” means a permit or action required to be approved by the city to allow the development of one or more parcels of property.

“Landslide hazard areas” are areas at risk of mass movement due to a combination of geologic, topographic and hydrologic factors. The following areas are considered to be subject to landslide hazards:

1. Areas of historic failures or potentially unstable slopes, such as areas mapped within Soil Conservation Service Slide Hazard Area Studies; as unstable, unstable old slides, or unstable recent slides designated by the Department of Ecology Coastal Zone Atlas; and as quaternary slumps, earthflows, mudflows, lahars or landslides on maps published by the United States Geological Survey or Department of Natural Resources, Division of Geology and Earth Resources;

2. Any area with a combination of:

a. Slopes 15 percent or steeper, and

b. Impermeable soils (typically silt and clay) frequently interbedded with granular soils (predominantly sand and gravel), and

c. Springs or ground water seepage;

3. Any slope of 40 percent and with a vertical relief of 10 or more feet except areas composed of consolidated rock;

4. Any slope greater than 80 percent subject to rockfall during seismic events;

5. Any area which has shown movement during the past 10,000 years or which is underlain by mass wastage debris from that period of time;

6. Any area potentially unstable as a result of rapid stream incision, stream bank erosion (e.g., ravines) or undercutting by wave action (e.g., marine bluffs);

7. Slopes that are parallel or subparallel to planes of weakness (such as bedding planes, joint systems, and fault planes) in subsurface materials.

“Locally unique feature zones” means variable width planning areas defined as setbacks from the top of ravines or bluffs, or corresponding to the shoreline management zone for beaches and associated coastal-drift processes.

“Locally unique features” means landforms and features that are important to the character of the city. These features or landforms usually contain more than one “critical area.” Locally unique features in the region include ravines, marine bluffs, and beaches and associated coastal-drift processes.

M. M Definitions.

“Marine bluffs” means coastal features resulting from wave erosion undercutting uplands located adjacent to the shoreline creating vertical cliffs greater than 20 feet in height that are an important source of sediment for coastal-drift processes and the landforms created by these processes.

N. N Definitions. Reserved.

O. O Definitions. Reserved.

P. P Definitions.

“Practicable alternative” means an alternative that is available and capable of being carried out after taking into consideration cost, existing technology and logistics in light of overall project purposes, and having less impact to regulated wetlands. It may include an area not owned by the applicant which could reasonably have been or be obtained, utilized, expanded or managed in order to fulfill the basic purposes of the proposed activity. 

“Priority habitats” means areas with one or more of the following attributes: comparatively high wildlife density; high wildlife species richness; significant wildlife breeding habitat, seasonal ranges, or movement corridors; limited availability; and/or high vulnerability.

Q. Q Definitions.

“Qualified professional” means a person with experience and training in the pertinent scientific discipline, and who is a qualified scientific expert with expertise appropriate for the relevant critical area subject in accordance with WAC 365-195-905. A qualified professional must have obtained a B.S. or B.A. or equivalent degree in biology, engineering, environmental studies, fisheries, geomorphology, or related field, and have at least five years of related work experience.

1. A qualified professional for wetlands must be a professional wetland scientist or ecologist with at least two years of full-time work experience as a wetlands professional, including delineating wetlands using the state or federal manuals, preparing wetlands reports, conducting function assessments, and developing and implementing mitigation plans.

2. A qualified professional for habitat must have a degree in biology or a related degree and professional experience related to the subject species.

3. A qualified professional for a geological hazard must be a professional engineer or geologist, licensed in the state of Washington.

4. A qualified professional for critical aquifer recharge areas means a hydrogeologist, geologist, engineer, or other scientist with experience in preparing hydrogeologic assessments.

5. A qualified professional arborist must be an ISA (International Society of Arboriculture) certified arborist.

R. R Definitions.

“Ravines” means narrow gorges normally containing steep slopes, having little or no defined floodplain, and deeper than 10 vertical feet as measured from the centerline of the ravine to the top of the slope. Ravines may also contain flowing water or streams.

“Regulated wetlands” means areas that meet the definition of “wetlands” and that are not exempt from regulation.

“Repair or maintenance” means an activity that restores the character, scope, size and design of a serviceable area, structure or land use to its previously authorized and undamaged condition. Activities that change the character, size or scope of a project beyond the original design, and drain, dredge, fill, flood or otherwise alter additional regulated wetlands, are not included in this definition.

S. S Definitions.

“Seismic hazard areas” means areas subject to severe risk of damage as a result of earthquake-induced ground shaking, slope failure, settlement or subsidence, soil liquefaction, surface faulting, or tsunamis. Settlement and soil liquefaction conditions occur in areas underlain by cohesionless soils of low density usually in association with a shallow ground water table. One indicator of potential for future earthquake damage is a record of earthquake damage in the past. Ground shaking is the primary cause of earthquake damage in Washington, and ground settlement may occur with shaking.

“Species of local importance” are those species that are of local concern due to their population status or their sensitivity to habitat alteration or that are game species.

“Stream buffers” means variable width planning areas defined as setbacks from the ordinary high water elevation of the stream or watercourse, or from the top of the bank or dike. Zones include both year-round and seasonal waterways, but vary in width depending on the rating of the stream.

“Stream types” include categories established as follows:

1. “Type 1” means those streams inventoried as “shorelines of the state” in the city’s adopted shoreline master program.

2. “Type 2” means perennial or intermittent streams used by anadromous fish during any stage of life.

3. “Type 3” means perennial or intermittent streams with the potential for anadromous fish use, but which do not currently support anadromous fish because of fish barriers or any other condition that substantially interferes with stream use by anadromous fish.

4. “Type 4” means intermittent or perennial streams that are not Type 1, 2 or 3 that may contain fish other than anadromous fish.

5. “Type 5” means intermittent or perennial streams that are not Type 1, 2, 3, or 4.

T. T Definitions. Reserved.

U. U Definitions.

“Unavoidable and necessary impacts” are impacts that remain after a person proposing to alter critical areas has demonstrated that no practicable alternative exists for the proposed project.

V. V Definitions. Reserved.

W. W Definitions.

“Wetland buffer” or “wetland buffer zone” means an area that surrounds and protects a wetland from adverse impacts to the functions and values of a regulated wetland.

“Wetland categories,” “classes of wetlands” or “wetland types” means descriptive classes of the wetlands taxonomic classification system of the current version of the Washington State Department of Ecology Wetlands Rating System for Western Washington.

“Wetland edge” means the line delineating the outer edge of a wetland. Wetlands will be delineated in accordance with the procedure outlined in WAC 173-22-035.

“Wetland functions” means the beneficial roles served by wetlands, including, but not limited to, water quality protection and enhancement; fish and wildlife habitat; food chain support; flood storage; conveyance and attenuation; ground water recharge and discharge; erosion control; wave attenuation; historical, archaeological and aesthetic value protection; and recreation. These beneficial roles are not listed in order of priority.

“Wetlands” means areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. Wetlands do not include those artificial wetlands intentionally created from nonwetland sites, including, but not limited to, irrigation and drainage ditches, grass-lined swales, canals, detention facilities, wastewater treatment facilities, farm ponds, and landscape amenities, or those wetlands created after July 1, 1990, that were unintentionally created as a result of the construction of a road, street, or highway. Wetlands may include those artificial wetlands intentionally created from nonwetland areas created to mitigate conversion of wetlands.

X. X Definitions. Reserved.

Y. Y Definitions. Reserved.

Z. Z Definitions. Reserved. (Ord. 2017-005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2012-001 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 631 § 1, 1992)


18.80.040 Applicability.

This chapter establishes regulations for the designation and protection of properties with critical areas and critical area buffers as indicated under subsection D of this section. Properties listed, identified, classified or rated as critical areas are those which are or may become designated critical areas by the city’s comprehensive plan, development regulations, or by separate studies which indicate that all or portions of a particular area or specific site are critical areas. A site-specific analysis which indicates that any element regulated by this chapter is present will result in that portion of the property being classified as a critical area.

A. All development proposals on sites which are identified as critical areas must comply with the requirements and provisions of this chapter. Responsibility for administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter must rest with the department of community development director or the director’s designee.

B. For the purposes of this chapter, development proposals include proposals which require land use approvals required by city ordinances, as amended, or the Revised Code of Washington.

C. When any other city provision conflicts with this chapter, that provision which provides the greatest protection to critical areas applies.

D. This chapter applies to all lots or parcels that contain or are adjacent to critical areas. Critical areas must be defined and designated to assure that the properties subject to review under this chapter encompass all areas necessary to maintain the natural hydraulic and habitat functions of the critical area. The approximate distribution and extent of critical areas in the city and its urban growth area are displayed on maps on file with the city department of community development.

1. Critical areas composite maps must be prepared and revised on an ongoing basis. The Clallam County Critical Areas Map may also be used as a guide in determining critical areas. Wetlands identified on the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory, and hydric soils and “wet spots” identified by the USDA Soils Conservation Service Natural Resource Conservation Service Soil Survey of Clallam County Area, Washington, may also be used.

2. These maps are to be used as a guide to the general location and extent of critical areas and to alert the public and city officials of the potential presence of critical areas on site or off site of a development proposal. Given the generalized nature of these maps and recognizing that critical areas are a dynamic environmental process, the actual presence and location of critical areas, as determined by qualified professionals, must be established and protected in accordance with all the provisions of this chapter, which governs the treatment of proposed development sites.

3. In the event that any of the critical areas shown on the maps conflict with the criteria set forth in this chapter, the criteria must control.

E. The department of community development director, as assisted by other city officials, has final responsibility for the accuracy of the submitted information. Once classification and location information have been verified for a particular lot or parcel, the director must require that the owner/applicant:

1. File a notice on title with the Clallam County auditor pursuant to SMC 18.80.090; and

2. Place a “critical areas easement” on the face of a final subdivision, minor subdivision binding site plan, or boundary line adjustment. (Ord. 2017-005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2012-001 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-017 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 2002-027 § 4; Ord. 631 § 1, 1992)


18.80.045 Critical area review.

A. The city must perform a critical area review for a development proposal permit application or other request to proceed with an alteration on a site that includes a critical area or is within an identified critical area buffer or building setback area. Any required studies must be conducted in conformance with SMC 18.80.060(C).

B. As part of the critical area review, the city must:

1. Determine whether any critical area exists on the property and confirm its nature and type;

2. Determine whether a critical area special study is required;

3. Evaluate the critical area special study, if one is required;

4. Determine whether the proposal is consistent with this chapter;

5. Determine whether any proposed alteration to the critical area is necessary; and 

6. Determine if the mitigation and monitoring plans and bonding measures proposed by the applicant are sufficient to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, consistent with the goals, purposes, objectives, and requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2017-005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2012-001 § 2 (Exh. A))


18.80.050 Permitted uses and development restrictions.

A. Permitted Uses. Uses permitted on properties classified as critical areas must be the same as those permitted in the underlying zone. Each use must be evaluated in accordance with the review process required for the proposed use in the underlying zone in conjunction with the requirements of this chapter and state and federal regulations.

B. Development Restrictions.

1. The following critical areas and their buffers must remain undisturbed pursuant to SMC 18.80.070, except as otherwise provided in SMC 18.80.080:

a. Wetlands;

b. Surface streams;

c. Ravines and marine bluffs;

d. Beaches and associated coastal-drift processes;

e. Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas.

2. All other critical areas identified in SMC 18.80.030 are developable pursuant to the provisions of SMC 18.80.070. The applicant must provide supporting documentation that the proposal incorporates measures pursuant to this chapter that adequately protect the public health, safety and welfare.

3. Special Conditions.

a. As a condition of any land use permit, building permit, grading permit, clearing permit and subdivision or short plat issued pursuant to the Sequim Municipal Code, the property owner and/or applicant are required to create a separate critical area tract or tracts containing the areas determined to be critical area and/or critical area buffer.

b. The common boundary between a separate critical area tract and the adjacent land must be permanently identified. This identification must include permanent wood or metal signs on treated wood or metal posts indicating that property owners, homeowners’ associations, or other party is responsible for the care and maintenance of the critical area tract(s).

c. Sign locations and size specification must be approved by the department of community development director or authorized designee.

d. The department of community development director or authorized designee requires permanent fencing of the critical areas when there is a substantial likelihood of the presence or introduction of domestic grazing animals within the development proposal.

e. The department of community development director or authorized designee may attach such additional conditions to the approval of any permit or application as deemed necessary to assure the preservation and protection of affected critical areas and to assure compliance with the purposes and requirements of this chapter.

f. This subsection does not apply to any single-family lot that is a lot of record or any single-family lot within any subdivision or short plat that has received preliminary approval prior to the adoption of this subsection. This subsection must not abrogate any requirements for critical area tracts already required for preliminary subdivisions or short plats approved prior to the adoption of this subsection. (Ord. 2017-005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2012-001 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-017 § 2; Ord. 631 § 1, 1992)


18.80.055 Exempt activities.

The following uses are exempt if they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law and are conducted using best management practices:

A. Normal repair and routine maintenance and operation of residences, landscaping, utilities, roads, trails, irrigation and drainage ditches, and fish ponds which were lawfully constructed, approved, or established prior to the effective date of this chapter if no expansion results.

B. Operation and maintenance of all electric facilities, lines, equipment or appurtenances; water and sewer lines; natural gas, cable communications and telephone facilities, lines, pipes, mains, equipment or appurtenances, except for power, water, and sewer substations and pump sites or new utilities within designated frequently flooded areas. For the purposes of this chapter, operation and maintenance includes those usual acts necessary for the continued use of existing services in their established locations. Replacement, expansion, relocation or placement of new utility service lines are subject to the standards of this chapter, as applicable.

C. Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish, shellfish and other wildlife that does not involve changing the structure or functions of the existing wetland.

D. Low intensity outdoor recreational activities having minimal adverse impacts, including but not limited to wildlife watching and nonpermanent blinds, hiking, boating, swimming, canoeing, bicycling, pervious trails less than five feet in width, and sport fishing or hunting.

E. The harvesting of wild crops in a manner that is not injurious to natural reproduction of such crops and that does not require tilling of soil, planting of crops, chemical applications, or alteration of the wetland by changing existing topography, water conditions or water sources.

F. Existing and ongoing agricultural activities, including farming, horticulture, aquaculture, irrigation, ranching or grazing of animals. Activities on areas lying fallow as part of a conventional rotational cycle are part of an ongoing operation. Activities which bring an area into agricultural use are not part of an ongoing operation. An operation ceases to be ongoing when the area on which it was conducted has been converted to another use or has lain idle so long that modifications to the hydrological regime are necessary to resume operations.

G. Education, scientific research and activities, and use of nature trails.

H. Navigation aids and boundary markers.

I. Boat-mooring buoys.

J. Site investigative work necessary for land use application submittals, such as surveys, soil logs and other related activities. In every case, critical area impacts must be minimized and disturbed areas must be immediately restored.

K. Enhancement of a critical area or buffer by removing nonnative, invasive plant species. Only hand removal is allowed under this exemption unless the necessary permits have been obtained from the regulatory agencies specifically allowing biological or chemical treatments. All removed plant material must be taken from the site and disposed of appropriately. Plants that appear on the State Noxious Weed Board list of noxious species must be handled according to a control plan appropriate for that plant species. Revegetation with native species is allowed at natural densities if performed in conjunction with removal of invasive species. (Ord. 2017-005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2012-001 § 2 (Exh. A))


18.80.060 Submittal requirements and support information required.

A. Submittal Requirements. Applications for land uses or developments proposed within critical areas must be filed with all the information requested on the application forms available from the department of community development. All developments proposed on lots or parcels which may contain or adjoin critical areas, as determined by the city, must be evaluated by the applicant to provide the information necessary for the department of community development to determine if and to what extent the site contains critical area characteristics. The department of community development director must make the determination to classify a site or portion of a site as critical area pursuant to the procedures set forth in SMC 18.80.045. For applications which are subject to review pursuant to SEPA, the appeal of a determination that a site is a critical area must be made pursuant to the SEPA appeals procedures as set forth in SMC Title 16.

B. Supporting Information Required.

1. All land uses and developments proposed on or adjacent to lots or parcels listed, identified, inventoried, classified or rated as critical areas must include supporting studies, prepared to describe the environmental limitations of the site. No construction activity, including clearing or grading, is permitted until the information required by this chapter is reviewed and approved by the city as adequate. Special environmental studies must include a comprehensive site inventory and analysis, a discussion of the potential impacts of the proposed development, and specific measures designed to mitigate any potential adverse environmental impacts of the applicant’s proposal, both on site and off site, as follows:

a. A description of how the proposed development will or will not impact each of the following on the subject property and adjoining properties:

i. Erosion and landslide hazard, 

ii. Seismic hazards, 

iii. Drainage, surface and subsurface hydrology and water quality,

iv. Flood-prone areas,

v. Existing vegetation as it relates to steep slopes, soil stability and natural habitat, 

vi. Locally unique landforms: ravines, marine bluffs, beaches and associated coastal-drift processes, 

vii. Slopes greater than 40 percent,

viii. Wetlands, and

ix. Critical aquifer recharge areas pursuant to SMC 18.80.100;

b. Recommended methods for mitigating identified impacts and a description of how these mitigating measures may impact adjacent properties;

c. Any additional information determined to be relevant by the city or by the professional consultant who prepared the study.

2. Such studies must be prepared by qualified professionals.

C. City Review.

1. An applicant for a development proposal that includes or is within an identified critical area or critical area buffer must enter into a three-party agreement, as approved by the city. The applicant must pay the costs for the city to hire the appropriate consultant(s) to provide a critical area special study to adequately evaluate the proposal and all probable impacts, unless studies have already been prepared by the applicant’s consultant. If the applicant has already prepared studies, the applicant must pay for the costs of a peer review of all studies submitted. The applicant must pay for any additional studies that may be required in the peer review. The selection of the consultant(s) hired for the study or peer review by the city must be at the sole discretion of the city.

2. All critical area studies must be prepared under the direction of the city. The department of community development director will make the final determination on the adequacy of these studies.

3. Project proposals with impacts to critical areas must be submitted to the appropriate agencies for review and comment.

4. The city’s review of critical area permit applications must not be construed to take the place of any other additional local, state, or federal permits or permit requirements. (Ord. 2017-005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2012-001 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-017 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 631 § 1, 1992)


18.80.070 Development standards.

A. Streams and Stream Buffers. Any development or construction adjacent to streams must preserve an undisturbed buffer which is wide enough to maintain the natural hydraulic and habitat functions of that stream as it relates to an urban environment. The dimensions of stream buffers are listed in subsection (A)(1) of this section. If streams are located within ravines, as defined in SMC 18.80.030, buffers will be established according to the criteria set forth in subsection B of this section.

1. Stream Buffers.

a. The following buffers of undisturbed native vegetation must be provided for different classes of streams and their tributaries. Dimensions are measured from the ordinary high-water elevation of the stream or watercourse, or from the top of the bank or dike:

	Type 1	150 feet;

	Type 2	100 feet;

	Type 3	75 feet;

	Type 4	50 feet;

	Type 5	25 feet.

b. Closed stream segments must have no buffers.

c. Where the FEMA floodplain is wider than these buffers, the width of the floodplain is considered to be the buffer width.

2. Stream buffers must be increased to include streamside wetlands that provide overflow storage for stormwaters, feed water back to the stream during low flows or provide shelter and food for fish.

3. Additional Buffers. The department of community development director may require additional native vegetation or increased buffer sizes when environmental information indicates the necessity for additional vegetation or greater buffers in order to achieve the purposes of this chapter. In cases where additional buffers are not feasible, the department of community development director may require the applicant to undertake alternative on-site or off-site mitigation measures, including but not limited to a financial contribution to projects or programs which seek to improve environmental quality within the same or adjacent watershed.

4. Stream relocation must be allowed only when the relocation:

a. Is part of an approved mitigation or rehabilitation plan;

b. Will result in equal or better habitat and water quality;

c. Will not diminish the flow capacity of the stream; and

d. Will result in equal or better hydrologic continuity.

Any relocation must obtain prior approval from the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife. Relocation of Type 1 streams is prohibited.

B. Ravines, Marine Bluffs and Beaches and Associated Coastal-Drift Processes. All properties falling within the buffer zones identified in the following subsection are subject to the requirements of this chapter.

1. Buffers. The following buffers of undisturbed vegetation must be established from the top of ravines and the top and toe of marine bluffs and ravine bluffs:

a. Ravines, 50 feet;

b. Marine bluffs, as set forth in the city’s adopted shoreline master program;

c. Beaches and associated coastal-drift processes, as set forth in the city’s adopted shoreline master program.

2. Buffer Reduction. Undisturbed zones adjoining both marine bluffs and beaches must be sufficient to assure that natural coastal-drift processes will remain unimpaired.

a. Buffers for “feeder” or eroding bluffs must not be reduced.

b. The buffer for noneroding bluffs may be reduced when expert verification and environmental information demonstrate that the proposed construction method will:

i. Not adversely impact the stability of ravine sidewalls and bluffs;

ii. Not increase erosion and mass-movement potential of ravine sidewalls and bluffs;

iii. Use construction techniques which minimize disruption of the existing topography and vegetation; and

iv. Include measures to overcome any geological, soils and hydrological constraints of the site.

c. Buffers must not be reduced to less than 25 feet from the top of a ravine, or the top or toe of a noneroding bluff.

3. Additional Buffers. The department of community development director may require increased buffers if environmental studies indicate such increases are necessary to mitigate landslide, seismic and erosion hazards, or as otherwise necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare.

4. Viewshed Enhancement. In ravine and marine bluff buffers, tree removal for viewshed enhancement is allowed so long as tree removal does not exceed 50 percent and:

a. Will not increase geological hazards such as erosion potential, landslide potential or seismic hazard potential; or

b. Will not adversely affect significant wildlife habitat areas; and

c. Is based upon a review and recommendation by a certified arborist.

C. Geological Hazard (Erosion, Landslide, Seismic) Areas. Areas containing or adjacent to geological hazard areas must be altered only when the department of community development director concludes, based on environmental information, the following:

1. Landslide Hazard Areas.

a. There will be no increase in surface water discharge or sedimentation to adjacent properties;

b. There will be no decrease in slope stability on adjacent properties; and

c. Either:

i. There is no hazard as proven by evidence of no landslide activity in the past in the vicinity of the proposed development and a quantitative analysis of slope stability indicates no significant risk to the development proposal and adjacent properties,

ii. The landslide hazard area can be modified or the development proposal can be designed so that the landslide hazard is eliminated or mitigated so that the site is as safe as a site without a landslide hazard, or

iii. The alteration is so minor as not to pose a threat;

2. Erosion Hazard Areas.

a. Areas containing erosion hazard areas must have land clearing, grading or filling limited to the period between April 1st and October 1st,

b. Vegetation must be preserved or replaced;

3. Seismic Hazard Areas.

a. Areas containing or adjacent to seismic hazard areas must be altered only when the department of community development director concludes, based on environmental information, the following:

i. There is no actual hazard based on a lack of seismic activity in the past in the area of the development proposal, and a quantitative analysis of potential for seismic activity indicates no significant risk to the development proposal; or

ii. The development proposal can be designed so that it will minimize any risk of harm from seismic activity to public health, safety or welfare on or off the site.

b. Construction on fills allowed through a development permit must be certified by a qualified professional to be safe. This requirement may be waived by the public works director for actions involving minor changes, alterations, or additions to developed properties; provided, that such activities do not jeopardize public health, safety or welfare on or off the site;

4. Geological Hazard Area Buffers. If it is determined that a geological hazard area, particularly landslide hazard and erosion hazard areas or steep slopes, cannot be safely developed and must remain as permanent open space, the geological hazard area must have a buffer of 50 feet from the top and toe of the designated area. This buffer may be reduced (to not less than 25 feet) or enlarged based on geotechnical review, which assures any such variation provides or is necessary to provide adequate protection of any structures on site.

D. Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation Areas. To protect the habitat of animal species which are considered to be endangered or threatened species and thereby maintain and increase their populations, fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas are subject to the following:

1. When a development proposal contains a priority habitat for endangered or threatened species, the applicant must submit a habitat management plan. The need for a habitat management plan must be determined during State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA) review of the proposal. The habitat management plan must identify how the impacts from the proposed project will be mitigated. Possible mitigation measures must include, but are not limited to:

a. Establishment of buffer zones,

b. Preservation of critically important plants and trees within the buffer,

c. Limitation of access to habitat area,

d. Scheduling construction activities to avoid interference with wildlife and fisheries rearing, resting, nesting or spawning activities,

e. Using best available technology to avoid or reduce impacts,

f. Using drainage and erosion control measures to prevent siltation of aquatic areas, and

g. Possibly reducing the size, scope, configuration or density of the project;

2. Buffer. To retain adequate natural habitat for endangered or threatened species, buffers must be established on a case-by-case basis as described in a habitat management plan;

3. Uses and activities allowed within a significant wildlife habitat area as identified by a habitat management plan must be limited to low-intensity land uses which will not adversely affect or degrade the habitat and which will not be a threat to the critical ecological processes such as feeding, breeding, nesting and resting;

4. Bald eagle habitat must be protected pursuant to the Washington State bald eagle protection rules (WAC 232-12-292). Whenever activities are proposed within 800 feet of a verified nest territory or communal roost, a habitat management plan must be developed by a qualified professional. The director must verify the location of eagle management areas for each proposed activity. Approval of the activity must not occur prior to approval of the habitat management plan by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife.

E. Frequently Flooded Areas. Development in frequently flooded areas which are not subject to the standards of other critical areas will be directed by Chapter 8.36 SMC, Flood Damage Prevention.

F. Wetlands.

1. The following wetlands are exempt from regulation:

a. All isolated wetlands less than 1,000 square feet that are not part of a wetland mosaic;

b. Category III wetlands less than 2,500 square feet;

c. Category IV wetlands less than 4,356 square feet;

d. Category IV wetlands greater than 4,356 square feet and less than 10,000 square feet with mitigation; and

e. Wetlands created directly as a result of poorly maintained storm drainage systems that would not have been created if the drainage system had been properly maintained. 

f. The city reserves the right to require mitigation, after public notice, for small wetland impacts, consistent with ratios established in the table in subsection (F)(7) of this section should a mitigation bank or in-lieu fee program become available in the appropriate watershed.

2. Determination of Regulatory Wetland Boundary.

a. The exact location of the wetland boundary must be determined through the performance of a field investigation applying the wetland definition provided in this chapter. Qualified professionals must perform wetland delineations, which must be delineated in accordance with the procedure outlined in WAC 173-22-035 pursuant to RCW 36.70A.175 and 90.58.380. An applicant for a wetland permit is required to show the location of the wetland boundary on a scaled drawing as a part of the permit application.

b. The city retains the right to obtain its own delineations through a qualified professional pursuant to SMC 18.80.060. If the city’s delineation differs from the applicant’s delineation, the city’s delineation must control and must be considered a final decision.

3. Wetland rating categories must be applied to the regulated wetland:

a. As it exists on the date of adoption of the rating system by the city;

b. As the regulated wetland may naturally change thereafter; or

c. As the regulated wetland may change in accordance with permitted activities.

d. Wetland rating categories must not be altered to recognize illegal modifications made by the applicant or with the applicant’s knowledge. 

4. Regulated Activities. A permit must be obtained from the city prior to undertaking the following activities in a regulated wetland or its buffer:

a. The removal, clearing, excavation, grading or dredging of soil, sand, gravel, minerals, organic matter or material of any kind;

b. Dumping, discharging or filling with any material;

c. Draining, flooding or disturbing of the water level or water table;

d. Pile driving;

e. The placing of obstructions;

f. The construction, reconstruction, demolition, or expansion of any structure;

g. The destruction or alteration of wetlands vegetation through clearing, harvesting, shading, intentional burning or planting of vegetation that would alter the character of a regulated wetland; provided, that these activities are not part of a forest practice governed under Chapter 76.09 RCW and its rules, unless those activities are Class IV activities regulated by the city; 

h. Stormwater management facilities in Category III or IV wetlands having no other reasonable alternative on-site location if the facilities are located in the outer 25 percent of the buffer; or

i. Development in Category III or IV wetlands having no feasible alternative location if mitigation sequencing is applied; or

j. Activities that result in the introduction of pollutants or a significant change of water temperature, physical or chemical characteristics of wetlands water sources, or in the quantity, timing, or duration of the water entering the wetland. 

When such permit applications are submitted, the city must submit applications to the Department of Ecology for comment, pursuant to SMC 18.80.060(C)(3). Ecology should submit its comments or should request an extension of the review period within 30 days of submittal. Extensions may be up to 30 days in length. When submitted, no permit is allowed to be issued under this subsection prior to receipt of such comments or the expiration of the time period or any extensions and receipt of any other necessary permits.

5. Buffers. Wetland buffers are required for all regulated activities adjacent to regulated wetlands. Any wetland created, restored or enhanced as compensation for approved wetland alterations must also include the standard buffer required for the category of the created, restored or enhanced wetland. All buffers must be measured from the wetland boundary as surveyed in the field. The width of the wetland buffer zone must be determined according to wetland category, habitat score, and the intensity of the proposed land use. For the purposes of this section, “low impact land use” means land uses with low levels of human disturbance or low wetland habitat impacts, including, but not limited to, passive recreation, open space, educational field trips, small gardens, or low impact stormwater management facilities. A maximum net density of four dwelling units per acre is defined as low intensity. “Net density” means the density calculation after the land set aside for roads and wetlands (but not their buffers) has been removed from the total land associated with the proposed development. “High impact land use” means land uses associated with moderate or high levels of human or structural disturbance including but not limited to R4-8 conditional or special uses, R-III zoning and above, multifamily residential, active recreation, commercial and industrial land uses. 

	Wetland Rating	Land Use Impact	Buffer

	Cat I – Habitat score 20 or more, or estuarine or coastal lagoon	Low	150 ft.

	High	200 ft. 

	Cat I – Habitat score 19 or less 	Low	125 ft.

	High	200 ft. 

	Cat II – Habitat score 20 or more, or estuarine or coastal lagoon	Low	100 ft.

	High	150 ft. 

	Cat II – Habitat score 19 or less	Low	65 ft.

	High	100 ft. 

	Cat III – Habitat score 20 or more	Low	75 ft.

	High	125 ft. 

	Cat III – Habitat score 19 or less	Low	40 ft.

	High	75 ft. 

	Cat IV	All 	25 ft.

The following measures are required, as applicable, to receive the buffer widths listed above.

	•	Outdoor lighting from the development shall be designed and installed to prevent direct casting of light into adjacent wetland areas. Final design shall be reviewed and approved by the department of community development prior to permit issuance. 

	•	Activity that generates noise shall be located away from wetlands. If warranted, enhance existing buffer with native vegetation plantings adjacent to noise source. 

	•	The applicant shall prepare a restrictive covenant, to be placed upon the deed for the property, that prohibits use of pesticides within 150 feet of the delineated on-site wetland area. Proof of the recorded covenant shall be provided to the city prior to permit issuance.

	•	Surface water management shall be consistent with low impact development (LID) practices as set forth in the manual identified in Chapter 13.104 SMC. Final design shall be reviewed and approved by the public works department prior to permit issuance.

	•	Permanent signage on the boundary of a wetland buffer to protect its functions and values. Fencing may be required if requested by the wetland biologist to protect its functions and values. Fencing design shall not interfere with fish and wildlife migration and shall minimize impacts to the wetland and its associated habitat. 

	•	The applicant shall utilize dust control best management practices (BMP) during development activities. Such practices shall be consistent with the manual identified in Chapter 13.104 SMC.

	•	Surface water from areas adjacent to on-site delineated wetland areas shall be channelized and treated prior to discharge into wetland buffer areas. Surface water treatment shall be consistent with the manual identified in Chapter 13.104 SMC. Final design shall be reviewed and approved by the city public works department prior to permit issuance.

	•	All treated surface water proposed for discharge into any on-site delineated wetland area shall be conveyed in a manner consistent with those practices set forth in the manual identified in Chapter 13.104 SMC. Final design shall be reviewed and approved by the city public works department prior to permit issuance.

	•	Existing on-site drainage system facilities shall be reviewed by a Washington State licensed engineer to determine their ability to accommodate the increased volume of surface water created by the new development. The facilities shall be modified as necessary with facility design consistent with the direction provided in the manual identified in Chapter 13.104 SMC. Final design shall be reviewed and approved by the city public works department prior to permit issuance.

	•	Surface water from impervious surfaces and lawns located adjacent to on-site delineated wetland areas shall be channelized and treated prior to discharge into wetland buffer areas. Surface water treatment shall be consistent with those practices contained in the manual identified in Chapter 13.104 SMC. Final design shall be reviewed and approved by the city public works department prior to permit issuance.

	•	Apply integrated pest management.

	•	The delineated on-site wetland area shall be placed in a separate tract as prescribed in SMC 18.80.090.

6. A building setback line of 15 feet is required from the edge of any wetland buffer. Minor structural intrusions into the area of the building setback may be allowed if the department of community development director or authorized designee determines, supported by objective written evidence, that such intrusions will not negatively impact the wetland. If the wetland buffer is already heavily impacted, building setbacks may be reduced in exchange for buffer enhancement – see SMC 18.80.080.

7. Wetlands Restoration and Creation.

a. Any person who alters regulated wetlands must restore or create equivalent areas or greater areas of wetlands than those altered in order to compensate for wetland losses.

b. Where feasible, restored or created wetlands must be a higher category than the altered wetland.

c. Compensation areas must be determined according to function, acreage, type, location, time factors, ability to be self-sustaining, and projected success. Wetland functions and values must be calculated using the best professional judgment of a qualified wetland ecologist using the best available techniques. Multiple compensation projects may be proposed for one project in order to best achieve the goal of no net loss.

d. Acreage Replacement Ratio. The following ratios apply to wetland creation or restoration which is in-kind, on site, timed prior to or concurrent with alteration, and has a high probability of success. These ratios do not apply to remedial actions resulting from unauthorized alterations. The first number specifies the acreage of replacement wetlands and the second specifies the acreage of wetlands altered. Ratios for rehabilitation and enhancement may be reduced when combined with 1:1 replacement through creation or re-establishment. 

 

	Category and Type of Wetland	Creation or Reestablishment 	Rehabilitation 	Enhancement 	Preservation 

	Category I: 

Coastal Lagoon, Natural Heritage site 	Not considered possible 	6:1 	Case by case 	10:1 

	Category I: 

Mature Forested 	6:1 	12:1 	24:1 	24:1 

	Category I: Estuarine	Case by case	6:1 of estuarine wetland	Case by case	Case by case

	Category I: 

Based on functions 	4:1 	8:1 	16:1 	20:1 

	Category II 	3:1 	6:1 	12:1 	20:1 

	Category III 	2:1 	4:1 	8:1 	15:1 

	Category IV 	1.5:1 	3:1 	6:1 	10:1 

G. Standard Buffer Width Averaging. Buffers may be modified by averaging buffer widths. This section must not apply to geohazard areas. Averaging must not be allowed in conjunction with any other buffer reduction provisions. Averaging to improve critical area protection may be permitted when all of the following conditions are met:

1. There are no feasible alternatives to the site design that could be accomplished without buffer averaging;

2. The buffer is increased adjacent to the higher-functioning or more sensitive areas and decreased adjacent to the lower-functioning or less sensitive portion;

3. The total area of the buffer after averaging is equal to the area required without averaging; and

4. The buffer at its narrowest point is never less than three-quarters of the required width.

H. Density Credit or Floor Area On-Site Transfer Calculation. The calculation of potential dwelling units in residential development proposals and allowable floor area in nonresidential development proposals must be determined by the ratio of developable area to undisturbable critical areas and buffers of the development site. Density credits and floor area calculations are designed to provide compensation for the preservation of critical areas and their buffers, flexibility in design, and consistent treatment of different types of development proposals. Density credit or floor area must be allowed for landslide and erosion hazard areas, and required buffers for any critical area.

	Percentage of Site as Critical Area	 Floor Area Added to Remaining Developable Site	Density Credit

	1 – 10	.30	100%

	11 – 20	.27	90%

	21 – 30	.24	80%

	31 – 40	.21	70%

	41 – 50	.18	60%

	51 – 60	.15	50%

	61 – 70	.12	40%

	71 – 80	.09	30%

	81 – 90	.06	20%

	91 – 99	.03	10%

Full density credit must be allowed for erosion, seismic, and flood hazard areas. For landslide, erosion, and seismic hazards, the most restrictive regulations must apply. The resulting density determination is rounded down to the nearest whole number.

For example: A 4.5-acre site in the R4-8 zone would have a potential gross density of 22 units (based on five units per acre). If the developable area of the site is reduced to 2.25 acres (a 50 percent reduction based on landslide hazard areas and critical area buffers), the net density is 11 units for the site. Applying the density credit of 60 percent from the above table allows 17 units on the site (11 x 160% = 17.6 or 17 units). (Ord. 2017-005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2012-001 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-017 § 2; Ord. 631 § 1, 1992)


18.80.075 Buffer and setback on sites with existing primary structure(s).

Where a primary structure legally established on a site prior to June 1, 2012, encroaches into the critical area buffer or structure setback established in this chapter, the critical area buffer and/or structure setback must be modified to exclude the footprint of the existing primary structure. Expansion of any existing structure into the critical area buffer or critical area structure setback must be allowed only pursuant to the provisions of SMC 18.80.080.


[IMAGE]


(Ord. 2017-005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2012-001 § 2 (Exh. A))


18.80.080 Development exceptions.

A. Reasonable Use Exceptions. Nothing in this chapter is intended to preclude reasonable use of property. An applicant for a city permit to develop or use real property located in a critical area may apply for a reasonable use exception as set forth in Chapter 18.72 SMC. Applications for modification of critical area development standards must be processed as Type B permits as set forth in Chapter 20.01 SMC.

1. An applicant requesting modification must provide the director with the following information:

a. Technical studies and other data that describe the possible injurious effects of the proposed development on occupiers of the land, on other properties, on public resources, and on the environment. Possible injurious effects must be described even when the injurious effect will become significant only in combination with similar effects from other developments; and

b. An explanation with supporting evidence of how and why compliance with the unmodified critical areas development standards would not permit reasonable use of the property.

2. The reasonable use exception must be approved and critical areas development standards may be modified only when all of the following findings can be made:

a. The application of this chapter would deny all reasonable use of the property;

b. No other reasonable use of the property has less impact on the critical area;

c. The proposed impact to the critical area is the minimum necessary to allow for reasonable use of the property; 

d. The inability of the applicant to derive reasonable use of the property is not the result of actions by the applicant after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter or its predecessor;

e. The proposal does not pose an unreasonable threat to the public health, safety, or welfare on or off the development proposal site;

f. To the extent feasible while still allowing for reasonable use of the property, the proposal has been mitigated to avoid, reduce, or compensate for loss of critical area functions and values consistent with the best available science; and

g. The proposal is consistent with other applicable regulations and standards.

3. A critical areas development standard may be reduced, waived or otherwise modified only to the extent necessary to make the standard reasonable in light of all the facts and circumstances of a particular case. In modifying a development standard, the director may impose reasonable conditions that prevent or mitigate the same harm that the modified regulation was intended to prevent or mitigate.

4. A decision to modify a development standard may be appealed pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 20.01 SMC. The decision as to whether development pursuant to a modified development standard will cause significant injury must be affirmed unless found to be clearly erroneous. The decision as to whether strict application of a development standard is reasonable must be accorded substantial weight, and the burden of proof of justifying the reasonable use exception must be on the applicant.

B. Modification of Existing Structures. Existing structures or improvements that do not meet the requirements of this chapter are considered conforming pursuant to SMC 18.80.075 and may be remodeled, reconstructed or replaced; provided, that the new construction does not further disturb or encroach upon a critical area or its buffer.

C. Previously Altered Critical Areas or Buffers. If any portion of a critical area or its buffer has been altered from its natural state, the applicant may propose to develop within the altered area pursuant to the following decision criteria:

1. The critical area or buffer was lawfully altered in accordance with the provisions of the city ordinances and any state and federal laws at the time the alteration occurred;

2. The alteration has significantly disrupted the natural functions of the critical area or its buffer as determined by a qualified professional;

3. The proposal utilizes to the maximum extent possible the best available construction, design and development techniques which result in the least adverse impact on the critical area and its buffer as determined by a qualified professional;

4. The proposal incorporates the development standards of SMC 18.80.070;

5. The new development will not further degrade the critical area or its buffer as determined by a qualified professional;

6. The proposal is consistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter; and

7. The applicant must mitigate and enhance the remaining critical area or buffer. An enhancement plan must be submitted in accordance with the requirements of SMC 18.80.060.

D. Emergencies. The department of community development director may approve improvements that are necessary to respond to emergencies that threaten the public health and safety, or public development proposals, when it determines that no reasonable alternative exists and the benefit outweighs the loss.

1. Emergencies must be verified by a licensed engineer and notice of their existence must be posted in a paper of general circulation within the city.

2. Within 30 days, the director must determine if the action taken was within the scope of the emergency actions allowed in this subsection. If the director determines that the action taken, or any part of the action taken, was beyond the scope of an allowed emergency action, then enforcement provisions must apply.

3. After the emergency, the person or agency undertaking the action must fully fund and conduct necessary restoration and/or mitigation for any impacts to the critical area and buffers resulting from the emergency action in accordance with an approved critical area report and mitigation plan. The person or agency undertaking the action must apply for review, and the alteration, critical area report, and mitigation plan must be reviewed by the city in accordance with the review procedures contained herein. Restoration and/or mitigation activities must be initiated within one year of the date of the emergency, and completed in a timely manner.

E. Drainage Facilities. Category III or IV wetlands and their buffers, and stream buffers, may be altered for use as a public drainage facility; provided, that all requirements of the city stormwater management plan and all other local, state and federal laws are satisfied, and so long as increased and multiple natural resource functions are achievable and the benefits outweigh any lost resource. The department of community development director may approve public drainage facilities in a buffer only when he/she determines that long-term impacts are minimal or when there are no practicable or reasonable alternatives and mitigation is provided. Drainage facilities shall be limited to the outer 25 percent of a buffer.

F. Trails and Trail-Related Facilities. Public and private trails and trail-related facilities, such as picnic tables, benches, interpretive centers and signs, and viewing platforms, must be allowed, but use of impervious surface must be minimized. Trails and trail-related facilities must be avoided within streams. The department of community development director may approve such trails and facilities only when he/she determines that there is no practicable or reasonable upland alternative. Trail planning construction and maintenance must adhere to the following additional criteria:

1. Trails and related facilities must, to the extent feasible, be placed on existing levies, road grades, utility corridors or any other previously disturbed areas;

2. Trails and related facilities must be planned, aligned, and constructed to minimize removal of trees, shrubs, snags and important wildlife habitat and disturbance to critical area functions;

3. Trails and related facilities must provide water quality protection measures to assure that runoff from them does not directly discharge to wetlands or streams;

4. Private trail widths must be limited to five feet; public trail widths must be limited to five feet or the minimum necessary to achieve Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) compliance;

5. Public trails must be constructed and located in a manner that will achieve ADA compliance; and

6. Trails and related facilities must not exceed five percent impervious surface based on the total size of the critical area and its buffer.

G. Utilities. Every attempt must be made to avoid locating new utilities within streams and stream buffers. The department of community development director may approve new utilities in streams and stream buffers only when he/she determines that there is no practicable or reasonable upland alternative.

H. Stream Crossings. Stream crossings, whether for access or utility purposes, must be avoided to the extent possible; but when necessary due to the lack of feasible alternatives, crossing of streams must follow all applicable local, state and federal laws and the following criteria:

1. Bridges are required for streams that support anadromous fish, unless otherwise allowed by the Washington State Department of Fisheries;

2. All crossings using culverts must use superspan, oversize, box or bottomless culverts;

3. All crossings must be constructed and installed during summer low flow between June 15th and September 15th;

4. Crossings must not occur in anadromous fish spawning areas unless no other feasible crossing site exists;

5. Bridge piers or abutments must not be placed in either the floodway or between the ordinary high-water marks unless no other feasible alternative placement exists;

6. Crossings must not diminish flood-carrying capacity;

7. Crossings must provide for maintenance of culverts, bridges and utilities; and

8. Crossings must serve multiple properties whenever possible.

I. Time Limitation. A development exception automatically expires and is void if the applicant fails to file for a building permit or other necessary development permit within one year of the effective date of the development exception, unless either:

1. The applicant has received an extension for the development exception pursuant to subsection J of this section;

2. The development exception approval provides for a greater time period.

J. Time Extension. The department of community development director may extend the development exception, not to exceed one year, if:

1. Unforeseen circumstances or conditions necessitate the extension of the development exception;

2. Termination of the development exception would result in unreasonable hardship to the applicant, and the applicant is not responsible for the delay; and

3. The extension of the development exception will not cause adverse impacts to critical areas.

K. Mitigation. For any allowable development exception provided under this section, the associated adverse impacts must be considered unavoidable but mitigable. The applicant must first demonstrate that they have taken the following mitigation sequencing actions:

• Avoiding the impact altogether by not taking a certain action or parts of an action;

• Minimizing impacts by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action and its implementation, by using appropriate technology, or by taking affirmative steps to avoid or reduce impacts;

• Rectifying the impact by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the affected environment;

• Reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation and maintenance operations during the life of the action;

• Compensating for the impact by replacing, enhancing, or providing substitute resources or environments; and/or

• Monitoring the impact and taking appropriate corrective measures.

Mitigation must not be implemented until after city approval of the critical area report and mitigation plan prepared in accordance with subsection (K)(4) of this section.

1. General Requirements. The applicant must develop a mitigation plan that provides for construction, maintenance, monitoring and contingencies of the critical areas compensatory mitigation as required by conditions of approval and consistent with the requirements of this chapter. The mitigation plan must be consistent with subsection (K)(4) of this section. All mitigation sites must have buffers consistent with the buffer requirements of this chapter. Where feasible, mitigation projects must be completed prior to activities that will disturb critical areas. In all other cases, mitigation must be completed immediately following disturbance and prior to use or occupancy of the activity or development. Construction of mitigation projects must be timed to reduce impacts to existing wildlife and vegetation. For mitigation projects that involve creating new wetlands or relocating streams, the director of community development must have the authority to modify the buffer requirements on a case-by-case basis to avoid unduly encumbering neighboring properties.

2. On properties where mitigation is required, prior to issuance of any construction, grading, or building permits, or preliminary approval of a major plat, short plat, or binding site plan, a “critical areas performance bond” or other suitable financial guarantee as approved by the city attorney must be submitted to the department of community development. The amount of the bond or other financial guarantee must be equal to 150 percent of the estimated cost of the mitigation. Such bond or other suitable financial guarantee must not be released until all required mitigation is installed.

3. Monitoring. All mitigation projects must be monitored for a period of five years. Monitoring reports must be submitted annually for the first three years following construction and at least upon the completion of the fifth year to document milestones, successes, problems, and contingency actions of the mitigation. The applicant must deposit an amount equal to 125 percent of the full cost of monitoring with the city before monitoring begins. The city must use such funds to pay for monitoring costs associated with the mitigation project. Once the monitoring has been completed, the city must refund any remaining funds to the applicant within 60 days of receiving the final monitoring report. The director must have the authority to extend the monitoring period and require additional monitoring reports beyond the initial five-year monitoring period for any project that does not meet the performance standards identified in the mitigation plan, does not provide adequate replacement for the functions and values of the impacted critical area, or otherwise warrants additional monitoring (such as when forested wetlands are restored or created).

4. Mitigation Plans. All restoration and compensation projects must follow a mitigation plan prepared by qualified professionals containing, at a minimum, the following components:

a. Baseline Information. Quantitative data must be collected and synthesized for both the impacted critical area and the proposed mitigation site, if different from the impacted critical area, following procedures approved by the department of community development;

b. Environmental Goals and Objectives. Goals and objectives describing the purposes of the mitigation measures must be provided, including a description of site selection criteria, identification of target evaluation species and resource functions;

c. Performance Standards. Specific criteria for fulfilling environmental goals and objectives and for beginning remedial action or contingency measures must be provided, including water quality standards, species richness and diversity targets, habitat diversity indices, or other ecological, geological or hydrological criteria;

d. Detailed Construction Plan. Written specifications and descriptions of mitigation techniques must be provided, including the proposed construction sequence, accompanied by detailed site diagrams and blueprints that are an integral requirement of any development proposal;

e. Monitoring Program. A program outlining the approach for assessing a completed project must be provided including descriptions or proposed experimental and control site survey or sampling techniques. A protocol must be included outlining how the monitoring data will be evaluated by agencies that are tracking the progress of the mitigation project. A report must be submitted at least twice yearly documenting milestones, successes, problems and contingency action of the restoration or compensation project. The department of community development director must require that the applicant monitor the project consistent with subsection (K)(3) of this section;

f. Contingency Plan. A plan must be provided fully identifying potential courses of action and any corrective measures to be taken when monitoring or evaluation indicates project standards are not being met;

g. Performance and Maintenance Securities. Securities ensuring fulfillment of the mitigation project, monitoring program and any contingency measures must be posted pursuant to SMC 18.80.110.

5. Restoring Closed Stream Segments.

a. The city allows the voluntary opening of previously channelized/culverted streams and the rehabilitation and restoration of streams, especially on public property or when a property owner is a proponent in conjunction with new development.

b. When closed stream segments are restored, a protective buffer must be required of the stream section. The buffer distance must be 25 feet, regardless of stream classification, to allow for restoration and maintenance. The stream and buffer area must include habitat improvements and measures to prevent erosion, landslide and water quality impacts.

c. Removal of pipes conveying streams must only occur when the city determines that the proposal will result in a new improvement of water quality and ecological functions and will not significantly increase the threat of erosion, flooding, slope stability or other hazards.

6. Other mitigation alternatives, such as banking, in-lieu fees, off-site mitigation, and/or advance mitigation, may be used if the city has established procedures.

a. In-Lieu Fee. To aid in the implementation of off-site mitigation, the city may develop a program which prioritizes wetland areas for use as mitigation and/or allows payment in lieu of providing mitigation on a development site. This program must be developed and approved through a public process. The program should address:

i. The identification of sites within the city that are suitable for use as off-site mitigation. Site suitability must take into account wetland functions, potential for wetland degradation, and potential for urban growth and service expansion; and

ii. The use of fees for mitigation on available sites that have been identified as suitable and prioritized.

b. Wetland Mitigation Banks. Credits from a wetland mitigation bank may be approved for use as compensation for unavoidable impacts to wetlands when:

i. The bank is certified under state rules;

ii. The administrator determines that the wetland mitigation bank provides appropriate compensation for the authorized impacts; and

iii. The proposed use of credits is consistent with the terms and conditions of the bank’s certification.

Replacement ratios for projects using bank credits must be consistent with replacement ratios specified in the bank’s certification. Credits from a certified wetland mitigation bank may be used to compensate for impacts located within the service area specified in the bank’s certification. In some cases, the service area of the bank may include portions of more than one adjacent drainage basin for specific wetland functions.

7. Final Approval. The department of community development director must grant final approval of a completed restoration or compensation project if the final report of the project mitigation plan satisfactorily documents that the area has achieved all requirements of this section. (Ord. 2017-005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2012-001 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 631 § 1, 1992)


18.80.090 Notice to title and protective tracts.

A. To inform subsequent purchasers of real property of the existence of critical areas, when development is permitted in an identified critical area or its associated buffer, a notice to title applicable to the property must be filed with the Clallam County auditor. The notice must state that critical areas or buffers have been identified on the property and that limits on actions in or affecting the critical area or buffer may exist. The notice must run with the land. This notice must not be required for development by a public agency or public or private utility when within a recorded easement or right-of-way, or on the site of a permanent public facility. The applicant must submit proof that the notice has been filed for public record before the city approves any development permit for the property or, in the case of subdivisions, short subdivisions, planned unit developments, and binding site plans, at or before recording.

B. Separate critical area tracts are required for subdivisions, development agreements, binding site plans, or any other project that requires a site permit, to protect critical areas that are to remain undisturbed pursuant to this chapter. The department of community development director or responsible designee must require that the owner/applicant of parcels with critical area features and delineations convey this information on parcel/plat legal documents filed with the city and the county. The plan must clearly depict the critical areas tract, which must include the critical area and any required buffers. Other lands may be included within the critical areas tract at the developer’s discretion. Development restrictions within the tract must be clearly noted on the site plan. Responsibility for maintaining critical area tracts must be held by a homeowners’ association, adjacent lot owners, the permit applicant or designee, or other appropriate entity as approved by the department of community development director or authorized designee and must also be indicated on the plat or plan. (Ord. 2017-005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2012-001 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-017 § 2; Ord. 2002-027 § 4; Ord. 631 § 1, 1992)


18.80.100 Critical aquifer recharge areas.

A. Intent. The intent of this section is to identify, classify and protect vulnerable aquifer recharge areas within the city and to protect vulnerable aquifer recharge areas from pollution by pre-land use activities.

B. Applicability. This section applies to all development proposals within designated areas with a critical recharging effect on aquifers used for potable water.

C. Permitted Uses. Development permitted on lands or shorelands designated as having critical recharging effect on aquifers used for potable water must be the same as those permitted in the underlying zoning classification subject to the restrictions and standards of this chapter.

D. Classification and Designation.

1. Classification. All city lands must be classified as having either a high, moderate or low aquifer recharge potential. At a minimum, classification must be based on soil permeability as described within the Soil Survey of Clallam County. Where adequate information is available, aquifer recharge potential must be further classified based on the recharge potential of surficial geologic materials, depth to ground water, and topography (i.e., slopes). Lands classified as having a high, moderate or low aquifer recharge potential must also be classified as having a high, moderate or low susceptibility to contamination of an underlying aquifer, respectively. Based on these criteria, the potential for recharging aquifers or transmitting contaminants to the underlying aquifer is greatest where the aquifer is close to the ground surface, where ground surface slopes are minimal, and where the recharge potential of the soils and/or surficial geologic material is greatest.

2. Designation. All lands classified as high or moderate aquifer recharge potential and aquifer susceptibility are designated as areas with a critical recharging effect on aquifers used for potable water. Critical aquifer recharge areas must be rated as high or moderate susceptibility areas as follows:

a. High susceptibility aquifer recharge areas are all wellhead protection areas within the five-year travel time boundary; 

b. Moderate susceptibility aquifer recharge areas are all wellhead protection areas within the 10-year travel time boundary; and

c. Low susceptibility includes all areas within the city that do not meet the criteria for a high or moderate susceptibility rating. 

These areas must be identified on maps available at the department of community development.

3. Declassification. Applicants may request that the city declassify a specific area included in the map. The application must be supported by a hydrogeologic assessment demonstrating that the designation is not warranted based on the physical character of the aquifer. The application to declassify an area must be reviewed by the city and a determination made to amend the map as appropriate.

E. Definitions Referral. The use of terms within this section must include those listed below and the definitions used in SMC 18.80.030.

1. “Aquifer” means a saturated geologic formation which will yield a sufficient quantity and quality of water to serve a private or public system or well. “Sufficient” means a possible minimum draw of three gallons per minute.

2. “Aquifer recharge” or “aquifer recharge area” means the process by which water is added to an aquifer. It may occur naturally by the percolation (infiltration) of surface water, precipitation or snowmelt from the ground surface to a depth where the earth materials are saturated with water. Aquifer recharge can be augmented by “artificial” means through the addition of surface water (e.g., land application of wastewater or stormwater) or by the injection of water into the underground environment (e.g., drainfields and drywells). Aquifer recharge areas are those areas overlying the aquifer(s) where natural or artificial sources of water can move downward to an aquifer(s). Most areas are aquifer recharge areas.

3. “Aquifer susceptibility” means the ability of the natural system to transmit contaminants to and through the ground water system.

4. “Critical aquifer recharge areas” means those land areas which contain hydrogeologic conditions which facilitate aquifer recharge and/or transmitting contaminants to an underlying aquifer.

5. “Ground water” means all water found beneath the ground surface, including a saturated body of rock, sand, gravel or other geologic material.

F. Performance Standards. The following protection standards must apply to the regulated uses outlined below and in areas designated as high or moderate susceptibility. The city must impose development conditions when necessary to prevent degradation of ground water. Conditions must be based on known, available, and reasonable methods of prevention, control, and treatment.

1. Activities that will not degrade ground water quality and adversely affect aquifer recharging may be permitted in a critical aquifer recharge area if they comply with the city stormwater management regulations and other applicable local, state and federal regulations. These activities typically include commercial and industrial development that does not include storage, processing, or handling of any hazardous substance, or other development that does not substantially divert, alter, or reduce the flow of surface or ground waters.

2. Aboveground Storage Tanks or Vaults. Aboveground storage tanks or vaults for the storage of hazardous substances or dangerous wastes as defined in Chapter 173-303 WAC, or any other substances, solids or liquids in quantities identified by the Clallam County environmental health division, consistent with Chapter 173-303 WAC, as a risk to ground water quality, must be designed and constructed so as to:

a. Prevent the release of a hazardous substance to the ground, ground waters or surface waters;

b. Have constructed around and under them an impervious containment area enclosing or underlying the tank or part thereof. Impervious containment must be greater than the volume of the tank to avoid an overflow of the containment area;

c. Provide for release detection; and

d. Provide written spill response and spill notification procedures to the local fire district.

3. Agricultural Activities. Agricultural activities, including commercial and hobby farms, are encouraged to incorporate best management practices concerning animal keeping, animal waste disposal, fertilizer use, pesticide use and stream corridor management, and seek the technical assistance of the Clallam County Conservation District and cooperative extension agent.

4. Land Divisions. Subdivisions, short subdivisions and other divisions of land relying on on-site septic systems because city sewer services are not available must be evaluated for their impact on ground water quality. The following measures may be required as determined by the Clallam County environmental health division:

a. An analysis of the potential nitrate loading to the ground water may be required to assess the impact on ground water quality;

b. Alternative site designs, phased development and/or ground water quality monitoring may be required to reduce contaminant loading where site conditions indicate that the proposed action will measurably degrade ground water quality;

c. Open spaces may be required on development proposals overlying areas highly susceptible for contaminating ground water resources;

d. Community/public water systems and community drainfields are encouraged and may be required where site conditions indicate a high degree of potential contamination to individual wells from on-site or off-site sources;

e. Where wells are required to be abandoned, the applicant must ensure that they are abandoned according to state guidelines;

f. Remove contaminants from stormwater runoff prior to their point of entry into surface or ground water resources using best management practices in conformance with the manual identified in Chapter 13.104 SMC.

5. Parks, Schools and Recreation Facilities. Fertilizer, herbicide and pesticide management practices of schools, parks, golf courses and other nonresidential facilities that maintain large landscaped areas must be evaluated in relation to best management practices as recommended by the cooperative extensions service.

6. Stormwater Standards for Commercial and Industrial Uses. All new commercial and industrial land uses must remove contaminants prior to their point of entry into surface or ground water resources using best management practices in conformance with the manual identified in Chapter 13.104 SMC. Maintenance of stormwater facilities must be assured as a permit condition.

7. Underground Storage Tanks and Vaults. Underground storage tanks and vaults used for the storage of hazardous substances, solids or liquids in quantities identified by the Clallam County environmental health division, consistent with Chapter 173-303 WAC, as a risk to ground water quality, must be designed and constructed so as to:

a. Prevent releases due to corrosion or structural failure for the operational life of the tank or vault;

b. Be cathodically protected against corrosion, constructed of noncorrosive material, steel-clad with a noncorrosive material, or designed in a manner to prevent the release or threatened release of any stored substance;

c. Use material in the construction or lining of the tank which is compatible with the substance to be stored;

d. Provide for release detection method(s); and

e. Provide written spill response and spill notification procedures to the local fire district.

8. Spreading or Injection of Reclaimed Water or Biosolids. Water reuse or biosolid projects must be in accordance with the city’s comprehensive plans and approved by the Departments of Ecology and Health.

9. Vehicle Repair and Servicing. Vehicle repair and servicing must be conducted over impermeable pads and within a covered structure capable of withstanding normally expected weather conditions. Chemicals used in the process of vehicle repair and servicing must be stored in a manner that protects them from weather and provides containment should leaks occur.

G. Prohibited Uses. The following activities and uses are prohibited in high and moderate critical aquifer recharge areas:

1. Dry wells on sites used for vehicle repair and servicing must not be allowed, and any existing dry wells on the site must be replaced with best management practices in conformance with the manual identified in SMC 13.104.100 prior to commencement of any new vehicle repair and servicing facility;

2. Landfills including hazardous or dangerous waste, municipal solid waste, special waste, and inert and demolition waste landfills;

3. All classes of underground injection wells, except those in conformance with the manual identified in SMC 13.104.100 or when approved by state or local authorities as part of an approved remediation action; and

4. Facilities that store, process, or dispose of radioactive substances. (Ord. 2017-005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2017-002 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2012-001 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 2011-017 § 1; Ord. 631 § 1, 1992)


18.80.110 Securities and enforcement.

A. Performance Securities. The department of community development director may require the applicant of a development proposal to post a cash performance bond or other acceptable security to guarantee full performance of all mitigation required under this chapter. All securities must be on a form approved by the city attorney. Until written release of the security, the security may not be terminated or canceled. The department of community development director must release the security upon determining that all mitigation requirements have been fully performed and upon the applicant depositing the monitoring costs required under SMC 18.80.080(K) with the city.

B. Monitoring. Costs associated with monitoring under any mitigation plan required under SMC 18.80.080(K) must be paid in accordance with that section.

C. Renewable Bonds. Any bonds required by this section may be in the form of one-year bonds to be renewed as appropriate.

D. Enforcement. Violations of this chapter are subject to the enforcement provisions of this code and are punishable as a misdemeanor offense. (Ord. 2017-005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2012-001 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 631 § 1, 1992)


Chapter 18.84 ANNEXATIONS

Sections:

18.84.010    Purpose.

18.84.020    Preannexation – Comprehensive plan and regulations.

18.84.030    Policies.

18.84.040    Other ordinances.

18.84.050    Applicability.

18.84.060    Standards.

18.84.070    Particular annexations.

18.84.080    Areas beyond urban growth area boundaries.


18.84.010 Purpose.

It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for development planning for those properties reasonably expected to be annexed to the city at some future date. (Ord. 98-007 § 4, Exh. B)


18.84.020 Preannexation – Comprehensive plan and regulations.

The city of Sequim comprehensive plan and optimum land use map and regulations as contained in this chapter identify areas and designate land uses which shall become effective upon annexation. Such preannexation development planning is determined to be reasonable necessary by the city to protect the public interests of health, safety, and the general welfare. (Ord. 98-007 § 4, Exh. B)


18.84.030 Policies.

The comprehensive plan has designated those areas proposed for future annexation. All lands designated on the optimum land use map as being located within the urban growth area shall be considered for annexation. The land use designations of the comprehensive plan provide guidance to owners of land which may be annexed by establishing:

A. The zoning regulations and land use restrictions which will be applied within the areas to annexed with regard to the location and the use of buildings, structures and land for residential, commercial, industrial and other purposes the height, number of stories, size, construction and design of buildings and other structures, the size of the yards, setbacks and other open spaces on the lot, the density of the development, and the rules regulating further subdivision and developments of land. (Ord. 98-007 § 4, Exh. B)


18.84.040 Other ordinances.

In order to accomplish the above purposes, the city zoning code, the city building code, the subdivision code, utilities ordinances, the procedures for review and approval of annexation requests, consistent with SMC Title 20, and any other presently adopted ordinances, which affect and/or regulate the matters set forth in SMC 18.84.030 shall be adopted by reference, which adoption shall specifically include any amendments made hereafter to the above-named ordinances. (Ord. 98-007 § 4, Exh. B)


18.84.050 Applicability.

All property annexed to the city shall abide by the terms of the ordinances mentioned in SMC 18.84.040, and specifically shall abide by the terms and regulations pertaining to the zones set forth on the comprehensive plan optimum land use map for the property, unless a variance or exemption has been granted pursuant to the terms of the ordinances which would otherwise control the particular matter for which an exemption or variance has been sought. (Ord. 98-007 § 4, Exh. B)


18.84.060 Standards.

To the extent reasonably practical, annexation shall occur only when in conformity with the following standards and policies of the city:

A. Annexations shall occur only within the service areas of municipal utility systems, or when acceptable alternative systems are reasonably available, consistent with the requirements of city utility service ordinances, policies and procedures. 

B. Annexation boundaries should be drawn to eliminate boundary, interjurisdictional, and service problems.

C. Necessary rights-of-way and easements shall be obtained prior to or at the time of annexation.

D. Properties which are to be annexed shall be incorporated into the city with a zoning district designation which is consistent with the designation for the subject property as shown on the adopted comprehensive plan optimum land use map. (Ord. 98-007 § 4, Exh. B)


18.84.070 Particular annexations.

Petitions for annexation, other than annexation for municipal purposes, shall state on the face thereof that the annexation properties shall be required to accept simultaneous adoption of the comprehensive plan and zoning as set forth in the comprehensive plan, together with necessary dedications of rights-of-way, assumption of the existing city indebtedness, adoption of the regulations and standards of the zoning code, and other ordinances applicable to development of the property. In addition to the particular ordinances set forth above, annexations may be required to meet other conditions reasonably necessary to meet the objectives set forth above. (Ord. 98-007 § 4, Exh. B)


18.84.080 Areas beyond urban growth area boundaries.

Properties which are not included within the Sequim urban growth area, as designated by the comprehensive plan optimum land use map, may not be annexed into the city, unless the annexation is for municipal purposes and the property to be annexed is owned by the city. (Ord. 98-007 § 4, Exh. B)


Chapter 18.88 AMENDING THE ZONING ORDINANCE AND THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN

Sections:

18.88.010    Purpose.

18.88.020    Exceptions to the amendment process.

18.88.030    Types of amendments.

18.88.040    Type I amendments – Text and map rezones consistent with comprehensive plan optimum land use map designations.

18.88.050    Type II amendments –Transitional zone redesignation.

18.88.060    Type I and Type II application review procedures.

18.88.070    Type III amendments – Annual review process.

18.88.080    Map revisions.


18.88.010 Purpose. 

The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures for amending the city of Sequim comprehensive plan, including the optimum land use map and any subarea plans, and for amending the zoning code and the official zoning map. The Growth Management Act (GMA) generally allows amendments to comprehensive plans only once per year, except in emergencies, so as to allow communities to consider the cumulative impacts of the proposed revisions. This chapter is intended to provide a process to distinguish those applications for amendments which require review for cumulative impacts and should be “docketed” for annual review and to identify those applications for amendments for which the cumulative impacts have been previously addressed and to provide timelines, public participation procedures, application requirements, and review criteria for consideration of amendments to the comprehensive plan, comprehensive plan optimum land use map and the zoning code and official zoning map. (Ord. 2011-012 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


18.88.020 Exceptions to the amendment process. 

The city council may amend the comprehensive plan and/or zoning code outside of the processes contained in this chapter, in any of the following circumstances:

A. Emergencies. Resolution of an emergency condition or situation that involves public health, safety or welfare and when adherence to the processes of the chapter would be detrimental to the public health and safety.

B. Initial Adoption of an Identified Subarea Plan and/or Planned Unit Development. Initial adoption of an identified subarea plan when the subarea plan has been considered and approved consistent with the procedures and criteria of Chapter 18.18 SMC, Overlay Districts, and adoption of a planned unit development, consistent with the procedures and criteria of Chapter 18.40 SMC, Planned Unit Developments.

C. Resolution of a Decision by an Administrative Agency or Court of Competent Jurisdiction. Situations involving official legal or administrative action (such as decisions by the Western Washington Growth Hearings Board or the state or federal courts, actions of a state agency or office or the state legislature) affecting the city of Sequim and the urban growth area (planning area) will be reviewed by the city council to determine if an appropriate “emergency” exists, necessitating an emergency comprehensive plan amendment. The council may choose to enact an emergency amendment; however, in all cases, the planning commission shall evaluate and consider the cumulative impacts of any emergency decisions when considering annual amendments. (Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


18.88.030 Types of amendments. 

The city has identified three separate amendment types. Type I and II amendments do not require “docketing” for consideration on an annual basis. Type III amendments do require “docketing” and will be considered annually. All comprehensive plan, comprehensive plan optimum land use map, zoning code, and official zoning map amendments are considered C-2 (legislative) processes, consistent with the procedures and criteria of SMC Title 20, and are exempt from the timeline requirements of that title. (Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)

Table 18.88.030 

	Amendment  Type	Purpose	Examples	Docketing for Annual Review Required

	Type I	Revisions to the official zoning map consistent with the comprehensive plan, code text amendments	Map errors, public facilities zoning designations (with approved special use applications), code amendments	No

	Type II	Rezones of parcels designated by the optimum land use map as “transitional zoning areas”	Applications for subdivision, PUD, or binding site plan within the transitional zoning designation which propose greater than one acre density	No

	Type III	Amendments of the comprehensive plan land use map and text	Text amendments, changes to goals, policies or projects, map changes	Yes

(Ord. 2011-012 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


18.88.040 Type I amendments – Text and map rezones consistent with comprehensive plan optimum land use map designations. 

Requests for amendments to the official zoning map and/or to the text of the municipal code which are determined to be consistent with the comprehensive plan and the optimum land use map shall be considered a Type I amendment, and may be applied for at any time.

A. Who May Apply. The department of community development and building department will only accept applications for Type I amendments from the owner or owners of a property, or the owner’s authorized representative. Proof of ownership may be required.

B. Application Required. All applications for Type I amendments shall be received on forms provided by the department of community development, and shall include:

1. A complete legal description of the subject parcel(s).

2. A copy of the county tax assessors map of the subject parcel(s).

3. A vicinity map showing at least those neighboring parcels within 300 feet of the subject parcel and all road access to the parcel.

4. The current official zoning map designation for the subject parcel(s).

5. The current optimum land use map designation for the subject parcel(s).

6. The zoning designation requested.

7. An adjacent properties owners (APO) list including all those located within a 300-foot radius from the edge of the subject properties.

8. Applicant or applicant’s representative’s signature on the application.

9. Fees as established by the city of Sequim.

C. Standards for Review. The following standard for review shall be applied to Type I amendments:

1. The proposed land use designation shall be found to be consistent with the comprehensive plan and the comprehensive plan optimum land use map. (Ord. 2011-017 § 1; Ord. 2002-004 § 1; Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


18.88.050 Type II amendments –Transitional zone redesignation.

The Type II amendment process allows for consideration of official zoning map redesignation of those parcels designated on the optimum land use map as being included within “transitional zones areas.”

A. Who May Apply. The department of community development and building department shall only accept applications for Type II amendments from the owner or owners of a property, or the owner’s authorized representative. Proof of ownership may be required. Groups of adjacent landowners may combine their applications into a single application provided the optimum land use map designations of all of the parcels are the same.

B. Type II Applications May Be Combined. Type II applications may be combined with other development review applications, consistent with the requirements of SMC Title 20 providing that any other land use applications combined with a Type II amendment will be exempt from the timeline requirements of SMC Title 20 and will be considered consistent with the requirements of this section.

C. Application Required. All applications for Type II amendments shall be received on forms provided by the department of community development and shall include:

1. A complete legal description of the subject parcel(s).

2. A copy of the county tax assessor’s map of the subject parcel(s).

3. A vicinity map showing at least those neighboring parcels within 300 feet of the subject parcel and all road access to the parcel.

4. The location of existing utilities serving the subject parcels including sewer, water, electrical services, and telephone service.

5. The location and uses of existing structures located on the subject parcel(s), or an aerial photo of the subject area, with boundaries marked.

6. The location of existing roads in the vicinity of the property including information on road classifications (major or minor arterial, collector, and local access roads) and improvements to such roads.

7. A transportation study area report shall be included for those applications which include parcels within a transportation study area, as indicated in the Sequim comprehensive plan.

8. The location of existing park and recreational facilities, critical areas, trails and paths, dedicated open space and shorelines, if applicable.

9. A topographical map of the subject parcels and surrounding properties to a scale of a minimum of one inch equaling 200 feet (1:200).

10. The current official zoning map designation for the subject parcel(s).

11. The current optimum land use map designation for the subject parcel(s).

12. The zoning designation requested.

13. A detailed plan which indicates any proposed improvements, including plans for:

a. Street and pedestrian improvements;

b. Street lighting;

c. Storm drainage controls, including but not limited to, curbs, gutters, and stormwater detention facilities;

d. Public water supply;

e. Public sanitary sewers;

f. Circulation and traffic patterns for the development and the surrounding neighborhoods;

g. Trails, parks or playgrounds, or contributions to regional facilities.

14. Other information as may be required by the director of the department of community development to assist in accurately assessing the conformance of the application with the standards for approval.

15. Supplemental environmental review and/or critical areas review if determined by the director of the department of community development to be required.

16. Fees as established by the city of Sequim.

D. Criteria for Approval – Type II Amendments. Applications for Type II amendments shall be recommended and approved if they meet all of the following criteria:

1. The applicant is the owner or authorized representative of the owner of the subject parcel(s).

2. The subject parcel(s) is currently designated as a transitional zones on the comprehensive plan optimum land use map and the official zoning map.

3. The requested land use designation is consistent with the indicated transitional zone shown on the comprehensive plan optimum land use map and official zone map.

4. Environmental impacts and critical areas impacts of redesignation to the transitional zone have been assessed and proposed mitigations approved.

5. The required minimum improvements for residential development have been provided including:

a. Paved streets, curbs, sidewalks or surfaced walkways;

b. Adequate areas for off-street parking are available;

c. Street lighting;

d. Storm drainage control, including curbs, gutters, and stormwater detention facilities;

e. Public water supply;

f. Public sanitary sewers;

g. Appropriate circulation and traffic patterns for the development and the surrounding neighborhoods;

h. Adequate trails, parks or playgrounds, or contributions to regional facilities.

6. The proposed amendment does not erode the purpose, goals and policies of the comprehensive plan.

7. The proposed amendment is consistent with the capital facilities plan, transportation improvement plan, comprehensive water plan, comprehensive sewer plan, shoreline master program (if applicable) and any other applicable plans or ordinances of the city of Sequim.

E. Applications for Type II Amendments Located Within the Urban Growth Area and Outside of the City Limits. The city council will consider application for amendment of the comprehensive plan optimum land use map for those parcels located within the urban growth area, but outside of the city limits. A recommendation for approval or denial shall be forwarded to the Clallam County board of county commissioners. Should the Clallam County board of commissioners approve, the subject application, the optimum land use map shall be revised. (Ord. 2011-017 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


18.88.060 Type I and Type II application review procedures.

A. Preliminary Administrative Determination Required. All applications for a Type I and Type II amendment shall be reviewed by the director of the department of community development to establish a preliminary determination of consistency.

1. The director of the department of community development will use the following criteria to determine if a Type I application is consistent:

a. The current official zoning map land use designation is not consistent with the comprehensive plan optimum land use map.

b. The requested land use designation is consistent with the comprehensive plan and the comprehensive plan optimum land use map.

c. Requests for transitional zoning re-designation shall not be considered Type I amendments.

2. The director of the department of community development will use the following criteria to determine if a Type II application is consistent:

a. The application is complete and all information, including any additional information deemed necessary by the director of the department of community development, has been provided;

b. The requested land use designation is consistent with the comprehensive plan and the comprehensive plan optimum land use map transitional zoning designation. Applications which request a designation other than that indicated on the optimum land use map as the transitional designation shall not be considered for Type II approval.

B. Consistent Applications. Applications for Type I and Type II amendment, determined by the director of the department of community development to be consistent with the criteria of SMC 18.88.060(A) shall be forwarded to the planning commission for their review and recommendation. The director of the department of community development may require that additional information which clarifies the intent and purpose of the requested amendment be provided to accompany the application.

C. Inconsistent Applications. Applications which are not consistent with the above referenced criteria shall be returned to the applicant, with a written determination of inconsistency. In addition, the director of the department of community development shall determine which amendment process would be most appropriate for the requested revision and include such determination in the written determination of inconsistency. All application fees received by the city of Sequim shall be returned to the applicant if the application is determined inconsistent.

D. Notice Required. All applications for Type I and Type II amendments shall be noticed consistent with the requirements of SMC Title 20, except that text amendments to the zoning code which are procedural and do not affect the manner in which land may be used or developed shall be exempt from the requirements of SMC Title 20.

E. Hearing by the Planning Commission Required. All applications for Type I and Type II amendments require that the planning commission hold a public hearing, receive comment and testimony and prepare a recommendation to the city council. The planning commission shall recommend approval of the requested Type I and Type II amendment if the commission finds the application meets the criteria for approval for Type I application listed in SMC 18.88.040(C) and/or the criteria for approval of Type II applications listed in SMC 18.88.050(D).

F. City Council Hearing. The Sequim city council shall have final decisionmaking authority for all Type I and Type II amendments. The council shall consider the recommendation of the planning commission at a public hearing.

1. The council shall apply the standards for review and approval as set forth in SMC 18.88.040(C) for Type I amendments and in SMC 18.88.050(D) for Type II applications.

2. The city council shall adopt any Type I and Type II amendments by ordinance.

3. Type I and Type II amendments adopted by council ordinance shall be noted on the official zoning map by ordinance number, and included in periodic revisions to said map. (Ord. 2011-017 § 2; Ord. 2002-004 § 2; Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)




18.88.070 Type III amendments – Annual review process. 

Except as provided in SMC 18.88.020 through 18.88.030, proposals for amendments to the text of the Sequim comprehensive plan, amendments to the designations of the comprehensive plan optimum land use map, the text of the zoning code, and the designation of parcels by the official zoning map shall be considered by the city council no more frequently than once every calendar year. Proposals for Type III amendments shall be considered so that the cumulative effect of all amendments may be ascertained. Proposals may be considered at separate meetings and hearings, so long as the final action taken considers the cumulative effect of all the proposed amendments on the comprehensive plan.

A. Initiation of Amendments. Amendments may be initiated by the planning department, the planning commission, city council, other jurisdictions and agencies, individual citizens and affected property owners.

B. Jurisdictional Amendments. Amendments may be initiated by any governmental jurisdiction or agency at anytime within the review period; provided, that:

1. No new amendments may be proposed without providing at least 30 days public notice prior to final council action; and

2. Action on any amendment not exempt as described in SMC 18.88.020 shall be considered with all other amendments for the given year; and

3. Jurisdictional amendments shall be proposed on forms provided by city, dated and “docketed”;

4. A current copy of the docket shall be maintained by the city clerk, and shall be available for public inspection during regular city business hours.

C. Text Amendments to the Comprehensive Plan or Zoning Code. Members of the public wishing to propose a text amendment to the comprehensive plan and/or zoning code may propose amendments on forms provided by the city; provided, that a public-initiated amendment to be considered in a current year is received by a date determined by the city council. All text amendments received shall be included in the docket. All public proposals for text amendments should include subsections (C)(1) through (4), unless determined as unnecessary by the planning director:

1. Name and address of the person or persons proposing the amendment.

2. Proposed text amendments, including plan or code to be amended, section, chapter or element number, page number references. Text amendments should be proposed consistent with the format described by the city.

3. Statement as to the purpose of the proposed amendment.

4. Statement as to how the proposed amendment would:

a. Be consistent with the Growth Management Act; 

b. Be consistent with the county-wide planning policies; 

c. Further the purpose of the comprehensive plan; and

d. Be internally consistent with the plan or code to be amended, the comprehensive plan, and other adopted city plans and codes.

D. Amendments to the Optimum Land Use Map and Related Changes to the Official Zoning Map Required to Maintain Consistency with the Proposed Optimum Land Use Map Change. Landowners or their authorized representatives may propose amendments to the optimum land use map. Optimum land use map changes shall be accompanied by a corresponding zone map change where necessary to maintain consistency between the two maps. Proposed amendments to the optimum land use map and official zoning map shall be on forms provided by the city and received by the established date of the year in which consideration is requested. All proposals for amendments to the optimum land use map and official zoning map shall include subsections (D)(1) through (18), unless determined as unnecessary by the planning director:

1. A complete legal description of the subject parcel(s).

2. A copy of the county tax assessor’s map of the subject parcel(s).

3. A vicinity map showing at least those neighboring parcels within 300 feet of the subject parcel and all road access to the parcel.

4. The location of existing utilities serving the subject parcels including sewer, water, electrical services, telephone service, and other urban services.

5. The location and uses of existing structures located on the subject parcel(s).

6. The location of existing roads in the vicinity of the property including information on road classifications (arterial, collector, access) and improvements to such roads.

7. A completed transportation study may be required for those applications which include parcels within a transportation study area.

8. Location of existing park and recreational facilities, critical areas, trails and paths, dedicated open space and shorelines, if applicable.

9. Topographical map of the subject parcels and surrounding properties at a scale of a minimum of one inch equals 200 feet (1:200).

10. The current official zoning map designation for the subject parcel(s).

11. The current optimum land use map designation for the subject parcel(s).

12. The optimum land use map and zoning designation requested.

13. A detailed plan which indicates any proposed improvements, including plans for:

a. Paved streets, curbs, sidewalks or surfaced walkways;

b. Off-street parking;

c. Street lighting;

d. Storm drainage control, including curbs, gutters, and stormwater detention facilities;

e. Public water supply;

f. Public sanitary sewers;

g. Circulation and traffic patterns for the development and the surrounding neighborhoods; and

h. Trails, parks or playgrounds, or contributions to regional facilities.

14. Other information as may be required by the planning director to assist in accurately assessing the conformance of the application with the standards for approval.

15. Statement as to the purpose of the proposed amendment, and a description of any associated development proposals. Proposed site specific or project related plan amendments which do not specify proposed uses and potential impacts will be assumed to have the maximum allowable impact to the environment and public facilities and services.

16. Supplemental environmental review and/or critical areas review if determined by the planning director to be required.

17. Fees as established by the city of Sequim.

18. Statement as to how the proposed amendment would:

a. Be consistent with the Growth Management Act; 

b. Be consistent with the county-wide planning policies; 

c. Further the purpose of the comprehensive plan; and

d. Be internally consistent with the plan or code to be amended, the comprehensive plan, and other adopted city plans and codes.

E. Determination of Completeness for Application for Type III Amendment. The planning director shall review all docketed Type III applications and make a determination of completeness within 28 days of receipt of application. Applicants will be required to provide any additional material requested by the director within 14 days of the date of the request. It is highly recommended that applicants for Type III amendments to the comprehensive plan optimum land use map and official zoning map contact the planning department and arrange for a preapplication consultation prior to submittal of an application for amendment. Type III applications which are determined to be not complete as of 14 days after the annual application deadline date set by the city council will not be considered during the current annual review process.

F. Planning Department – Public Notice Requirements – Type III Amendments – Annual Comprehensive Plan Review. The planning department will prepare notices for the public explaining the comprehensive plan, zoning code, comprehensive plan optimum land use map and official zone code map amendment annual review process. This notice shall be placed in the legal notice section of the newspaper of record no less than two times within the 30-day period preceding the deadline for applications. In addition, the planning department may take any other steps it deems necessary to advise the public as to the annual review process, its timelines, requirements and opportunities for participation.

G. Planning Commission Hearing – Notice Requirements. The planning commission shall hold at least one public hearing to review Type III amendments. The hearing shall be noticed by publication in the newspaper of record of the city at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing, and by posting of notice of hearing in City Hall and the planning and public works building. The notice shall include:

1. The purpose(s) of amending the comprehensive plan and/or zoning code;

2. The deadline for submitting comments on the amendments;

3. A tentative hearing schedule; and

4. The address and hours where the public information files containing the proposed amendments can be viewed.

H. Planning Commission Consideration of Type III Amendments. The planning commission shall review all of the amendments included in the docket. The commission may also choose to review the comprehensive plan and propose additional amendments.

I. Recommendation of the Planning Commission. For all proposed amendments included in the docket, the planning commission shall develop findings of fact, conclusions and recommendations which consider the review criteria of this section.

J. The Planning Commission Recommendation. The planning commission findings of fact and conclusions shall include a recommendation to the city council that the proposed amendment(s) be denied, approved, or approved with conditions or modifications.

K. Council Hearing. The council shall apply the same criteria for review and approval as set forth for the planning commission in subsection (M) of this section.

1. The council will apply the same criteria for review and approval as that set forth for the planning commission in subsection (M) of this section.

2. The city council shall adopt any Type III amendments by ordinance. This final action on the docket should be taken, at least, by the second meeting in December of each year.

3. Type III amendments adopted by council ordinance shall be noted on the official zoning map by ordinance number, and be included in periodic revisions to said map.

4. Appeals of decisions of the city council on Type III amendments shall be made to superior court consistent with the procedures and requirements of SMC Title 20.

L. Considerations for Approval – Type III Amendments. Applications for Type III amendments shall be recommended and approved after consideration of the following items:

1. Whether circumstances related to the proposed amendment and/or the area in which it is located have substantially changed since the adoption of the Sequim comprehensive plan; and

2. Whether the assumptions upon which the Sequim comprehensive plan is based are no longer valid, or whether new information is available which was not considered during the adoption process or during previous annual amendments.

M. Criteria for Approval – Type III Amendments. In addition to the consideration of the conditions set forth in subsection (L) of this section, in order to recommend a proposed plan amendment which relates to a site-specific request, the council must find:

1. The proposed amendment meets concurrency requirements for transportation, sewer, water and parks, and does not adversely affect adopted levels of service standards for other public facilities and services such as police, fire, emergency medical services and governmental services;

2. The proposed amendment is consistent with the goals, policies and objectives of the Sequim comprehensive plan;

3. The proposed amendment will not result in probable significant adverse impacts to the planning area’s transportation network, capital facilities, utilities, parks, and environmental features which can not be mitigated and will not place uncompensated burdens upon existing or planned services;

4. In the case of an amendment to the comprehensive plan optimum land use map and official zoning map, that the subject parcels being redesignated are physically suitable for the allowed land uses in the designation being requested, including compatibility with existing and planned surrounding land uses and the zoning district locational criteria contained within the comprehensive plan;

5. The proposed amendment will not create a demand to change other land use designations of adjacent or surrounding properties, unless the change in land use designation for other properties is in the long-term interest of the community in general;

6. The proposed amendment is consistent with the Growth Management Act, the Clallam County county-wide planning policies and other applicable interjurisdictional policies and agreements, and/or other state or local laws;

7. The proposed amendment does not erode the purpose, goals and policies of the comprehensive plan; and

8. The proposed effect of approval of any individual amendment will not have a cumulative adverse effect on the planning area.

N. Transmittals to the State. The planning department will transmit a copy of any proposed amendments to the State Department of Community, Trade, Economic and Development (DCTED) at least 60 days prior to the expected date of final city council action on the proposed Type III amendments, consistent with Chapter 36.70A RCW. The planning department will transmit a copy of any adopted amendment to DCTED within 19 days of adoption by ordinance.

O. Appeals. All appeals to the adoption of an amendment to the comprehensive plan shall be filed with, and processed by, the Western Washington Growth Hearing Board in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 36.70A RCW.

P. Applications for Type III Amendments Located Within the Urban Growth Area and Outside of the City Limits. Council will consider applications for amendment of the comprehensive plan optimum land use map for those parcels located within the urban growth area, but outside of the city limits. Actions of the council will be forwarded to the Clallam County board of county commissioners with a recommendation for approval of zoning re-designation. (Ord. 2002-004 § 3; Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


18.88.080 Map revisions.

Council shall order approved revisions to the comprehensive plan optimum land use map and the official zoning map at the conclusion of the annual review process. (Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


Chapter 18.90 VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIES

Sections:

18.90.010    Violations.

18.90.020    Enforcement and remedies.


18.90.010 Violations. 

Any person who violates the provisions of this title, or permits such violation, or otherwise fails to comply with the procedures, standards, or requirements established herein is subject to any and all corrective actions available to the city under the law. Additionally, any sign, structure, or building hereafter constructed, altered, enlarged, converted, moved, or changed, or any use of the property or structure contrary to the provisions of this title, is considered unlawful and may be subject to abatement or other remedial action. Notwithstanding remedies provided herein below, the city of Sequim will suspend or withhold all related development permits for any development initiated without obtaining approval under this title, in addition to all other penalties for violations as set forth in Chapter 1.13 SMC. Said suspension or withholding will remain in effect until compliance with this title is achieved. (Ord. 2019-013 (Exh. B); Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


18.90.020 Enforcement and remedies.

The city of Sequim strives to equitably administer the procedures and standards established by this title. In doing so, the city may apply the provisions and penalties as set forth in SMC 1.13, Code Enforcement, or take such administrative, injunctive, declaratory, or other action as is necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this title.

A. Administrative Remedies. The city will investigate and verify that a violation exists. Upon verification, the city must provide written notice to the party causing the alleged violation and seek voluntary suspension of the action or activity and compliance with the provisions of this title or Chapter 1.13 SMC. Should voluntary compliance not be forthcoming, the city will move to initiate compliance through legal remedies or initiate action to rescind the permit granting zoning approval or permission to develop.

B. Withholding of Pending or Future Permits for Development. Any pending and all future permits and approvals for the subject property will be withheld by the city upon provision of written notice of noncompliance to the permittee. Permits and applications will be released only upon satisfactory remedy of the noncomplying action or activity. The withholding of permits and approvals consistent with the requirements of this section is subject to the appeals process of Chapter 1.13 SMC.

C. Rescission of Approval Granting Permits. The permit granting development approval will be rescinded upon finding that the permittee or his or her designated representative or agent misrepresented the facts upon which approval was based or has not complied with the development standards or conditions for which approval was granted. Written notice of the rescission must be provided to the permittee. The permittee has 30 days to respond to the notice before rescission of the permit granting development approval becomes effective. Projects for which development approval has been rescinded have 180 days to remedy the situation or the permit is subject to the proceedings established hereinbelow to ensure compliance with the conditions of the project approval or to abate the development.

D. Legal Remedies. Upon receipt of a documented violation where administrative remedies have failed to correct the violation, the city attorney will take such legal action as deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this title. Such action may include notice to title, injunctive relief, declaration of a public nuisance and abatement thereof, the imposition of civil penalties, and/or criminal prosecution as provided for by law. (Ord. 2019-013 (Exh. B); Ord. 97-019 § 4, Exh. B)


Title 19 SHORELINE MASTER PROGRAM

Chapters:

19.05    Shoreline Master Program


Chapter 19.05 SHORELINE MASTER PROGRAM

Sections:

19.05.010    Shoreline Master Program adopted.


19.05.010 Shoreline Master Program adopted.

The Sequim Municipal Code is hereby amended by adding the adopted SMP and its appendices as set forth in the exhibits attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter: Shoreline Master Program, Appendices A, B, C and D, dated November 2013. (Ord. 2014-001 § 1)


Title 20 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT

Chapters:

20.01    Administration of Land Use and Zoning Applications and Development Regulations

20.02    Effective Date – Conflicts – Severability

20.05    Fee Schedule

20.10    Concurrency Management System


Chapter 20.01 ADMINISTRATION OF LAND USE AND ZONING APPLICATIONS AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS

Sections:

20.01.010    Statutory authorization and purpose.

20.01.020    Definitions.

20.01.030    Procedures for processing development project permits.

20.01.040    Determination of proper type of procedure.

20.01.050    Projects requiring two or more permit applications.

20.01.060    Joint public hearings (other public agency hearings).

20.01.070    Exemptions from project permit application processing.

20.01.080    Administrative approvals without notice (Type A-1) – Process overview.

20.01.090    Administrative approvals subject to notice (Type A-2) – Process overview.

20.01.100    Type B and Type C-1 and C-2 procedures – Quasi-judicial decisions – Process overview.

20.01.110    Preapplication consultation.

20.01.120    Permit application.

20.01.130    Submission and acceptance of application – Determination of completeness – Additional information and project revisions.

20.01.140    Application review – Notice of application – Referrals.

20.01.150    Application review – Notice of application – Shoreline master program (SMP) permits.

20.01.160    Optional additional public notice.

20.01.170    Application review – Scope of review.

20.01.180    Application review – Integrated SEPA review.

20.01.190    Notice of public hearing.

20.01.191    Notice of public meetings.

20.01.200    Procedures for public hearings.

20.01.201    Procedures for public meetings.

20.01.210    Reconsideration.

20.01.220    Remand.

20.01.230    Final decision.

20.01.240    Appeals.


20.01.010 Statutory authorization and purpose.

In enacting this title, the city council intends to establish an integrated permit review process, including environmental review, that implements the provisions of Chapter 36.70B RCW (the Regulatory Reform Act ESHB 1724) while ensuring compliance, conformity, and consistency of proposed projects with the city’s adopted comprehensive plan and development regulations. (Ord. 2000-006 § 3)


20.01.020 Definitions.

The following definitions shall apply throughout this title:

A. “Adjacent landowners” means the owners of real property, as shown by the records of the county assessor, located within 300 feet of any portion of the boundary of the proposed subdivision.

B. “Aggrieved party” is a party of record who can demonstrate the following:

1. The land use decision will prejudice the person;

2. The asserted interests are among those the city is required by city code to consider in making a land use decision; and

3. A decision on appeal in favor of the person would substantially eliminate or redress the prejudice alleged to be caused by the land use decision.

C. “Appellant” means a person, organization, association or other similar group who files a complete and timely appeal of a city decision.

D. “Applicant” means a person who is the owner of the subject property or the authorized representative of the owner of the subject property, and who has applied for land use permits.

E. “Hearing examiner” means a position appointed and created pursuant to Chapter 2.10 SMC to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the staff and to authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variances from the provision of the zoning ordinance or other land use regulatory ordinances as the city may adopt.

F. “City” means the city of Sequim, Washington.

G. “City council” means the city of Sequim city council.

H. “Closed record appeal” means an administrative appeal on the record to a local government body or officer, including the legislative body, following an open record hearing on a project permit application when the appeal is on the record with no or limited new evidence or information allowed to be submitted and only appeal argument allowed. 

I. Days. All days shall be calendar days.

J. “Department” means the department of community development.

K. “Director” shall mean the director of the department of community development or his/her designee.

L. Effective Date of Decisions. All preliminary and final decisions shall be effective on the date stated in SMC 20.02.010.

M. Effective Date of Notices. All notices provided to applicants and any members of the public shall be effective on the date deposited in the mail and when first published or posted on properties.

N. “Ministerial” means an action that allows for little description and requires adherence to previous decisions or adopted rules and regulations.

O. “Open record hearing” means a hearing, conducted by a single hearing body or officer, that creates the record through testimony and submission of evidence and information. An open record hearing may be held prior to a decision on a project permit to be known as an “open record predecision hearing.” An open record hearing may be held on an appeal, to be known as an “open record appeal hearing,” if no open record hearing has been held on the project permit.

P. “Parties of record” means the land use permit applicant, persons who have testified at an open record hearing, and any persons who have submitted written comments concerning the application that form part of the public record that is considered at the open record hearing (excluding persons who only signed petitions or mechanically produced form letters).

Q. “Project permit” or “project permit application” means any land use or environmental permit or license required from the city for a project action, including but not limited to subdivisions, planned unit developments, conditional uses, shoreline substantial development permits, permits or approvals required by Chapter 18.80 SMC, Critical and Environmentally Sensitive Areas Protection, as amended, site-specific rezones authorized by the Sequim comprehensive plan or a formally adopted subarea plan, but excluding the adoption or amendment of the Sequim comprehensive plan, a subarea plan, or development regulations except as otherwise specifically included in this subsection.

R. “Public workshop” or “public meeting” means an informal meeting or other public gathering of people to obtain comments from the public or other agencies on a proposed project permit prior to a decision. A public workshop may include, but is not limited to, a design review, a special review district or community council meeting, or a scoping meeting on a draft environmental impact statement. A public meeting does not include an open record hearing. The proceedings at a public workshop may be recorded and a report or recommendation may be included in the local government’s project permit application file.

S. “Sequim Municipal Code” means Sequim Municipal Code as amended.

T. “Type A-1 process” means a process which involves an application that is subject to clear, objective and nondiscretionary standards that require the exercise of professional judgment about technical issues and therefore does not require public participation.

U. “Type A-2 process” means a process which involves an application that is subject to objective and subjective standards that require the exercise of limited discretion about non-technical issues and about which there may be a limited public interest.

V. “Type B process” means a process which involves an application that is subject to standards that require the exercise of certain discretion and about which there may be a considerable public interest.

W. “Type C-1, C-2, C-3 processes” means processes which involve applications that require the exercise of substantial discretion and about which there is a broad public interest. (Ord. 2019-004 (Exh. B); Ord. 2012-001 § 3 (Exh. B); Ord. 2011-017 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 2002-014; Ord. 2000-006 § 3)


20.01.030 Procedures for processing development project permits.

A. Project Permit Application Framework.

Table 1 

	Procedural  Steps	Application Process

	Type “A” Actions Administrative	Type “B” Actions Hearing Examiner	Type “C” Actions

Planning Commission and City Council

	Type A-1	Type A-2	Type B	Type C-1	Type C-2	Type C-3

	Recommendations by:	N/A	N/A	Staff	Staff	Planning Commission 	Staff

	Notice of Application	No	Yes	Yes	Yes	Yes	No

	Public Meeting/ Workshop	—	—	—	—	Planning Commission	—

	Open Record Public Hearing	See Notea	See Notea	Yes

Hearing Examiner	Yes

Planning Commission	Yes

City Council	No

	Final Decision-making Body	Staffb	Staffb	Hearing Examinerb	Planning Commission	City Council	City Council

	Appeal Authority	Hearing Examinerc

City Council	City Councild	Clallam County Superior Court	City Council	Clallam County Superior Court	Clallam County Superior Court

aPublic hearing only if administrative decision is appealed, open record hearing before hearing examiner.

bDenials of permits, boundary line adjustments and variances must be reviewed by the city attorney for legality before becoming final.

cAppeal authority for building and other construction permits; sign permits and boundary line adjustments. Subsequent appeals on these permits to Clallam County Superior Court.

dSubsequent appeals on city council decisions to Clallam County Superior Court.

Table 2 

	Application Type

	Type A-1	Type A-2	Type B	Type C-1	Type C-2	Type C-3

	Building and other construction permit	SEPA determination	Variances	Major use permit	Comprehensive plan amendment	Final subdivision map

	Sign permit	Minor subdivision	Shoreline permit	Special use permit	Dedication of public easements and rights-of-way

	Boundary line adjustment	Minor conditional use permit	SMC land use related text amendment	Acceptance of public improvement

	Minor amendments to PRDs	ESA and wetland permits	Site-specific rezone

	Home occupation	Planned residential developments

Major amendments

	Street use	Annexation

	ESA, shoreline and wetland exemptions	Street vacation

	Preliminary major subdivisions

	Preliminary binding site plan

B. Types of Development Permit Applications. For the purpose of project permit processing, all development permit applications are subject to a Type A-1 and Type A-2 process (administrative), Type B process (hearing examiner), or Type C-1, Type C-2 and Type C-3 process (planning commission/city council) as defined in SMC 20.01.020. As defined in subsection A of this section, a Type A-1 is an administrative process which does not require public notice; a Type A-2 process is an administrative process which requires public notice; a Type B is a quasi-judicial process which requires a public hearing (the decision-making body for a Type B process is the hearing examiner); Type C-1 processes are quasi-judicial and require public hearings (the decision-making body for Type C-1 processes is the planning commission). Type C-2 are quasi-judicial or legislative and require public hearings (the decision-making body is the city council). Type C-3 are largely ministerial and do not require a public hearing (the decision-making body for Type C-3 is the city council).

C. Exemptions from the requirements of project permit application processing as defined in this chapter are contained in SMC 20.01.070.

D. Burden of Proof. During “project permit” or “project permit application” (as defined in SMC 20.01.020(Q)) processes as described in this title, the burden of proof is on the proponent or permit applicant. The proponent or applicant must provide convincing evidence to the decision makers that the application conforms to applicable law, including, but not limited to, the Growth Management Act, SEPA, the Sequim Municipal Code, all developmental regulations, and the city’s comprehensive plan. The proponent must also present convincing evidence that any significant adverse environmental impacts have been adequately mitigated. (Ord. 2019-004 (Exh. B); Ord. 2019-006 § 1 (Exh. C); Ord. 2010-006 § 1; Ord. 2005-022 § 10; Ord. 2004-015 § 11; Ord. 2002-014; Ord. 2000-006 § 3)


20.01.040 Determination of proper type of procedure.

A. Type of Application. The act of classifying an application shall be a Type A-1 action. Classification of an application shall be subject to reconsideration and appeal at the same time and in the same way as the merits of the application in question.

B. Determination of Director. The director shall determine the proper procedure for all development applications. If there is a question as to the appropriate type of procedure, the director shall resolve it in favor of the higher procedure type letter as defined in SMC 20.01.030. (Ord. 2000-006 § 3)


20.01.050 Projects requiring two or more permit applications.

A. Optional Consolidation. A project that involves two or more permit applications may be subject to a consolidated project permit review process as established in this chapter. The applicant may determine whether the applications shall be processed collectively or individually. If the applications are processed under the individual procedure option, the highest type procedure must be processed prior to the subsequent lower procedure.

B. Consolidated Permit Processing. When the project is reviewed under the consolidated procedure option, the highest procedure required for any part of the project application must be applied. All project permits being reviewed through the consolidated permit review process shall be included in the following:

1. Determination of completeness;

2. Notice of application;

3. Notice of final decision;

4. Single report stating all the decisions made and any mitigation required or proposed under the development regulations or the agency’s authority under RCW 43.21C.060.

C. Public Hearing for Consolidated Applications. The review process shall provide for no more than one consolidated open record hearing and one closed record appeal. If an open record predecision hearing is provided prior to the decision on a project permit, the process shall not allow a subsequent open record appeal hearing.

D. Decisionmaker(s). Applications processed in accordance with subsection B of this section which have the same highest numbered procedure but are assigned different hearing bodies will be heard collectively by the highest decisionmaker(s). The city council is the highest, followed by the hearing examiner, and then the director.

E. Consolidation with the Other Government Agencies. The city is also authorized to consolidate project review with the permit procedures of other government agencies. Joint public hearings with other agencies shall be processed according to SMC 20.01.060. (Ord. 2019-004 (Exh. B); Ord. 2000-006 § 3)


20.01.060 Joint public hearings (other public agency hearings).

A. Administrator’s Decision to Hold Joint Hearing. The administrator may combine any public hearing on a project permit application with any hearing that may be held by another local, state, regional, federal, or other agency, on the proposed action, as long as: 

1. The hearing is held within the city limits; and

2. The requirements of subsection (C) of this section are met.

B. Applicant’s Request for a Joint Hearing. The applicant may request that the public hearing on a permit application be combined as long as the joint hearing can be held within the time periods set forth in this chapter. In the alternative, the applicant may agree to a particular schedule if that additional time is needed in order to complete the hearings. 

C. Prerequisite to Joint Public Hearing. A joint public hearing may be held with another local, state, regional, federal or other agency and the city, as long as:

1. The other agency is not expressly prohibited by statute from doing so;

2. Sufficient notice of the hearing is given to meet each of the agencies’ adopted notice requirements as set forth in statute, ordinance, or rule; and

3. The agency has received the necessary information about the proposed project from the applicant in enough time to hold its hearing at the same time as the local government hearing. (Ord. 2000-006 § 3)


20.01.070 Exemptions from project permit application processing.

A. Project Permit Application Processing. Whenever a permit or approval in the Sequim Municipal Code has been designated as a Type A-1, A-2, B, C-1, C-2 or C-3 permit, the procedures in this title shall be followed in project permit processing, except for exemptions specified in this section.

B. Legislative Actions. The following Type C-2 decisions are legislative, and are not subject to the procedures in this chapter:

1. City of Sequim comprehensive plan adoption and amendments;

2. Municipal code amendments (zoning code text, development regulations and zoning district amendments);

3. Areawide rezones to implement city policies contained within the city of Sequim comprehensive plan and any amendments thereto;

4. All other master land use and utility plans and amendments thereto. 

The administrative procedures for the legislative decisions specified in this section are set forth coordinately by adopted ordinances. Nothing in this chapter or the permit processing procedures shall limit the authority of the city to make changes to the Sequim comprehensive plan, as part of an annual revision process, the city’s development regulations, or to undertake any other legislative actions.

C. SEPA Determination. SEPA determination is a Type A-2 action specifically excluded from the procedures set forth in this chapter, except for SMC 20.01.180. Procedures for SEPA determination shall follow Chapter 16.04 SMC, Environmental Policy, as amended, and SMC 20.01.180.

D. Exemptions. The following permits or approvals are specifically excluded from the procedures set forth in this title but must comply with any other statutory and regulatory requirements not found in this title:

1. Landmark designations;

2. Street vacations;

3. Annexations;

4. Capital improvement projects (CIPs) identified by city ordinance or resolution adopted after environmental review conducted in conjunction with the adoption or amendment of the city of Sequim comprehensive plan;

5. Judicially mandated actions;

6. Procedural actions as defined in WAC 197-11-800(20).

E. Type A-1 Administrative Permits. Pursuant to RCW 36.70B.140(2), administrative permits Type A-1, categorically exempt from environmental review under SEPA (Chapter 43.21C RCW and Chapter 16.04 SMC as amended), or for which environmental review has been completed in connection with other project permits, shall be excluded from the following procedures as defined by this chapter:

1. Determination of completeness;

2. Notice of application;

3. Notice of decision. (Ord. 2002-014; Ord. 2000-006 § 3)


20.01.080 Administrative approvals without notice (Type A-1) – Process overview.

A. Administrative Decision. The director shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny (with or without prejudice) all Type A-1 permit applications within 30 days after the date the determination of completeness was issued; provided, an applicant may agree in writing to extend the time in which the director shall issue a decision. The director may consider new evidence the applicant introduces with or after such a written request. The director may issue written findings and conclusions supporting Type A-1 decisions. 

B. Notice of Decision. Notice of a decision regarding a Type A-1 process shall be mailed to the applicant and applicant’s representative.

C. Appeal Procedure. The applicant may appeal the decision pursuant to SMC 20.01.240.

D. The director shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny (with or without prejudice) all Type A-1 permit applications, categorically exempt from environmental review under SEPA (Chapter 43.21C RCW and Chapter 16.04 SMC as amended), or for which environmental review has been completed in connection with other project permits, within 30 days after the date the application was submitted; provided, an applicant may agree in writing to extend the time in which the director shall issue a decision. (Ord. 2000-006 § 3)


20.01.090 Administrative approvals subject to notice (Type A-2) – Process overview.

A. Administrative Decision. The director shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny (with or without prejudice) all Type A-2 permit applications, subject to the determination of completeness, the notice of application, the notice of decision and appeal requirements of this section.

B. Notice of Application. Within 14 working days after the date an application subject to a Type A-2 process was accepted as complete, the review authority shall issue a public notice of the pending review consistent with the requirements of SMC 20.01.140. Upon issuance of the notice of application the city shall provide the public notice of application for a project permit by enduring posting of the property, mailing and by publication in the city’s official newspaper as provided in SMC 20.01.130.

C. Additional Posting. The review authority may also require notices to be posted in conspicuous places visible on the site or in the vicinity of a proposed action at least 10 working days before the close of the comment period.

D. Staff Report. The director shall issue written findings and conclusions supporting Type A-2 decisions.

E. Appeal Procedures. An applicant or other party of record who may be aggrieved by the administrative decision may appeal the decision to the hearing examiner; provided, that a written appeal is filed in conformance with SMC 20.01.240.

F. Public Hearing on Appeal. If a Type A-2 decision is appealed, an open record public hearing will be held before the hearing examiner consistent with the requirements of SMC 20.01.200. (Ord. 2019-004 (Exh. B); Ord. 2000-006 § 3)


20.01.100 Type B and Type C-1 and C-2 procedures – Quasi-judicial decisions – Process overview.

A. Determination of Completeness and Notice of Application. All Type B, C-1 and C-2 procedures require the issuance of determination of completeness and notice of application consistent with SMC 20.01.130 and 20.01.140 coordinately. Upon issuance of the notice of application the city shall provide the public notice of application for a project permit by ensuring posting of the property, mailing and by publication in the city’s official newspaper as provided in SMC 20.01.130.

B. Staff Report. At least seven days before a public hearing for all types of procedures, the administrator shall prepare a staff report on the proposed development or action summarizing the comments and recommendations of city departments, affected agencies and special districts, and evaluating the development’s consistency with the city’s development code as amended, adopted plans and regulations. The staff report shall include proposed findings, conclusions and recommendations for disposition of the development application. The staff report shall include and consider all written public comments on the application.

C. Recommendations. For Type B procedures, staff makes recommendations to the hearing examiner. For Type C-1 procedures, staff makes recommendations to the planning commission. For Type C-2 procedures, the planning commission makes its recommendations to the city council after a workshop or public meeting when public comments may be taken. Public comments taken at a public meeting may not be part of the testimony for any required later public hearing before the deciding body. (See RCW 36.70B.060(3) and (4).)

D. Required Findings. The planning commission or hearing examiner must recommend to approve a proposed project if it first makes the following findings and conclusions:

1. The project is consistent with the Sequim comprehensive plan and meets the requirements and intent of the Sequim Municipal Code;

2. The project is not detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare;

3. The project adequately mitigates impacts identified under Chapters 16.04, Environmental Policy, and 18.80 SMC, Environmentally Sensitive Areas Protection, as amended.

E. Public Hearing. A public hearing on quasi-judicial decisions shall be held for the purpose of taking testimony, hearing evidence, considering the facts germane to the proposal, and evaluating the proposal for consistency with the city’s development code, adopted plans and regulations. 

F. Notice of Public Hearing. At least 10 working days before the date of the hearing for an application subject to Type B or Types C-1 and C-2 review, the review authority shall issue a public notice. Notice of the public hearing shall be in accordance with SMC 20.01.190.

G. Notice of Public Meeting or Workshop. Notice shall be given consistent with RCW 36.70A.035, Public participation – Notice provisions.

H. Neighborhood and Community Presentations. Project proponents shall be required to hold at least one neighborhood and community presentation, pursuant to RCW 36.70B.160(2). Project proponents conducting presentations under this subsection shall not be considered agents of the city. The purpose of this subsection is to:

Provide early and effective citizen participation in conjunction with the applicant’s proposal, giving the project proponent the opportunity to understand and try to mitigate any real and perceived impact their proposal may have on the neighborhood; and 

Provide the citizens and property owners an adequate opportunity to learn about the proposal that may affect them and to work with project proponents to resolve concerns at an early stage of the application process.

1. This presentation shall be an informal gathering of people to obtain comments from the public on a proposed project permit prior to a decision.

2. Neighborhood and community presentations shall be hosted by the project proponent at a time and location of their choice; provided, that it is reasonably foreseeable that affected residents would be able to attend. 

3. The presentation’s agenda shall include a conspicuous disclaimer that the proposed project discussed at the presentation may differ from the final proposal.

4. The neighborhood and community presentation should give a fair and accurate description of the project as currently proposed, and discuss a project’s uses, design elements and environmental impacts and/or proposed mitigations.

5. Project proponents must provide the city with a copy of the mailed notice with a mailing list of residents notified, a presentation attendance list, and an affidavit indicating that a summary of the presentation, including any concerns, issues, questions, and outcomes, was provided to each attendee. 

6. Information obtained from the neighborhood presentation shall not be considered, in whole or in part, as part of the official city record by the developer, attendees, or city decision-makers. 

7. Nothing in this section shall be construed to vest a project application. A project proponent may submit a building permit or subdivision application at any time. 

8. Any actions, errors, or omissions regarding this subsection H shall not affect the validity or effect of the city council’s decision.

I. Quasi-Judicial Action. Upon receiving a recommendation the hearing examiner (for Type B), planning commission (for Type C-1) or the city council (for Type C-2) must hold an open record public hearing and make a decision on a recommendation, including consideration of any appeals of the recommendation.

J. Quasi-Judicial Decisions. A quasi-judicial decision on a recommendation following an open record public hearing shall include one of the following actions:

1. Approve as recommended;

2. Approve with additional conditions;

3. Modify, with or without the applicant’s concurrence; provided, that the modifications do not:

a. Enlarge the area or scope of the project;

b. Increase the density or proposed building size; or

c. Significantly increase adverse environmental impacts as determined by the responsible official;

4. Deny without prejudice (reapplication or resubmittal is permitted);

5. Deny with prejudice (reapplication or resubmittal is not allowed for one year); or

6. Remand for further proceedings and/or evidentiary hearing in accordance with SMC 20.01.220. (Ord. 2019-004 (Exh. B); Ord. 2011-003 § 1 (Att. 1a); Ord. 2002-014; Ord. 2000-006 § 3)


20.01.110 Preapplication consultation.

A. Optional Preapplication Consultation. Preapplication conferences for all Type A-1 applications not specified in subsection (B) of this section are optional, and requests for conferences will be considered on a time-available basis by the director. 

B. Mandatory Consultation. Applications for Type A-1 project permits subject to SEPA review, Type A-2, Type B, Type C-1 and Type C-2 actions shall not be accepted by the director unless the applicant has scheduled and attended a preapplication consultation. The purpose of the preapplication consultation is to acquaint the applicant with the requirements of the Sequim Municipal Code and the allow the director to provide the applicant with preliminary comments based upon the applicant’s preliminary sketch of the proposal. 

C. Preapplication consultation is not required if:

1. This code or the director expressly exempts the application(s) in question from preapplication review; and

2. The applicant submits a completed form provided by the review authority requesting waiver of preapplication consultation.

D. Scheduling. The consultation shall be held within 15 days of the request.

E. Conceptual Design Review. The applicant shall submit a completed preapplication request form and a preliminary sketch or conceptual design which illustrates the applicant’s generalized ideas of the proposal at least seven days prior to preapplication consultation. The sketch or conceptual design shall include approximate lot lines, general topography of site, suggested vehicle access to the site, and provision of utilities. Final drawings are discouraged at this preapplication stage. Additionally, for the preapplication consultation, the applicant shall identify all land uses on adjacent properties and all platted and opened roads serving the site. 

F. Information Provided to Applicant. At the consultation or within seven days following the consultation, the director shall provide the applicant with:

1. A form which lists the requirements for a completed application;



2. A general summary of the procedures to be used to process the application;

3. The references to the relevant code provisions or development standards which may apply to the approval of the application;

4. Information on all applicable application fees in effect at the time.

G. Assurances Unavailable. It is impossible for the preapplication conference to be an exhaustive review of all potential issues. The discussions at the conference or the forms provided by the city to the applicant under this section shall not bind or prohibit the city’s future application or enforcement of all applicable law and ordinances. No statements or assurances made by city representatives shall in any way relieve the applicant of his or her duty to submit an application consistent with all relevant requirements of city, state, and federal codes, laws, regulations and land use plans. 

H. Consecutive Preapplication Consultation. An applicant may request another preapplication consultation within one year after an initial preapplication consultation. There is not additional fee for a second consultation if the proposed development is substantially similar to the one reviewed or if it reflects changes based on information received at the first consultation. A request for a second preapplication consultation shall be subject to the same procedure as the request for the initial preapplication consultation. 

I. Fee. The applicant shall pay the fee set forth in the fee ordinance for the preapplication consultation. 

J. Vesting. Preapplication consultation does not vest an application. (Ord. 2000-006 § 3)


20.01.120 Permit application.

A. Application Forms. Applications for project permits shall be submitted upon forms provided by the director.

B. Contents of the Application. An application shall consist of all materials required by the applicable development regulations, and shall include the following general information:

1. A completed project permit application form, including SEPA checklist submitted pursuant to Chapter 16.04 SMC as amended when required;

2. A verified statement by the applicant that the property affected by the application is in the exclusive ownership of the applicant, or that the applicant has submitted the application with the written consent of all owners of the affected property. A photocopy of the property deeds shall be provided;

3. A property and/or legal description of the site, as required by the applicable development regulations;

4. The applicable fee;

5. A site plan, showing the location of all proposed lots, points of access and utilities, and identifying all easements, deeds, restrictions, or other encumbrances restricting the use of the property, if applicable;

6. For land use permits requiring a Type A-2, B, C-1, C-2 and C-3 decision, assessor’s maps and a list of tax parcels and their owners for all properties within 300 feet of the property and properties to which public notice must be sent as provided in SMC 20.01.190;

7. Any supplemental information or special studies identified by the director or project planner;

8. In addition to the requirements of this section, complete application requirements for the land use permits set forth in the Sequim Municipal Code.

C. Requirements Waived. The director may waive specific submittal requirements determined to be unnecessary for review of an application. In such event, the director shall document the waiver in the project file or project log. (Ord. 2000-006 § 3)


20.01.130 Submission and acceptance of application – Determination of completeness – Additional information and project revisions.

A. Determination of Completeness. Within 28 days after receiving a project permit application, the city shall mail a determination to the applicant which states either:

1. That the application is complete; or

2. That the application is incomplete and what is necessary to make the application complete.

B. Identification of Other Agencies with Jurisdiction. To the extent known by the city, other agencies with jurisdiction over the project permit application shall be identified in the city’s determination required by subsection (A) of this section. 

C. Incomplete Application Procedure.

1. If the applicant receives a determination from the city that an application is not complete or that additional information is required, the applicant shall have 120 days to submit the necessary information to the city. Within 20 days after an applicant has submitted the requested additional information, the city shall make the determination as described in subsection (A) of this section, and notify the applicant in the same manner.

2. If the applicant either refuses in writing to submit additional information or does not submit the required information within the 120-day period, the director shall make a determination that the application has been abandoned and is therefore withdrawn, according to the procedures of a Type A-1 action as defined SMC 20.01.040.

3. In those situations where the director has deemed an application withdrawn because the applicant has failed to submit the required information within the necessary time period, the applicant will forfeit the application fee.

D. City’s Failure to Provide a Determination of Completeness. A project permit application shall be deemed complete under this section if the city does not provide a written determination to the applicant that the application is incomplete as provided in subsection (C) of this section. Notwithstanding a failure to provide a determination of completeness, the city may request additional information as provided in subsection (G) of this section. 

E. Date of Acceptance of Application. When the project permit application is determined to be complete, the director shall accept it and note the date of acceptance.

F. Project Planner. Upon issuance of a determination of completeness described in subsection (A) of this section, the director shall assign a project planner to the project who will coordinate and be responsible for all phases of development application administration. At any stage during project review the director may assign a different project planner.

G. Additional Information. A project permit application is complete for the purposes of this section when it meets the submission requirements contained in SMC 20.01.120, as well as the submission requirements contained in the applicable development regulations. This determination of completeness shall be made when the application is sufficient for continued processing even though additional information may be required or project modifications may be undertaken after submittal. The city’s determination of completeness shall not preclude the city from requiring additional information, that the applicant correct plans or perform studies at any time if new information is required for project review, or if there are substantial changes in the proposed action.

1. Pursuant to RCW 36.70B.090(1)(a) (i), any period during which the city has requested the applicant to correct plans, perform required studies, provide additional information or any remand or appeal periods shall be excluded from the time period provided in this chapter.

2. The time period for requiring additional information shall be calculated from the date the city notifies the applicant of the need for additional information until the date the city determines whether the information satisfies the request for information.

H. Effect of Project Permit Application Revisions – Substantial Revisions. If in the judgment of the director, the content of an application is so substantially revised by an applicant, either voluntarily or to conform with applicable standards and requirements, that such revised proposal constitutes a substantially different proposal than that originally submitted, the director shall deem the revised proposal to be a new application.

1. In reaching a decision whether a revision is substantial, the director shall consider the relative and absolute magnitude of the revision, the environmental sensitivity of the site, and changes in location of significant elements of the project and their relation to public facilities, surrounding lands and land uses and the stage of review of the proposal.

2. Lesser revisions that would not constitute substantial revisions during early stages of review may be substantial during later stages due to the reduced time and opportunity remaining for interested parties to review and comment upon such changes.

3. Written notice of such determination of substantial revision shall be provided to the applicant and all parties of record, including the reasons for the director’s decision.

4. The revised project application shall be subject to all laws, regulations, and standards in effect on the date of the determination of completeness of the substantial revision. (Ord. 2000-006 § 3)


20.01.140 Application review – Notice of application – Referrals.

A. Time of Issuance. Within 14 days of issuing the determination of completeness, administrator shall issue a notice of application on all Type A-2, B, C-1, C-2 and C-3 project permit applications. 

B. Contents. The notice of application shall include:

1. The name of the applicant or applicant’s representative and the case file number for the application;

2. The date of application, the date of the determination of completeness for the application and the date of the notice of application;

3. The street address location of the project or if unavailable, the location in reference to roadway intersections;

4. A description of the proposed project action and a list of the project permits included in the application;

5. The identification of other permits required by other agencies with jurisdiction not included in the application, to the extent known by the city;

6. The identification of existing environmental documents that evaluate the proposed project and the location where the application and any studies can be reviewed;

7. The name of the city staff contact and telephone number;

8. A statement of the limits of the public comment period, which shall be at least 14 days following the date of notice of application or at least 30 days if the application involves a shoreline master program permit, and statements of the right of any person to comment on the application, receive notice of and participate in any hearings, request a copy of the decision once made, and any appeal rights;

9. The date, time, place and type of hearing, if applicable and scheduled prior to issuance of the notice of application;

10. A statement of the preliminary determination of consistency with applicable development regulations and the Sequim comprehensive plan, if one has been made at the time of notice, and of those development regulations that will be used for project mitigation and determination of consistency as provided in RCW 36.70B.040 and SMC 20.01.170;

11. Any other information determined appropriate by the city, such as the city’s pending SEPA threshold determination or a statement advising that a final environmental determination shall be made following a comment period;

12. If a local government has made a determination of significance under Chapter 43.21C RCW concurrently with the notice of application, the notice of application shall be combined with the determination of significance and scoping notice. Nothing in this section prevents a determination of significance and scoping notice from being issued prior to the notice of application;

13. A statement that the final decision on the application will be made within the certain time period established by this chapter.

C. Methods of Public Notice of Application. Upon issuance of the notice of application the city shall provide the public notice of application for a project permit by ensuring posting of the property, mailing and/or by publication in the city’s official newspaper, as provided in this subsection.

1. Posting. Posting of the property for site-specific proposals shall consist of one or more notice boards posted by the applicant or the applicant’s representative. A single notice board shall be placed by the applicant at the midpoint of the site street frontage or as otherwise directed by the city for maximum visibility and where it is completely visible to pedestrians and vehicle traffic. 

a. Additional notice boards may be required when:

i. The site does not abut a public road;

ii. A large site abuts more than one public road;

iii. The director determines that additional notice boards are necessary to provide adequate public notice; or

iv. The review authority may also require notices to be posted in conspicuous places visible on the site or in the vicinity of a proposed action at least 10 days before the close of the comment period.

b. Notice boards shall be:

i. Maintained in good condition by the applicant during the notice period;

ii. In place at least 30 days prior to the date of predecision hearing; and

iii. Removed by the applicant within 15 calendar days after the end of the notice period.

An affidavit of posting shall be submitted to the director by the applicant prior to the hearing or final comment date. If the affidavit is not filed as required, any scheduled hearing or date by which the public may comment on the application, will be postponed in order to allow compliance with this notice requirement. Notice boards shall be constructed and installed in accordance with specifications promulgated by staff.

2. Published Notice. The notice of application shall be published in the city’s official newspaper of general circulation. Published notice shall include at least the project’s street address or location, project description, type of permit(s) required, comment period dates, and location where the complete application may be reviewed.

3. Mailing. The notice of application shall be mailed to:

a. The applicant and the applicant’s representative;

b. Owners of property within a radius of 300 feet of the edge of the property that is the subject of the application;

i. The records of the Clallam County assessor shall be used for determining the property owner of record;

ii. Failure of a property owner to receive notice does not invalidate the decision if the notice was sent; a sworn certificate of mailing executed by the person who did the mailing shall be conclusive evidence that notice mailed to parties listed or referenced in the certificate; and

iii. If the applicant owns property adjoining or across a right-of-way or easement from the property that is subject of the application, then notice shall be mailed to owners of property within a 300-foot radius, from the edge of the property owned by the applicant adjoining or across a right-of-way or easement from the property that is subject of the application;

c. Other people the review authority believes may be affected by the proposed action or who request such notice in writing.

4. Referrals of Notice of Application. Notice of the filing of a preliminary plat application of a proposed subdivision located adjoining the city’s municipal boundaries shall be given to the appropriate county officials.

5. Referrals to DOT. Notice of the filing of a preliminary plat application of a proposed subdivision located adjacent to the right-of-way of a state highway shall be given to the Washington State Secretary of Transportation, who must respond within 15 days of such notice.

6. Referral and Review of Development Permit Applications. Upon acceptance of a complete application, the director shall transmit a copy of the application, or appropriate parts of the application, to each affected agency and city department for review and comment, including those agencies responsible for determining compliance with state and federal requirements. The affected agencies and city departments shall have 15 days to comment. The director may grant an extension of time if needed.

7. Public Inspection Files. Department shall maintain for public review a list of pending projects (public inspection files), including project status. However, the failure by the department to maintain and update the project status list shall not be grounds for invalidation of any permit decision.

D. Public Comment on the Notice of Application. A notice of application for shoreline substantial development permit shall notify the public of the 30-day comment period. Comment period on all other types of applications shall be at least 20 days. All public comments on the notice of application must be received in the department by 4:00 p.m. on the last day of the comment period. Comments may be mailed, personally delivered or sent by facsimile. Comments should be as specific as possible. Public comments may be provided at any time up to an during the public hearing. However, the city cannot ensure that comments provided after the comment period on the notice of application will be considered and addressed in project review or in staff reports.

E. Hearing Is Required. If a predecision hearing is required, the notice of application shall be issued at least 30 days prior to the hearing. (Ord. 2000-006 § 3)


20.01.150 Application review – Notice of application – Shoreline master program (SMP) permits.

A. Shoreline Master Program Permits. SMP permits require notice as provided in SMC 20.01.140 and additional mailing of the notice as provided herein.

B. Mailing. The notice of application shall be mailed to the latest recorded real property owners as shown by the records of the county assessor within at least 300 feet of the boundary of the property upon which the development is proposed.

C. Content of SMP Notice. Except as provided in subsection (D) of this section, the content of SMP notices shall be identical to the notice set forth in SMC 20.01.140.

D. SMP Comment Period. A notice of application for a shoreline substantial development permit shall notify the public of the 30-day comment period. (SMP notice is 10 days longer than the comment period for other permits as required by RCW 90.58.140.) (Ord. 2000-006 § 3)


20.01.160 Optional additional public notice.

A. Optional Public Notices. As optional methods of providing public notice of any project permits, the city may:

1. Notify the public or private groups with known interest in a certain proposal or in the type of proposal being considered;

2. Notify the news media;

3. Place notices in appropriate regional or neighborhood newspapers or trade journals;

4. Publish notice in agency newsletters or send notice to agency mailing lists, either general lists or lists for specific proposals or subject areas;

5. Mail to potentially affected property owners; and

6. Place notices on the Internet.

B. Failure to Provide Optional Public Notice. The city’s failure to provide the optional notice as described in this section shall not be grounds for invalidation of any permit decision. (Ord. 2000-006 § 3)


20.01.170 Application review – Scope of review.

A. Foundation of the Review. Fundamental land use planning choices made in adopted comprehensive and subarea plans and development regulations shall serve as the foundation for project review. The review of a proposed project’s consistency with applicable development regulations, or in the absence of applicable regulations the adopted Sequim comprehensive plan or subarea plan(s) shall incorporate the determinations in this section.

B. Project Consistency. During project review, the director or any subsequent reviewing body shall determine a proposed project’s consistency with development regulations adopted under Chapter 36.70A RCW (the GMA), or, in the absence of applicable development regulations, the appropriate elements of the Sequim comprehensive plan or subarea plan adopted under Chapter 36.70A RCW shall be determined by consideration of:

1. The type of land use, including uses that may be allowed under certain circumstances, such as planned unit developments and conditional and special uses, if the criteria for their approval have been satisfied;

2. The level of development, such as units per acre or other measures of density;

3. Infrastructure, including public facilities and services needed to serve the development, and availability and adequacy of public facilities identified in the Sequim comprehensive plan, if the plan or development regulations provide for funding of these facilities;

4. The character of the development, such as development standards.

During project review, the director shall not reexamine alternatives to or hear appeals on the items identified in subsection (B) of this section.

C. Consistency. For purposes of this section, the term “consistency” shall include all terms used in this chapter and Chapter 36.70A RCW to refer to performance in accordance with this chapter and Chapter 36.70A RCW, including but not limited to compliance, conformity, and consistency. Nothing in this section requires documentation, dictates procedures for considering consistency, or limits the director from asking more specific or related questions with respect to any of the four main categories listed in subsections (B)(1) through (4) of this section. (Ord. 2000-006 § 3)


20.01.180 Application review – Integrated SEPA review.

A. Environmental Review. Project review conducted pursuant to the State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA), Chapter 43.21C RCW, shall occur concurrently with project review set forth in this chapter. The SEPA review process, including all public comment procedures, is set forth in Chapter 16.04 SMC, Environmental Policy, as amended. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to restrict the need for full environmental review in accordance with Chapters 16.04 and 18.80 SMC, as amended.

B. Public Comment Period on the Notice of Application and the Issuance of the SEPA Determination. Except for a determination of significance, the SEPA official may not issue its threshold determination, or issue a decision or a recommendation on a project permit until expiration of the public comment period on the notice of application.

C. Single Staff Report. If a SEPA threshold determination is not issued before a staff report and an open record predecision public hearing is not needed (Types A-1 and A-2), a determination of nonsignificance shall be issued with the single staff report on a project permit.

D. Predecision Hearing. If a predecision public hearing is required (Types B, C-1, C-2 and C-3), the threshold determination shall be issued at least 21 days prior to the open record predecision hearing and may be combined with the notice of the open record public hearing. If a predecision public hearing is required, an appeal of any determination of nonsignificance shall be submitted prior to and combined with the predecision open record public hearing.

E. Director’s Determination. The director may determine that the requirements for environmental analysis and mitigation measures in development regulations and other applicable laws provide adequate mitigation for some or all of the project’s specific probable significant adverse environmental impacts to which the requirements apply. In making this determination, the director shall:

1. Determine if the applicable regulations require measures that are sufficient to adequately address site-specific, probable significant adverse environmental impacts identified through project application review; and

2. Determine whether additional studies are required and/or whether the project permit application should be conditioned with additional mitigation measures.

F. Appeals. SEPA determination of nonsignificance may be appealed consistent with appeal requirements for SEPA determinations established in this chapter. Notice and appeal of a determination of significance shall follow Chapter 43.21C RCW and Chapter 197-11 WAC. 

G. Nothing in this section limits the authority of the city to approve, condition, or deny a project as provided in its development regulations adopted under Chapter 36.70A RCW and in its policies and criteria adopted under RCW 43.21C.060, including project review under Chapter 16.04 SMC, Environmental Policy, and Chapter 18.80 SMC, Environmentally Sensitive Areas, as amended. (Ord. 2012-001 § 3 (Exh. B); Ord. 2000-006 § 3)


20.01.190 Notice of public hearing.

A. Mailed Notice. Mailed notice of the public hearing shall be provided as follows:

1. No mailed public notice is required for Types A-1 and A-2 actions because no public hearing is held.

2. The notice of public hearing for Type B and Types C-1, C-2, and C-3 actions shall be mailed to:

a. The applicant;

b. All adjacent property owners within 300 feet of any portion of the subject property. (Note: If the applicant owns another parcel or parcels of real property which lie adjacent to the real property subject to development application, mailed notice shall be given to owners of real property located within 300 feet of such adjacently located parcels owned by the applicant);

c. Any person who submits written comments on an application.

B. Content of Notice of Public Hearing for All Types of Applications. The notice given of a public hearing required in this chapter shall contain:

1. The name and address of the applicant or the applicant’s representative;

2. Description of the affected property, including the street address (if any) and either a vicinity location (including roadway intersections) or written description, other than a legal description, reasonably sufficient to inform the public of the location;

3. The date, time and place of the hearing;

4. A description of the nature of the proposed use or development;

5. A statement that all interested persons may appeal at the hearing and provide oral or written comments or testimony;

6. Where information may be examined, and when and how written comments addressing findings required for a decision by the hearing body may be submitted;

7. The name of the city staff contact or representative and the telephone number where additional information may be obtained;

8. That a copy of the application and staff report, and all documents and evidence relied upon by the applicant and applicable criteria are available for inspection at the department at no cost.

C. General Procedure for Mailed Notice of Public Hearing.

1. The records of the Clallam County assessor’s office or an adjacent property ownership list prepared by a licensed title company shall be used for determining the property owner(s) of record. The applicant shall provide the list of property owner(s) of record to the department. Addresses for a mailed notice required by this chapter shall be obtained from the county’s real property tax records. The director shall issue a sworn certificate affirming the mailing of notice to all persons entitled to notice under this chapter. The director may provide notice to other persons than those required to receive notice under the chapter.

2. All public notices shall be deemed to have been provided or received on the date the notice is deposited in the mail or personally delivered, whichever occurs first.

D. Procedure for Posted or Published Notice of Public Hearing.

1. Posted notice of the public hearing is required for all Type B and Type C-1, C-2, C-3 project permit applications. The posted notice shall be posted as required by SMC 20.01.140 for notice of application.

2. Published notice is required for all procedures involving a public hearing. The published notice shall be published in the city’s official newspaper.

E. Other Method of Providing Notice. An additional notice of the hearing may be given to adjacent property owners by any other reasonable method the city deems necessary.

F. Time and Cost of Notice of Public Hearing. 

1. Notice of a public hearing shall be mailed, posted and first published not less than 10 nor more than 45 days prior to the hearing date. Any posted notice shall be removed by the applicant within 15 days following the public hearing.

2. All costs associated with the public notice shall be borne by the applicant.

G. Optional Additional Notice. As optional methods of providing notice of public hearing, the city may notify the public or private groups with known interest in a certain proposal or in the type of proposal being considered.

H. Notice of Application. The notice of application shall not be a substitute for the required notice of a public hearing. (Ord. 2000-006 § 3)


20.01.191 Notice of public meetings.

Public meetings of the planning commission, hearing examiner and city council must comply with applicable notice requirements of the Open Public Meetings Act, Chapter 42.30 RCW, and, if applicable, notice must be given consistent with RCW 36.70A.035, Public participation – Notice provisions. (Ord. 2019-004 (Exh. B); Ord. 2002-014)


20.01.200 Procedures for public hearings.

Public hearings shall be conducted in accordance with the hearing body’s rules of procedure and shall serve to create or supplement an evidentiary record upon which the body will base its decision. Questions directed to the staff or the applicant shall be posed by the chair at its discretion. In cases where scientific standards and criteria affecting project approval are at issue, the chair shall allow orderly cross-examination of expert witnesses presenting reports and/or scientific date and opinions. The hearing body may address questions to any party who testifies at a public hearing. The chair shall open the public hearing and, in general, observe the following sequence of events: 

A. Staff presentation, including submittal of any administrative reports. Members of the hearing body may ask questions of the staff.

B. Applicant presentation, including submittal of any materials. Members of the hearing body may ask questions of the applicant.

C. Testimony or comments by the public germane to the matter.

D. Rebuttal, response or clarifying statements by the staff and the applicant. 

E. The evidentiary portion of the public hearing shall be closed and the hearing body shall deliberate on the matter before it. (Ord. 2000-006 § 3)


20.01.201 Procedures for public meetings.

The city council, planning commission, by majority vote, and hearing examiner may adopt the process for their respective public meetings. Generally a public meeting does not involve formal public comment. A public meeting is not a public hearing. The city council, planning commission and the hearing examiner may, but are not required to, provide for written comments or questions prior to a meeting to assist that body in its actions at its public meeting and may allow comments at a public meeting.

A. Recommendations from Planning Commission. The recommendation from the planning commission, after public meetings or workshops, on Type C-2 decisions will be the subject of a public hearing at the city council. (Ord. 2019-004 (Exh. B); Ord. 2002-014)


20.01.210 Reconsideration.

A party of record at a public hearing may seek reconsideration only of a final decision by filing a written request for reconsideration with the director within five days of the oral announcement of the final decision. The request shall comply with SMC 20.01.240. The council or hearing body shall consider the request at its next regularly scheduled meeting, without public comment or argument by the party filing the request. If the request is denied, the previous action shall become final. If the request is granted, the council or hearing body may immediately revise and reissue its decision or may call for argument in accordance with the procedures for closed record appeals. Reconsideration should be granted only when an obvious legal error has occurred or a material factual issue has been overlooked that would change the previous decision. (Ord. 2000-006 § 3)


20.01.220 Remand.

If the hearing examiner or the city council determines that the public hearing record, the record on appeal or the administrative decision is insufficient or otherwise flawed, the council may remand the matter back to the planning commission, hearing examiner or director, as applicable, to correct the deficiencies. The council must specify the items or issues to be considered and the time frame for completing the additional work. The council may hold an open record public hearing on an appeal of planning commission recommendation only for the limited purposes identified in RCW 34.05.562(1) (involving allegations challenging the legal validity of the planning commission proceedings). (Ord. 2019-004 (Exh. B); Ord. 2000-006 § 3)


20.01.230 Final decision.

A. Time. The final decision on a development proposal subject to Type A-2, B, C-1, C-2 or C-3 actions must be made within 120 days from the date of the determination of completeness. In determining the number of days that have elapsed after the determination of completeness, the following periods are excluded:

1. Any time needed to amend the Sequim comprehensive plan or development regulations.

2. Pursuant to SMC 20.01.130, any time required to correct plans, perform studies or provide additional information; provided, that within 14 days of receiving the requested additional information, the director will determine whether the information is adequate to resume the project review.

3. Pursuant to SMC 20.01.130, substantial project revision(s) made or requested by an applicant, in which case the 120 days will be calculated from the time that the city determines the revised application to be complete and issues a new determination of completeness in accordance with SMC 20.01.130.

4. All time required for the preparation and review of an environmental impact statement as provided in Chapter 16.04 SMC as amended. Additional time may be allowed, with the written concurrence of the applicant.

5. Any time needed to process an application for projects involving the siting of an essential public facility.

6. An extension of time mutually agreed upon by the city and the applicant in writing.

7. Any remand to the planning commission, hearing examiner or director.

B. Effective Date. The final decision of the council or hearing body shall be effective on the date stated in the decision, motion, resolution, or ordinance; provided, that the appeal periods shall be calculated from the date of issuance of the land use decision, as provided in the Land Use Petition Act, Chapter 36.70C RCW. For the purposes of this chapter, the date on which a land use decision is issued is: 

1. Three days after a written decision is mailed by the city, or, if not mailed, the date on which the city provides notice that a written decision is publicly available;

2. If the land use decision is made by ordinance or resolution by the city council sitting in a quasi-judicial capacity, the date the city council passes the ordinance or resolution;

3. If neither subsection (B)(1) nor (2) of this section applies, the date the decision is entered into the public record.

C. Notice of Decision. Upon issuance of the final decision, the department shall mail or hand-deliver a copy of the final decision to the applicant, any persons who have filed a written request for a copy of the decision, and to all persons who submitted substantive written comments on the application. The notice of decision shall include a statement of the threshold determination made under Chapter 16.04 SMC as amended and the procedures for an appeal (if any) of the permit decision or recommendation.

D. Notice of Delayed Decision. If the city is unable to issue its final decision within 120 days from the date of the determination of completeness, the city shall provide written notice of this fact to the applicant. The notice shall contain a statement of reasons consistent with subsection (A) of this section why the time limits have not been met and an estimated date for issuance of the final decision. (Ord. 2019-004 (Exh. B); Ord. 2000-006 § 3)


20.01.240 Appeals.

A. Appeal of Administrative Interpretations and Decisions. Administrative interpretations and administrative Type A-1 and Type A-2 decisions may be appealed, by applicants or parties of record, to the hearing examiner. Determinations of nonsignificance may be appealed to the city council. An appeal of a determination of significance must follow Chapter 43.21C RCW and Chapter 197-11 WAC.

B. Consolidated Public Hearing. All appeals of SEPA threshold determinations made pursuant to Chapter 16.04 SMC as amended (other than determinations of significance) are considered together with the decision on the project application in a single, consolidated public hearing.

C. Appeal of Planning Commission and Hearing Examiner Decisions. Decisions of the planning commission or hearing examiner may be appealed, by parties of record from the hearing, to the city council.

D. Recommendations from Planning Commission. The recommendation from the planning commission, after public meetings or workshops, will be the subject of a public hearing at the city council.

E. Procedures for Appeals. Appeals will be conducted in accordance with the hearing examiner’s and city council’s rules of procedure and will serve to provide argument and guidance for the body’s decision. The parties to an appeal of a planning commission recommendation may submit timely written statements or arguments.

F. Filing. Every appeal shall be filed with the director within 21 days after the date of the decision of the matter being appealed became final. A notice of appeal shall be delivered to the department by mail or personal delivery, and must be received by 4:00 p.m. on the last business day of the appeal period, with the required appeal fee. 

G. Contents of the Notice of Appeal to the Hearing Examiner or the City Council. The notice of appeal must contain a concise statement identifying:

1. The decision being appealed;

2. The name and address of the appellant and his/her interest(s) in the matter;

3. The specific reasons why the appellant believes the decision to be wrong. The appellant bears the burden of proving the decision was wrong;

4. The desired outcome or changes to the decision; and

5. The appeal fee.

H. Hearing Examiner or City Council Actions on Appeal. Decision following an appeal hearing must include one of the following actions:

1. Grant the appeal in whole or in part.

2. Deny the appeal in whole or in part.

3. Remand for further proceedings and/or evidentiary hearing in accordance with SMC 20.01.220.

I. Judicial Appeal. Appeals from the final decision of the hearing examiner or the city council on Type B, Types C-1, C-2 and C-3 procedures and appeals from any other final decisions specifically authorized (subject to timely exhaustion of all administrative remedies) must be made to Clallam County superior court within 21 calendar days of the date the decision or action becomes final, as defined in SMC 20.01.230, unless another time period is established by state law or local ordinance. All appeals must conform with procedures set forth in Chapter 36.70C RCW. The costs of transcribing and preparing all records ordered certified by the court or desired by the appellant for such appeal are borne by the appellant. Prior to the preparation of any records, the appellant must post with the city clerk an advance fee deposit in the amount specified by the city clerk. Any overage will be promptly returned to the appellant. (Ord. 2019-004 (Exh. B); Ord. 2002-014; Ord. 2000-006 § 3)


Chapter 20.02 EFFECTIVE DATE – CONFLICTS – SEVERABILITY

Sections:

20.02.010    Effective date.

20.02.020    Conflict with other procedures.

20.02.030    Severability.


20.02.010 Effective date.

Applications received prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title shall be processed under the regulations in place at the time the application was received. (Ord. 2000-006 § 3)


20.02.020 Conflict with other procedures.

In the event of a conflict in project application and/or public hearing procedures found elsewhere in the Sequim Municipal Code and the requirements of this title, the requirements and procedures set forth in this title shall prevail. (Ord. 2000-006 § 3)


20.02.030 Severability.

If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this title or its application to any person or circumstance is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order or judgment shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of the remainder of any part of this title. To this end, the provisions of each clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this law are declared severable. (Ord. 2000-006 § 3)


Chapter 20.05 FEE SCHEDULE

Sections:

20.05.010    Fee schedule.


20.05.010 Fee schedule.

Fees and charges for services shall be as established by resolution. (Ord. 2005-029 § 2)


Chapter 20.10 CONCURRENCY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM

Sections:

20.10.010    Purpose.

20.10.020    Definitions.

20.10.030    De minimus determinations.

20.10.040    Applications for development approval.

20.10.045    Nonbinding determinations.

20.10.060    Fees.

20.10.070    Conflict with other ordinances and codes.

20.10.080    Savings provision.

20.10.090    Administration and enforcement process.

20.10.100    Transportation.

20.10.110    Water.

20.10.120    Sewer.

20.10.130    Parks.

20.10.140    Stormwater.

20.10.150    Street maintenance.


20.10.010 Purpose.

This chapter provides the necessary regulatory mechanism for determining that a property owner and/or developer meets the concurrency provisions of the comprehensive plan, as amended, for development purposes and ensures that adequate public facilities are available at acceptable levels of service to mitigate the development’s impact. (Ord. 2010-013 § 1 (Exh. 1))


20.10.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

“Building permit” means an official document or certificate issued by the building official authorizing performance of construction or alteration of a building or structure.

“Comprehensive plan” means the city of Sequim comprehensive plan.

“Concurrency” means when adequate public facilities meeting the established level of service standard are in place at the time a development permit is issued, or a development permit is issued subject to the determination that the necessary facilities will be in place when the impacts of the development occur, or that improvements or strategies are in place at the time of development or that a financial commitment is in place to complete the improvements or strategies within six years of the time of the development, as set forth in the city’s comprehensive plan, the water system comprehensive plan, the wastewater system comprehensive plan, and any other comprehensive or strategic plan, including subarea plans, adopted SEPA policies and requirements of applicable NPDES permits, as may be amended.

“Concurrency determination” means a nonbinding determination of what public facilities and services are available at the date of inquiry.

“Concurrency management system” means the procedures and processes utilized by the city to determine that development approvals, when issued, will not result in the reduction of the level of service standards set forth in the comprehensive plan.

“De minimus” means an impact so small that it is considered similar to no impact.

“De minimus development” means a proposed development relating to land use of such a low intensity as to have a de minimus effect, if any, upon the level of service standards set forth in the comprehensive plan.

“Development” means the particular development activity authorized by the unexpired development approval issued for a specific project.

“Development action” means an action of the city, such as a land use amendment to the comprehensive plan or a rezoning.

Development Approvals. The following unexpired development approvals shall be considered to be final development approvals:

A. Final subdivision plat;

B. Binding site plan;

C. Land use overlays (e.g., subareas, commercial C-IV);

D. Final site plan approval; and

E. Building permit.

“Public facilities and services” means the following public facilities and services for which level of service standards have been or will be established by ordinance, adopted policy or in the comprehensive plan (see for instance Chapters 7, 11, 13, 14 and appendices) and the adopted transportation improvement plan, water comprehensive plan, and wastewater comprehensive plan:

A. Potable water (Appendix 18);

B. Wastewater (Appendix 17);

C. Reuse water (Appendix 17);

D. Stormwater drainage;

E. Parks and recreation (Appendix 19 and park impact fee study accepted March 22, 2010)

F. Traffic facilities including but not limited to:

1. Intersections;

2. Arterial roadways;

3. Streets;

4. Sidewalks;

5. Storm drains;

6. Curbs;

7. Traffic flow;

8. Trails and pathways;

And as identified in the traffic impact fee study accepted March 22, 2010. (Ord. 2012-012 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2010-013 § 1 (Exh. 1))


20.10.030 De minimus determinations.

A. Development approvals for a single-family dwelling that is not part of any other related single-family development approval and that does not have a cumulative effect on present system capacity or exceed current uncommitted available capacity shall be deemed de minimus; provided, that this exemption does not exempt property from payment of citywide and areawide impact fees, facility charges, street maintenance and special district charges, latecomer charges, similar charges or any other city requirements or charges.

B. Any development generating less than 10 average daily trips, with no possible cumulative impact and which does not exceed current uncommitted available capacity, shall be deemed de minimus for purposes of assessing transportation levels of service; provided, that this de minimus determination does not exempt property from payment of citywide and areawide impact fees, facility charges, street maintenance and special district charges, latecomer charges, similar charges or any other city requirements or charges. (Ord. 2010-013 § 1 (Exh. 1))


20.10.040 Applications for development approval.

A. Development Approvals.

1. Each applicant for a development action/approval, including those exempted from concurrency determination requirements as de minimus, shall meet concurrency provisions described or referenced in this chapter before any development approval.

2. An applicant requesting development action/approval shall provide an application and all applicable fees, and all information required by the city, as part of a complete application packet, in order for the city to evaluate if a proposal meets concurrency standards. Such information shall include any information required by the planning director or designee.

3. No development approvals will be granted unless the applicant meets or mitigates all concurrency requirements and levels of service adopted in the comprehensive plan or any other documents identified in the “concurrency” definition above and meets other development requirements.

B. When any development approval, (including de minimus under SMC 20.10.030) has been granted, the city shall reduce the calculated available capacity of public facilities and services (SMC 20.10.030(A)) to account for the projected impact of the development as approved.

C. The planning director must consider the cumulative effect of all applications within the same geographic area which may be impacted.

D. Exempt or de minimus developments may be denied if any public facilities and services are below set level of service (LOS) standards or if the exempt development would, by itself, take them below LOS standards.

E. Development approval does not create a vested right to city services or capital facilities. Concurrency determinations shall expire after one year from date of issue. Any subdivision, short subdivision, binding site plan, planned unit development and development agreements under Chapter 36.70B RCW vesting, if any, including concurrency vesting expires no later than the later of one year from the date of concurrency determination or on the date the final plat approval vesting expires (RCW 58.17.170) unless the legislative body finds that a change in conditions creates a serious threat to the public health or safety in the subdivision. (Ord. 2010-013 § 1 (Exh. 1))


20.10.045 Nonbinding determinations.

A. An applicant may request a nonbinding concurrency determination, prior to applying for a development action/approval, by submitting a request and applicable fees to the planning department. Information required to make this determination is the same as that cited in SMC 20.10.040(A)(2).

B. The concurrency determination and the applicant’s information shall become a part of the staff recommendation regarding the requested development.

C. Concurrency determinations do not create a vested right to city services or capital facilities. Concurrency determinations shall expire after one year from date of issue. Any subdivision, short subdivision, binding site plan, planned unit development and development agreements under Chapter 36.70B RCW vesting, if any, including concurrency vesting expires no later than the later of one year from the date of concurrency determination or on the date the final plat approval vesting expires (RCW 58.17.170) unless the legislative body finds that a change in conditions creates a serious threat to the public health or safety in the subdivision. (Ord. 2010-013 § 1 (Exh. 1))


20.10.060 Fees.

A. The city shall charge a processing fee to any individual who requests a nonbinding concurrency determination not associated with an application for development approval or development action. The processing fee shall be nonrefundable and nonassignable to any other person, entity or applicable fees for the same developer. Such fee shall be determined by a fee resolution of the city council at a date subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

B. The following types of development may be exempted from paying the concurrency determination fee:

1. Nonprofit agencies whose primary chartered purpose is to provide affordable housing and for low income housing as defined in the comprehensive plan (and in the affordable housing study dated March 11, 2009), subject to compliance with and in furtherance of state statutes relating to affordable or low income housing and city ordinances relating to affordable housing;

2. Other governmental agencies, or taxing districts;

3. Schools and colleges or institutes of higher education;

4. Public utility districts and fire districts;

5. Libraries; and

6. Senior activity center. (Ord. 2010-013 § 1 (Exh. 1))


20.10.070 Conflict with other ordinances and codes.

In cases of conflict between this chapter or any part thereof, and any part of any other existing or future ordinance or code, the most restrictive in each case shall apply. (Ord. 2010-013 § 1 (Exh. 1))


20.10.080 Savings provision.

If any part of this chapter is held to be unconstitutional, it shall be construed to have the legislative intent to pass the ordinance codified in this chapter without such unconstitutional part. The remainder of this chapter shall be deemed and held to be valid as if the unconstitutional part had not been included. (Ord. 2010-013 § 1 (Exh. 1))


20.10.090 Administration and enforcement process.

Reserved. (Ord. 2010-013 § 1 (Exh. 1))


20.10.100 Transportation.

Reserved. (Ord. 2010-013 § 1 (Exh. 1))


20.10.110 Water.

Reserved. (Ord. 2010-013 § 1 (Exh. 1))


20.10.120 Sewer.

Reserved. (Ord. 2010-013 § 1 (Exh. 1))


20.10.130 Parks.

Reserved. (Ord. 2010-013 § 1 (Exh. 1))


20.10.140 Stormwater.

Reserved. (Ord. 2010-013 § 1 (Exh. 1))


20.10.150 Street maintenance.

Reserved. (Ord. 2010-013 § 1 (Exh. 1))


Title 21 (Reserved)


Title 22 IMPACT FEES

Chapters:

Division I. Transportation Impact Fees

22.04    General Provisions Governing the Assessment of Impact Fees

22.08    Miscellaneous

Division II. Parks and Recreation Impact Fees

22.12    General Provisions Governing the Assessment of Impact Fees

22.16    Miscellaneous Provisions

22.20    Deferral of Impact Fees


Chapter 22.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS GOVERNING THE ASSESSMENT OF IMPACT FEES

Sections:

22.04.010    Findings and authority.

22.04.020    Definitions.

22.04.030    Assessment of impact fees.

22.04.040    Exemptions.

22.04.050    Credits.

22.04.060    Tax adjustments.

22.04.070    Appeals.

22.04.080    Establishment of impact fee account.

22.04.090    Refunds.

22.04.100    Use of funds.

22.04.110    Transportation impact fee.

22.04.120    Independent fee calculations.

22.04.130    Review.

22.04.140    Interpretation and implementation.


22.04.010 Findings and authority.

The city council of the city of Sequim (the “council”) hereby finds and determines that new growth and development in the city of Sequim will create additional demand and need for transportation facilities in the city of Sequim, and the council finds that new growth and development should pay a proportionate share of the cost of new transportation facilities needed to serve the new growth and development. The city of Sequim has conducted extensive research documenting the procedures for measuring the impact of new developments on transportation facilities, has prepared the transportation study, and hereby incorporates that study into this title by reference. Therefore, pursuant to Chapter 82.02 RCW, the council adopts this division to assess impact fees for transportation facilities. The provisions of this division shall be liberally construed in order to carry out the purposes of the council in establishing the impact fee program. (Ord. 2015-001 Ch. III; Ord. 2013-014 Ch. III; Ord. 2010-007 § I-1)


22.04.020 Definitions.

The following words and terms shall have the following meanings for the purposes of this division, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. Terms otherwise not defined herein shall be defined pursuant to RCW 82.02.090, or given their usual and customary meanings.

“Applicant for impact fee deferral” means an applicant for a building permit that also makes application for impact fee deferral. It includes an entity that controls the applicant, is controlled by the applicant, or is under common control with the applicant. 

“Building permit” means an official document or certification which is issued by the building official and which authorizes the construction, alteration, enlargement, conversion, reconstruction, remodeling, rehabilitation, erection, demolition, moving or repair of a building or structure.

“Capital facilities plan” means the capital facilities plan element of a comprehensive plan adopted by the city of Sequim pursuant to Chapter 36.70A RCW, and such plan as amended.

“City” means the city of Sequim.

“Council” means the city council of the city of Sequim.

“Development activity” means any construction, expansion, or change in the use of a building or structure that creates additional demand and need for transportation facilities.

“Development approval” means any written authorization from the city of Sequim that authorizes the commencement of a development activity.

“Downtown” means that portion of the city included in the downtown core, downtown mixed use I, and downtown mixed use II zoning designations.

“Dwelling unit” means a single-family unit providing complete and independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent facilities for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation needs. A multifamily dwelling is two or more connected dwelling units.

“Encumbered” means to reserve, set aside, or otherwise earmark the impact fees in order to pay for commitments, contractual obligations, or other liabilities incurred for transportation facilities.

“Feepayer” is a person, corporation, partnership, incorporated association, or any other similar entity, or department or bureau of any governmental entity or municipal corporation, commencing a development activity which creates the demand for additional transportation facilities, and which requires the issuance of a building permit. “Feepayer” includes an applicant for an impact fee credit.

“Hearing examiner” means the examiner who acts on behalf of the city in considering and applying land use regulatory codes as provided under the Sequim Municipal Code. Where appropriate, “hearing examiner” also refers to the office of the hearing examiner. If the city has not implemented a hearing examiner office or if there is no person appointed as a hearing examiner, the city council shall act as a hearing body in place of the hearing examiner. Any appeal from the city council shall be to the appropriate court or state hearing body as may be required by law.

“Impact fee” means a payment of money imposed by the city of Sequim on development activity pursuant to this division as a condition of granting development approval in order to pay for the transportation facilities needed to serve new growth and development. “Impact fee” does not include a reasonable permit fee, an application fee, the administrative fee for collecting and handling school impact fees, or the cost of reviewing independent fee calculations.

“Impact fee account” or “account” means the account established for transportation facility impact fees.

“Independent fee calculation” means the transportation impact calculation, and/or economic documentation prepared by a feepayer, to support the assessment of an impact fee other than by the use of the rates listed in SMC 22.04.110, or the calculations prepared by the city manager or his designee where none of the fee categories or fee amounts in SMC 22.04.110 accurately describe or capture the impacts of the new development on transportation facilities.

“Interest” means the average interest rate earned in the last fiscal year by the city of Sequim.

“Occupancy permit” means the permit issued by the city of Sequim where a development activity results in a change in use of the preexisting structure, or the creation of a new use where none previously existed.

“Open space” means for the purposes of this division undeveloped public land that is permanently protected from development (except for the development of trails or other passive public access or use).

“Owner” means the owner of record of real property, or a person with an unrestricted written option to purchase property; provided, that, if the real property is being purchased under a recorded real estate contract, the purchaser shall be considered the owner of the real property.

“Project improvements” means site improvements and facilities that are planned and designed to provide service for a particular development or users of the project, and are not system improvements. No improvement or facility included in a capital facilities plan adopted by the council shall be considered a project improvement.

“Public facilities” means the publicly owned transportation facilities owned or operated by the city of Sequim.

“Significant past tax payment” means taxes exceeding five percent of the amount of the impact fee, and which were paid prior to the date the impact fee is assessed and were earmarked for or proratable to the same system improvements for which the impact fee is assessed.

“State” means the state of Washington.

“System improvements” means transportation facilities that are included in the city of Sequim’s capital facilities plan and are designed to provide service to service areas within the community at large, in contrast to project improvements.

“Transfer” means sale as defined in RCW 82.45.010, forfeiture, foreclosure, trade, gift, receivership, bankruptcy or other change in ownership interest in real property or improvements. 

“Transportation facility” means streets and roads, including the right-of-way, and pedestrian, bicycle and transit facilities that are part of streets and roads consistent with the city’s design standards for streets and roads.

“Transportation study” means the “City of Sequim Transportation Impact Fee Program” dated January 2010, the “Transportation Impact Fee Program for Sequim, Washington 2013 Update” dated March 2013, and the Addendum to the Update dated December 2014, as amended and supplemented before adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, as it amends the earlier studies. (Ord. 2015-016 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2015-001 Ch. III; Ord. 2013-014 Ch. III; Ord. 2010-007 § I-2)


22.04.030 Assessment of impact fees.

A. The city shall collect impact fees, based on the rates in SMC 22.04.110, from any applicant seeking development approval from the city for any development activity within the city, where such development activity requires the issuance of a building permit or occupancy permit, including the expansion or change in use of existing uses that creates one or more additional dwelling units.

B. For a change in use of an existing building or dwelling unit, including any alteration, expansion, replacement or new accessory building, the impact fee shall be the applicable impact fee for the land use category of the new use, less any impact fee previously paid for the land use category of the prior use. If no impact fee was paid for the prior use, the impact fee for the new use shall be reduced by an amount equal to the current impact fee rate for the prior use.

C. For mixed-use developments, impact fees shall be imposed for the proportionate share of each land use based on the applicable measurement in the impact fee rates set forth in SMC 22.04.110.

D. Impact fees shall be assessed at the time the complete application for a building permit or occupancy permit is submitted and vests, for each unit in the development, using the impact fee rates then in effect. Impact fees shall be paid at the time the building permit is issued by the city.

E. Applicants that have been awarded credits pursuant to SMC 22.04.050 prior to the submittal of the complete building permit application shall submit, along with the complete building permit application, a copy of the letter or certificate prepared by the city manager or his designee pursuant to SMC 22.04.050 setting forth the dollar amount of the credit awarded. Impact fees, as determined after the application of appropriate credits, shall be collected from the feepayer at the time the building permit is issued for each unit in the development.

F. The city manager or his designee shall not issue the required building permit or occupancy permit unless and until the impact fees set forth in SMC 22.04.110 have been paid in the amount that they exceed exemptions or credits provided pursuant to SMC 22.04.040 or 22.04.050.

G. The service area for impact fees for transportation facilities shall be a single citywide service area. (Ord. 2015-001 Ch. III; Ord. 2013-014 Ch. III; Ord. 2010-007 § I-3)


22.04.040 Exemptions.

A. The following shall be exempted from the payment of all impact fees:

1. Alteration or change in use of an existing nonresidential structure that does not add any dwelling units or additional square feet of space and which is not a development activity;

2. Miscellaneous improvements, including, but not limited to, fences, walls, swimming pools, and signs;

3. Demolition or moving of a structure;

4. Replacement of a structure with a new structure of the same size and use at the same site or lot when such replacement occurs within 12 months of the demolition or destruction of the prior structure;

5. Any vested building permit application that has been submitted to the city before 5:00 p.m. on the business day before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and subsequently determined to be a complete application, based on the information on file as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 2015-001 Ch. III; Ord. 2013-014 Ch. III; Ord. 2011-002 § 1; Ord. 2010-007 § I-4)


22.04.050 Credits.

A. A feepayer can request that credit to be used to reduce impact fees be awarded to him/her for the total value of dedicated land, improvements, or construction provided by the feepayer. Credits will be given only if the land, improvements, and/or facility constructed are:

1. Included within the capital facilities plan and would serve the goals and objectives of the capital facilities plan, including public availability of such facilities; and

2. At suitable sites and constructed at acceptable quality as determined by the city.

B. The city manager or his designee shall determine if requests for credits meet the criteria in subsection A of this section.

C. The value of a credit for structures, facilities or other improvements shall be established by original receipts provided by the applicant for one or more of the same system improvements for which the impact fee is being charged.

D. The value of a credit for land, including right-of-way and easements, shall be established on a case-by-case basis by an appraiser selected by or acceptable to the city manager or his designee. The appraiser must be licensed in good standing by the state of Washington for the category of the property appraised. The appraiser must possess an MAI or other equivalent certification and shall not have a fiduciary or personal interest in the property being appraised. A description of the appraiser’s certification shall be included with the appraisal, and the appraiser shall certify that he/she does not have a fiduciary or personal interest in the property being appraised. The appraisal shall be in accord with the most recent version of the Uniform Standards of Professional Appraisal Practice and shall be subject to review and acceptance by the city manager or his designee.

E. The feepayer shall pay for the cost of the appraisal or request that the cost of the appraisal be deducted from the credit which the city manager or his designee may be providing to the feepayer, in the event that a credit is awarded.

F. After receiving the appraisal the city manager or his designee shall provide the applicant with a letter or certificate setting forth the dollar amount of the credit, the reason for the credit, the legal description of the site donated where applicable, and the legal description or other adequate description of the project or development to which the credit may be applied. The applicant must sign and date a duplicate copy of such letter or certificate indicating his/her agreement to the terms of the letter or certificate and return such signed document to the city manager or his designee before the impact fee credit will be awarded. The failure of the applicant to sign, date, and return such document within 60 calendar days shall nullify the credit.

G. No credit shall be given for project improvements.

H. A feepayer can request that a credit for impact fees be awarded to him/her for significant past tax payments. For each request for a credit for significant past tax payments for transportation impact fees, the feepayer shall submit receipts and a calculation of past tax payments earmarked for or proratable to the particular system improvement for which a credit is requested. The city manager or his designee shall determine the amount of credits, if any, for significant past tax payments for transportation facilities.

I. Any claim for credit must be made no later than 20 calendar days after the submission of an application for a building permit. The failure to timely file such a claim shall constitute a final bar to later request any such credit.

J. Determinations made by the city manager or his designee pursuant to this section shall be subject to the appeals procedures set forth in SMC 22.04.070. (Ord. 2015-001 Ch. III; Ord. 2013-014 Ch. III; Ord. 2011-002 § 2; Ord. 2010-007 § I-5)


22.04.060 Tax adjustments.

Pursuant to and consistent with the requirements of RCW 82.02.060, the transportation study has provided adjustments for future taxes to be paid by the new development which are earmarked for or proratable to the same new transportation facilities which will serve the new development. The impact fee rates in SMC 22.04.110 have been reasonably adjusted for taxes and other revenue sources which are anticipated to be available to fund transportation improvements. (Ord. 2015-001 Ch. III; Ord. 2013-014 Ch. III; Ord. 2010-007 § I-6)




22.04.070 Appeals.

A. Any feepayer may pay the impact fees imposed by this division under protest in order to obtain a building permit. No appeal shall be permitted until the impact fees at issue have been paid.

B. Appeals regarding the impact fees imposed on any development activity may only be filed by the feepayer of the property where such development activity will occur.

C. The feepayer must first file a request for review regarding impact fees with the city manager or his designee, as provided herein:

1. The request shall be in writing on the form provided by the city and shall include a statement demonstrating standing to appeal, a clear description of what is being appealed, and specific data and technical information supporting the appeal;

2. The request for review by the city manager or his designee shall be filed within 14 calendar days of the feepayer’s payment of the impact fees at issue. The failure to timely file such a request shall constitute a final bar to later seek such review;

3. The fee for filing an appeal or request for review by the city manager or his designee shall be $200.00; and

4. The city manager or his designee shall issue his/her determination in writing.

D. Determinations of the city manager or his designee with respect to the applicability of the impact fees to a given development activity, the availability or value of a credit, or the city manager’s or his designee’s decision concerning the independent fee calculation which is authorized in SMC 22.04.120, or the fees imposed by the city manager or his designee pursuant to SMC 22.04.120, or any other determination which the city manager or his designee is authorized to make pursuant to this division, can be appealed to the hearing examiner.

E. Appeals shall be taken within 14 calendar days of the city manager’s or his designee’s issuance of a written determination by filing with the city manager or his designee a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof, and depositing the necessary fee, which is set forth in the existing fee schedules for appeals of such decisions. The city manager or his designee shall transmit to the office of the hearing examiner all papers constituting the record for the determination, including where appropriate the independent fee calculation.

F. The hearing examiner shall fix a time for the hearing of the appeal, give notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same as provided in the Sequim Municipal Code. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney.

G. The hearing examiner is authorized to make findings of fact regarding the applicability of the impact fees to a given development activity, the availability or amount of the credit, or the accuracy or applicability of an independent fee calculation. The decision of the hearing examiner shall be final, except as provided in this section.

H. The hearing examiner may, so long as such action is in conformance with the provisions of this division, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or may modify the determinations of the city manager or his designee with respect to the amount of the impact fees imposed or the credit awarded.

I. Unless the city council has acted in place of a hearing examiner, a decision of the examiner may be appealed to the city council within 14 days of the date of the hearing examiner’s written decision. (Ord. 2015-001 Ch. III; Ord. 2013-014 Ch. III; Ord. 2010-007 § I-7)


22.04.080 Establishment of impact fee account.

A. Impact fee receipts shall be earmarked specifically and deposited in a separate interest-bearing account.

B. There is hereby established a separate impact fee account for the fees collected pursuant to this division: the transportation impact fee account. Funds withdrawn or expended from this account must be used in accordance with the provisions of SMC 22.04.100 and applicable state law. Interest earned on the fees shall be retained in the account and expended for the purposes for which the impact fees were collected.

C. On an annual basis, the finance director shall provide a report to the council on the impact fee account showing the source and amount of all moneys collected, earned, or received, and the transportation improvements that were financed in whole or in part by impact fees.

D. Impact fees shall be expended or encumbered within 10 years of receipt, unless the council identifies in written findings extraordinary and compelling reason or reasons for the city to hold the fees beyond the 10-year period. Under such circumstances, the council shall establish the period of time within which the impact fees shall be expended or encumbered. (Ord. 2015-001 Ch. III; Ord. 2013-014 Ch. III; Ord. 2010-007 § I-8)


22.04.090 Refunds.

A. If the city fails to expend or encumber the impact fees within 10 years of when the fees were paid or, where extraordinary or compelling reasons exist, such other time periods as established pursuant to SMC 22.04.080, the current record owner of the property, at the expiration of any such period, on which impact fees have been paid may receive a refund of such fees. In determining whether impact fees have been expended or encumbered, impact fees shall be considered expended or encumbered on a first-in, first-out basis.

B. The city shall notify potential claimants by first class mail deposited with the United States Postal Service at the last known address of such claimants. A claimant must be the owner of the property.

C. An owner seeking a refund of impact fees must submit a written request for a refund of the fees to the city manager or his designee within one year of the date the right to claim the refund arises or the date that notice is given, whichever is later.

D. Any impact fees for which no application for a refund has been made within this one-year period shall be retained by the city and expended on the appropriate transportation facilities.

E. Refunds of impact fees under this section shall include any interest earned on the impact fees by the city.

F. When the city seeks to terminate any or all components of the impact fee program, all unexpended or unencumbered funds from any terminated component or components, including interest earned, shall be refunded pursuant to this section. Upon the finding that any or all fee requirements are to be terminated, the city shall place notice of such termination and the availability of refunds in a newspaper of general circulation at least two times and shall notify all potential claimants by first class mail at the last known address of the claimants. All funds available for refund shall be retained for a period of one year. At the end of one year, any remaining funds shall be retained by the city, but must be expended for the appropriate transportation facilities. This notice requirement shall not apply if there are no unexpended or unencumbered balances within the account or accounts being terminated.

G. The city shall also refund to the current owner of property for which impact fees have been paid all impact fees paid, as provided for herein, including interest earned on the impact fees, when the developer does not proceed with the development activity for which the impact fees were imposed and when no impact on the city has resulted; provided, that, if the city has expended or encumbered the impact fees in good faith prior to the application for a refund, the city manager or his designee can decline to provide the refund. Any refund provided for in this subsection shall not occur during the time when the development activity has a valid development approval and is legally authorized to proceed. If, after expiration of development approval and within a period of three years, the same or subsequent owner of the property receives a new development approval with the same or substantially similar development activity, the owner can petition the city manager or his designee for an offset of any unrefunded impact fees provided for herein. The petitioner must provide valid proof of ownership, clear title and receipts of impact fees previously paid for a development of the same or substantially similar nature on the same property or some portion thereof. The city manager or his designee shall determine whether to grant an offset. Determinations of the city manager or his designee shall be in writing and shall be subject to the appeals procedures set forth in SMC 22.04.070. (Ord. 2015-001 Ch. III; Ord. 2013-014 Ch. III; Ord. 2010-007 § I-9)


22.04.100 Use of funds.

A. Pursuant to this division, impact fees:

1. Shall be used for transportation facility improvements that will reasonably benefit the new development; and

2. Shall not be imposed to make up for deficiencies in transportation facilities serving existing developments; and

3. Shall not be used for maintenance or operation.

B. Transportation impact fees may be spent for transportation facility improvements, including, but not limited to, planning, land acquisition, site improvements, necessary off-site improvements, construction, engineering, architectural, permitting, financing, and administrative expenses, applicable impact fees or mitigation costs, capital equipment pertaining to transportation facilities, and any other expenses that can be capitalized, provided the expenses relate to the transportation facility improvements.

C. Impact fees may also be used to recoup transportation facility improvement costs previously incurred by the city to the extent that new growth and development will be served by the previously constructed improvements or incurred costs.

D. In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments are or have been issued for the advanced provision of transportation facility improvements for which impact fees may be expended, impact fees may be used to pay debt service on such bonds or similar debt instruments to the extent that the facilities or improvements provided are consistent with the requirements of this section and are used to serve the new development. (Ord. 2015-001 Ch. III; Ord. 2013-014 Ch. III; Ord. 2010-007 § I-10)


22.04.110 Transportation impact fee.

The transportation impact fee rates in this section are generated from the formula for calculating impact fees set forth in the transportation study, which is incorporated herein by reference. Except as otherwise provided for independent fee calculations in SMC 22.04.120, exemptions in SMC 22.04.040, and credits in SMC 22.04.050, all new developments in the city will be charged the transportation impact fee applicable to the type of development:

	Land Use	ITE Land Use Code	Unit of Measure	Impact Fee Rate 	Downtown Impact Fee Rate 

	 	Cost per Trip End = $2,244	Reduced rates in bold

	Residential	 	 

	Single-Family (Detached)	210	dwelling	$2,491	$2,020

	Multifamily	220, 221, 230, 233	dwelling	$1,628	$1,332

	Senior Housing	251	dwelling	$539	$420

	Mobile Home in MH Park	240	dwelling	$1,178	$1,178

	Commercial – Services	 	 

	Drive-In Bank	912	sf/GFA	$16.36	$2.92*

	Hotel	310	room	$1,723	$1,723

	Motel	320	room	$1,350	$1,350

	Day Care Center	565	sf/GFA	$13.91	$2.92*

	Library 	590	sf/GFA	$6.88	$2.92*

	Post Office	732	sf/GFA	$10.57	$10.57

	Service Station 	944	 VFP	$6,972	$6,972

	Service Station with Minimart	945	sf/GFA	$36.75	$36.75

	Auto Care Center	942	sf/GLA	$3.52	$3.52

	Movie Theater 	444, 445	seat	$96.13	$96.13

	Health Club	493, 493	sf/GFA	$5.94	$2.92*

	Commercial – Institutional	 	 

	Elementary School	520	sf/GFA	$1.22	$1.22

	Middle/Jr. High School	522	sf/GFA	$1.90	$1.90

	High School	530	sf/GFA	$2.04	$2.04

	Assisted Living, Nursing Home	254, 620	bed	$439	$439

	Church	560	sf/GFA	$1.44	$1.44

	Hospital	610	sf/GFA	$2.14	$2.14

	Commercial – Restaurant	 	 

	Restaurant	931	sf/GFA	$11.19	$2.92*

	High Turnover Restaurant	932	sf/GFA	$9.55	$2.92*

	Fast Food Restaurant	934	sf/GFA	$24.54	$2.92*

	Espresso with Drive-Through	938	sf/GFA	$22.55	$2.92*

	Commercial – Retail Shopping	 	 

	Shopping Center	820	sf/GLA	$3.90	$2.92*

	Supermarket	850	sf/GFA	$10.69	$2.92*

	Convenience Market	851	sf/GFA	$23.29	$2.92*

	Freestanding Discount Store	813, 815, 857, 863, 864	sf/GFA	$4.84	$2.92*

	Hardware/Paint Store	816	sf/GFA	$2.43	$2.43

	Specialty Retail Center	826	sf/GFA	$1.71	$1.71

	Furniture Store	890	sf/GFA	$0.34	$0.34

	Home Improvement Superstore	862	sf/GFA	$2.45	$2.45

	Pharmacy with Drive-Through	881	sf/GFA	$6.23	$2.92*

	Car Sales – New/Used	841	sf/GFA	$6.02	$2.92*

	Commercial – Office	 	 

	General Office	710, 715, 750	sf/GFA	$3.85	$2.92*

	Medical Office	720	sf/GFA	$7.69	$2.92*

	Research, Development Center	760	SF/GFA	$2.77	$2.77

	Industrial	 	 

	Light Industry	110	sf/GFA	$2.79	$2.79

	Heavy Industry, Manufacturing	120, 140	sf/GFA	$1.95	$1.95

	Mini-Warehouse/Storage	151	sf/GFA	$0.75	$0.75

	Warehousing	150	sf/GFA	$0.92	$0.92

Notes:

GFA = Gross Floor Area

GLA = Gross Leasable Area

For uses with Unit of Measure in sf, trip rate is given as trips per 1,000 sf

VFP = Vehicle Fueling Positions (Maximum number of vehicles that can be fueled simultaneously)

*Denotes Downtown Services/Retail rate

(Ord. 2015-001 Ch. III; Ord. 2013-014 Ch. III; Ord. 2010-007 § I-11)


22.04.120 Independent fee calculations.

A. If in the judgment of the city manager or his designee none of the fee categories or fee amounts set forth in SMC 22.04.110 accurately describe or capture the impacts of a new development on transportation, the city manager or his designee may conduct independent fee calculations and the city manager or his designee may impose alternative fees on a specific development based on those calculations. If the alternative fees are less than 90 percent of the amount set forth in SMC 22.04.110, then they shall be subject to the approval of the city council. The approved alternative fees and the calculations shall be set forth in writing and shall be mailed to the feepayer.

B. If a feepayer opts not to have the impact fees determined according to SMC 22.04.110, then the feepayer shall prepare and submit to the city manager or his designee an independent fee calculation for the development activity for which a building permit is sought. The documentation submitted shall show the basis upon which the independent fee calculation was made.

C. Any feepayer submitting an independent fee calculation will be required to pay the city of Sequim a fee to cover the cost of reviewing the independent fee calculation. The fee required by the city for conducting the review of the independent fee calculation shall be $200.00, unless otherwise established by the city manager or his designee, and shall be paid by the feepayer prior to initiation of review.

D. While there is a presumption that the calculations set forth in the transportation study are valid, the city manager or his designee shall consider the documentation submitted by the feepayer, but is not required to accept such documentation or analysis which the city manager or his designee reasonably deems to be inaccurate or not reliable, and may, in the alternative, require the feepayer to submit additional or different documentation for consideration. The city manager or his designee is authorized to adjust the impact fees on a case-by-case basis based on the independent fee calculation, the specific characteristics of the development, and/or principles of fairness, subject to city council approval. The approved fees or alternative fees and the calculations shall be set forth in writing and shall be mailed to the feepayer.

E. Determinations made by the city manager or his designee pursuant to this section may be appealed to the office of the hearing examiner as set forth in SMC 22.04.070. (Ord. 2015-001 Ch. III; Ord. 2013-014 Ch. III; Ord. 2010-007 § I-12)


22.04.130 Review.*

The fee rates set forth in SMC 22.04.110 may be reviewed and adjusted by the council as it deems necessary and appropriate in conjunction with the annual update of the capital facilities plan element of the city’s comprehensive plan. The fee rates shall be adjusted 12 months after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or 12 months after the most recent review by the council. The council may determine the amount of the adjustment taking into consideration changes in costs of real property, materials and labor. The council may revise the fee rates set forth in SMC 22.04.110. If the council does not determine the amount of the adjustment, the adjustment shall be by the same amount that the Engineering News Record Construction Price Index changed for the most recent 12-month period prior to the date of the adjustment. (Ord. 2015-001 Ch. III; Ord. 2013-014 Ch. III; Ord. 2010-007 § I-13)

*Code reviser’s note: Ord. 2015-006, Section 1, keeps impact fees at their present level, providing, “The automatic adjustments of transportation and park impact fees as provided for in SMC 22.04.130 and SMC 22.12.130 respectively shall not be applied this year until further action by the City Council.”


22.04.140 Interpretation and implementation.

The city council authorizes the city manager or his designee to administratively interpret the provisions of this division as necessary to implement the intent of the city council. The city manager or his designee shall be authorized to adopt guidelines for the implementation of this division that may include a procedures guide for impact fees. (Ord. 2015-001 Ch. III; Ord. 2013-014 Ch. III; Ord. 2010-007 § I-14)


Chapter 22.08 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

Sections:

22.08.010    Existing authority unimpaired.

22.08.020    Captions.


22.08.010 Existing authority unimpaired.

Nothing in this division shall preclude the city from requiring the feepayer or the proponent of a development activity to mitigate adverse environmental impacts of a specific development pursuant to the State Environmental Policy Act, Chapter 43.21C RCW, based on the environmental documents accompanying the underlying development approval process, and/or Chapter 58.17 RCW, governing plats and subdivisions; provided, that the exercise of this authority is consistent with the provisions of Chapters 43.21C and 82.02 RCW. (Ord. 2010-007 § II-1)


22.08.020 Captions.

The chapter and section captions used in this division are for convenience only and shall not control or affect the meaning or construction of any of the provisions of this division. (Ord. 2010-007 § II-2)


Chapter 22.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS GOVERNING THE ASSESSMENT OF IMPACT FEES

Sections:

22.12.010    Findings and authority.

22.12.020    Definitions.

22.12.030    Assessment of impact fees.

22.12.040    Exemptions.

22.12.050    Credits.

22.12.060    Tax adjustments.

22.12.070    Appeals.

22.12.080    Establishment of impact fee account.

22.12.090    Refunds.

22.12.100    Use of funds.

22.12.110    Park impact fee.

22.12.120    Independent fee calculations.

22.12.130    Review.

22.12.140    Interpretation and implementation.


22.12.010 Findings and authority.

The city council of the city of Sequim (“the council”) hereby finds and determines that new residential growth and development in the city of Sequim will create additional demand and need for parks and recreational facilities in the city of Sequim, and the council finds that new growth and development should pay a proportionate share of the cost of new parks and recreational facilities needed to serve the new growth and development. The city of Sequim has conducted extensive research documenting the procedures for measuring the impact of new developments on parks and recreational facilities, has prepared the parks study, and hereby incorporates that study into this division by reference. Therefore, pursuant to Chapter 82.02 RCW, the council adopts this division to assess impact fees for parks and recreational facilities. The provisions of this division shall be liberally construed in order to carry out the purposes of the council in establishing the impact fee program. (Ord. 2010-008 § I-1)


22.12.020 Definitions.

The following words and terms shall have the following meanings for the purposes of this division, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. Terms otherwise not defined herein shall be defined pursuant to RCW 82.02.090, or given their usual and customary meaning.

“Applicant for impact fee deferral” means an applicant for a building permit that also makes application for impact fee deferral. It includes an entity that controls the applicant, is controlled by the applicant, or is under common control with the applicant. 

“Building permit” means an official document or certification which is issued by the building official and which authorizes the construction, alteration, enlargement, conversion, reconstruction, remodeling, rehabilitation, erection, demolition, moving or repair of a building or structure.

“Capital facilities plan” means the capital facilities plan element of a comprehensive plan adopted by the city of Sequim pursuant to Chapter 36.70A RCW, and such plan as amended.

“City” means the city of Sequim.

“Council” means the city council of the city of Sequim.

“Development activity” means any construction, expansion, or change in the use of a building or structure that creates additional demand and need for parks and recreational facilities.

“Development approval” means any written authorization from the city of Sequim that authorizes the commencement of a development activity.

“Dwelling unit” means a single-family unit providing complete and independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent facilities for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation needs. A multi-family unit means two or more dwelling units which are connected.

“Encumbered” means to reserve, set aside, or otherwise earmark the impact fees in order to pay for commitments, contractual obligations, or other liabilities incurred for parks and recreational facilities.

“Feepayer” is a person, corporation, partnership, incorporated association, or any other similar entity, or department or bureau of any governmental entity or municipal corporation commencing a development activity which creates the demand for additional parks and recreational facilities, and which requires the issuance of a building permit. “Feepayer” includes an applicant for an impact fee credit.

“Hearing examiner” means the examiner who acts on behalf of the city in considering and applying land use regulatory codes as provided under the Sequim Municipal Code. Where appropriate, “hearing examiner” also refers to the office of the hearing examiner. If the city has not implemented a hearing examiner office or if there is no person appointed as a hearing examiner, the city council shall act as a hearing body in place of the hearing examiner. Any appeal from the city council shall be to the appropriate court or state hearing body as may be required by law.

“Impact fee” means a payment of money imposed by the city of Sequim on development activity pursuant to this division as a condition of granting development approval in order to pay for the parks and recreational facilities needed to serve new growth and development. “Impact fee” does not include a reasonable permit fee, an application fee, the administrative fee for collecting and handling school impact fees, or the cost of reviewing independent fee calculations.

“Impact fee account” or “account” means the account established for parks and recreational facility impact fees.

“Independent fee calculation” means the park impact calculation, and/or economic documentation prepared by a feepayer, to support the assessment of an impact fee other than by the use of the rates listed in SMC 22.12.110, or the calculations prepared by the city manager or his designee where none of the fee categories or fee amounts in SMC 22.12.120 accurately describe or capture the impacts of the new development on parks and recreational facilities.

“Interest” means the average interest rate earned in the last fiscal year by the city of Sequim.

“Occupancy permit” means the permit issued by the city of Sequim where a development activity results in a change in use of the preexisting structure, or the creation of a new use where none previously existed.

“Open space” means for the purposes of this division undeveloped public land that is permanently protected from development (except for the development of trails or other passive public access or use).

“Owner” means the owner of record of real property, or a person with an unrestricted written option to purchase property; provided, that, if the real property is being purchased under a recorded real estate contract, the purchaser shall be considered the owner of the real property.

“Park” means land or open space designated by the city as neighborhood parks, community parks, natural resource areas, urban pathways and bikeways or comparable designations of land.

“Parks study” means the “Parks and Recreational Facilities Impact Fee Rate Study for City of Sequim, Washington” dated December 21, 2009, as amended and supplemented before adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

“Project improvements” means site improvements and facilities that are planned and designed to provide service for a particular development or users of the project, and are not system improvements. No improvement or facility included in a capital facilities plan adopted by the council shall be considered a project improvement.

“Public facilities” means the publicly owned parks, open space, and recreational facilities owned or operated by the city of Sequim.

“Recreational facility” includes but is not limited to ball fields, athletic fields, soccer fields, swimming pools, tennis courts, and volleyball courts.

“Residential” or “residential development” means all types of construction intended for human habitation. This shall include, but is not limited to, single-family, duplex, triplex, and other multifamily residential development.

“Significant past tax payment” means taxes exceeding five percent of the amount of the impact fee, and which were paid prior to the date the impact fee is assessed and were earmarked for or proratable to the same system improvements for which the impact fee is assessed.

“State” means the state of Washington.

“System improvements” means parks and recreational facilities that are included in the city of Sequim’s capital facilities plan and are designed to provide service to service areas within the community at large, in contrast to project improvements.

“Transfer” means sale as defined in RCW 82.45.010, forfeiture, foreclosure, trade, gift, receivership, bankruptcy or other change in ownership interest in real property or improvements. (Ord. 2015-016 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2010-008 § I-2)


22.12.030 Assessment of impact fees.

A. The city shall collect impact fees, based on the rates in SMC 22.12.110, from any applicant seeking development approval from the city for any residential development activity within the city, where such development activity requires the issuance of a building permit or occupancy permit, including the expansion or change in use of existing uses that creates one or more additional dwelling units.

B. For a change in use of an existing building or dwelling unit, including any alteration, expansion, replacement or new accessory building, the impact fee shall be the applicable impact fee for the land use category of the new use, less any impact fee previously paid for the land use category of the prior use. If no impact fee was paid for the prior use, the impact fee for the new use shall be reduced by an amount equal to the current impact fee rate for the prior use.

C. For mixed-use developments, impact fees shall be imposed for the proportionate share of each land use based on the applicable measurement in the impact fee rates set forth in SMC 22.12.110.

D. Impact fees shall be assessed at the time the complete application for a building permit or occupancy permit is submitted and vests, for each unit in the development, using the impact fee rates then in effect. Impact fees shall be paid at the time the building permit is issued by the city.

E. Applicants that have been awarded credits pursuant to SMC 22.12.050 prior to the submittal of the complete building permit application shall submit, along with the complete building permit application, a copy of the letter or certificate prepared by the city manager or his designee pursuant to SMC 22.12.050 setting forth the dollar amount of the credit awarded. Impact fees, as determined after the application of appropriate credits, shall be collected from the feepayer at the time the building permit is issued for each unit in the development.

F. The city manager or his designee shall not issue the required building permit or occupancy permit unless and until the impact fees set forth in SMC 22.12.110 have been paid in the amount that they exceed exemptions or credits provided pursuant to SMC 22.12.040 or 22.12.050.

G. The service area for impact fees for parks and recreational facilities shall be a single citywide service area. (Ord. 2010-008 § I-3)


22.12.040 Exemptions.

A. The following shall be exempted from the payment of all impact fees:

1. Alteration or change in use of an existing nonresidential structure that does not add any dwelling units or additional square feet of space, and which is not a development activity;

2. Miscellaneous improvements, including, but not limited to, fences, walls, swimming pools, and signs;

3. Demolition or moving of a structure;

4. Replacement of a structure with a new structure of the same size and use at the same site or lot when such replacement occurs within 12 months of the demolition or destruction of the prior structure;

5. Any vested building permit application that has been submitted to the city before 5:00 p.m. on the business day before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and subsequently determined to be a complete application, based on the information on file as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 2011-001 § 1; Ord. 2010-008 § I-4)


22.12.050 Credits.

A. A feepayer can request that credit to be used to reduce impact fees be awarded to him/her for the total value of dedicated land, improvements, or construction provided by the feepayer. Credits will be given only if the land, improvements, and/or the facility constructed are:

1. Included within the capital facilities plan and would serve the goals and objectives of the capital facilities plan, including public availability of such facilities; and

2. At suitable sites and constructed at acceptable quality as determined by the city.

B. The city manager or his designee shall determine if requests for credits meet the criteria in subsection A of this section.

C. The value of a credit for structures, facilities or other improvements shall be established by original receipts provided by the applicant for one or more of the same system improvements for which the impact fee is being charged.

D. The value of a credit for land, including right-of-way and easements, shall be established on a case-by-case basis by an appraiser selected by or acceptable to the city manager or his designee. The appraiser must be licensed in good standing by the state of Washington for the category of the property appraised. The appraiser must possess an MAI or other equivalent certification and shall not have a fiduciary or personal interest in the property being appraised. A description of the appraiser’s certification shall be included with the appraisal, and the appraiser shall certify that he/she does not have a fiduciary or personal interest in the property being appraised. The appraisal shall be in accord with the most recent version of the Uniform Standards of Professional Appraisal Practice and shall be subject to review and acceptance by the city manager or his designee.

E. The feepayer shall pay for the cost of the appraisal or request that the cost of the appraisal be deducted from the credit which the city manager or his designee may be providing to the feepayer, in the event that a credit is awarded.

F. After receiving the appraisal the city manager or his designee shall provide the applicant with a letter or certificate setting forth the dollar amount of the credit, the reason for the credit, the legal description of the site donated where applicable, and the legal description or other adequate description of the project or development to which the credit may be applied. The applicant must sign and date a duplicate copy of such letter or certificate indicating his/her agreement to the terms of the letter or certificate, and return such signed document to the city manager or his designee before the impact fee credit will be awarded. The failure of the applicant to sign, date, and return such document within 60 calendar days shall nullify the credit.

G. No credit shall be given for project improvements.

H. A feepayer can request that a credit for impact fees be awarded to him/her for significant past tax payments. For each request for a credit for significant past tax payments for park impact fees, the feepayer shall submit receipts and a calculation of past tax payments earmarked for or proratable to the particular system improvement for which a credit is requested. The city manager or his designee shall determine the amount of credits, if any, for significant past tax payments for parks and recreational facilities.

I. Any claim for credit must be made no later than 20 calendar days after the submission of an application for a building permit. The failure to timely file such a claim shall constitute a final bar to later request any such credit.

J. Determinations made by the city manager or his designee pursuant to this section shall be subject to the appeals procedures set forth in SMC 22.12.070. (Ord. 2011-001 § 2; Ord. 2010-008 § I-5)


22.12.060 Tax adjustments.

Pursuant to and consistent with the requirements of RCW 82.02.060, the parks study has provided adjustments for future taxes to be paid by the new development which are earmarked for or proratable to the same new parks and recreational facilities which will serve the new development. The impact fee rates in SMC 22.12.110 have been reasonably adjusted for taxes and other revenue sources which are anticipated to be available to fund parks and recreational improvements. (Ord. 2010-008 § I-6)


22.12.070 Appeals.

A. Any feepayer may pay the impact fees imposed by this division under protest in order to obtain a building permit. No appeal shall be permitted until the impact fees at issue have been paid.

B. Appeals regarding the impact fees imposed on any development activity may only be filed by the feepayer of the property where such development activity will occur.

C. The feepayer must first file a request for review regarding impact fees with the city manager or his designee, as provided herein:

1. The request shall be in writing on the form provided by the city and shall include a statement demonstrating standing to appeal, a clear description of what is being appealed, and specific data and technical information supporting the appeal;

2. The request for review by the city manager or his designee shall be filed within 14 calendar days of the feepayer’s payment of the impact fees at issue. The failure to timely file such a request shall constitute a final bar to later seek such review;

3. The fee for filing an appeal or request for review by the city manager or his designee shall be $200.00; and

4. The city manager or his designee shall issue his/her determination in writing.

D. Determinations of the city manager or his designee with respect to the applicability of the impact fees to a given development activity, the availability or value of a credit, or the city manager or his designee’s decision concerning the independent fee calculation which is authorized in SMC 22.12.120, or the fees imposed by the city manager or his designee pursuant to SMC 22.12.120, or any other determination which the city manager or his designee is authorized to make pursuant to this division, can be appealed to the hearing examiner.

E. Appeals shall be taken within 14 calendar days of the city manager or his designee’s issuance of a written determination by filing with the city manager or his designee a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof, and depositing the necessary fee, which is set forth in the existing fee schedules for appeals of such decisions. The city manager or his designee shall transmit to the office of the hearing examiner all papers constituting the record for the determination, including where appropriate the independent fee calculation.

F. The hearing examiner shall fix a time for the hearing of the appeal, give notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same as provided in the Sequim Municipal Code. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney.

G. The hearing examiner is authorized to make findings of fact regarding the applicability of the impact fees to a given development activity, the availability or amount of the credit, or the accuracy or applicability of an independent fee calculation. The decision of the hearing examiner shall be final, except as provided in this section.

H. The hearing examiner may, so long as such action is in conformance with the provisions of this division, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or may modify the determinations of the city manager or his designee with respect to the amount of the impact fees imposed or the credit awarded.

I. Unless the city council has acted in place of a hearing examiner, a decision of the examiner may be appealed to the city council within 14 days of the date of the hearing examiner’s written decision. (Ord. 2010-008 § I-7)


22.12.080 Establishment of impact fee account.

A. Impact fee receipts shall be earmarked specifically and deposited in a separate interest-bearing account.

B. There is hereby established a separate impact fee account for the fees collected pursuant to this division: the Parks Impact Fee Account. Funds withdrawn or expended from this account must be used in accordance with the provisions of SMC 22.12.100 and applicable state law. Interest earned on the fees shall be retained in the account and expended for the purposes for which the impact fees were collected.

C. On an annual basis, the finance director shall provide a report to the council on the impact fee account showing the source and amount of all moneys collected, earned, or received, and the parks and recreational improvements that were financed in whole or in part by impact fees.

D. Impact fees shall be expended or encumbered within six years of receipt, unless the council identifies in written findings extraordinary and compelling reason or reasons for the city to hold the fees beyond the six-year period. Under such circumstances, the council shall establish the period of time within which the impact fees shall be expended or encumbered. (Ord. 2010-008 § I-8)


22.12.090 Refunds.

A. If the city fails to expend or encumber the impact fees within six years of when the fees were paid or, where extraordinary or compelling reasons exist, such other time periods as established pursuant to SMC 22.12.080, the current record owner of the property, at the expiration of any such period, on which impact fees have been paid may receive a refund of such fees. In determining whether impact fees have been expended or encumbered, impact fees shall be considered expended or encumbered on a first-in, first-out basis.

B. The city shall notify potential claimants by first class mail deposited with the United States Postal Service at the last known address of such claimants. A claimant must be the owner of the property.

C. An owner seeking a refund of impact fees must submit a written request for a refund of the fees to the city manager or his designee within one year of the date the right to claim the refund arises or the date that notice is given, whichever is later.

D. Any impact fees for which no application for a refund has been made within this one-year period shall be retained by the city and expended on the appropriate parks and recreational facilities.

E. Refunds of impact fees under this section shall include any interest earned on the impact fees by the city.

F. When the city seeks to terminate any or all components of the impact fee program, all unexpended or unencumbered funds from any terminated component or components, including interest earned, shall be refunded pursuant to this section. Upon the finding that any or all fee requirements are to be terminated, the city shall place notice of such termination and the availability of refunds in a newspaper of general circulation at least two times and shall notify all potential claimants by first class mail at the last known address of the claimants. All funds available for refund shall be retained for a period of one year. At the end of one year, any remaining funds shall be retained by the city, but must be expended for the appropriate parks and recreational facilities. This notice requirement shall not apply if there are no unexpended or unencumbered balances within the account or accounts being terminated.

G. The city shall also refund to the current owner of property for which impact fees have been paid all impact fees paid, as provided for herein, including interest earned on the impact fees, when the developer does not proceed with the development activity for which the impact fees were imposed and when no impact on the city has resulted; provided, that, if the city has expended or encumbered the impact fees in good faith prior to the application for a refund, the city manager or his designee can decline to provide the refund. Any refund provided for in this subsection shall not occur during the time when the development activity has a valid development approval and is legally authorized to proceed. If, after expiration of development approval and within a period of three years, the same or subsequent owner of the property receives a new development approval with the same or substantially similar development activity, the owner can petition the city manager or his designee for an offset of any unrefunded impact fees provided for herein. The petitioner must provide valid proof of ownership, clear title and receipts of impact fees previously paid for a development of the same or substantially similar nature on the same property or some portion thereof. The city manager or his designee shall determine whether to grant an offset. Determinations of the city manager or his designee shall be in writing and shall be subject to the appeals procedures set forth in SMC 22.12.070. (Ord. 2010-008 § I-9)


22.12.100 Use of funds.

A. Pursuant to this division, impact fees:

1. Shall be used for parks and recreational facility improvements that will reasonably benefit the new development; and

2. Shall not be imposed to make up for deficiencies in parks and recreational facilities serving existing developments; and

3. Shall not be used for maintenance or operation.

C. Park impact fees may be spent for parks and recreational facility improvements, including, but not limited to, planning, land acquisition, site improvements, necessary off-site improvements, construction, engineering, architectural, permitting, financing, and administrative expenses, applicable impact fees or mitigation costs, capital equipment pertaining to park and recreational facilities, and any other expenses that can be capitalized provided the expenses relate to the parks and recreational facility improvements.

D. Impact fees may also be used to recoup parks and recreational facility improvement costs previously incurred by the city to the extent that new growth and development will be served by the previously constructed improvements or incurred costs.

E. In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments are or have been issued for the advanced provision of parks and recreational facility improvements for which impact fees may be expended, impact fees may be used to pay debt service on such bonds or similar debt instruments to the extent that the facilities or improvements provided are consistent with the requirements of this section and are used to serve the new development. (Ord. 2010-008 § I-10)


22.12.110 Park impact fee.

The park impact fee rates in this section are generated from the formula for calculating impact fees set forth in the parks study, which is incorporated herein by reference. Except as otherwise provided for independent fee calculations in SMC 22.12.120, exemptions in SMC 22.12.040, and credits in SMC 22.12.050, all new residential developments in the city will be charged the park impact fee applicable to the type of dwelling unit:

A. Single-family dwelling unit: $1,975 per dwelling unit.

B. Multifamily dwelling unit: $2,129 per dwelling unit. (Ord. 2010-008 § I-11)


22.12.120 Independent fee calculations.

A. If in the judgment of the city manager or his designee none of the fee categories or fee amounts set forth in SMC 22.12.110 accurately describe or capture the impacts of a new development on parks, the city manager or his designee may conduct independent fee calculations and the city manager or his designee may impose alternative fees on a specific development based on those calculations. If the alternative fees are less than 90 percent of the amount set forth in SMC 22.12.110, then they shall be subject to the approval of the city council. The approved alternative fees and the calculations shall be set forth in writing and shall be mailed to the feepayer.

B. If a feepayer opts not to have the impact fees determined according to SMC 22.12.110, then the feepayer shall prepare and submit to the city manager or his designee an independent fee calculation for the development activity for which a building permit is sought. The documentation submitted shall show the basis upon which the independent fee calculation was made.

C. Any feepayer submitting an independent fee calculation will be required to pay the city of Sequim a fee to cover the cost of reviewing the independent fee calculation. The fee required by the city for conducting the review of the independent fee calculation shall be $200.00, unless otherwise established by the city manager or his designee, and shall be paid by the feepayer prior to initiation of review.

D. While there is a presumption that the calculations set forth in the parks study are valid, the city manager or his designee shall consider the documentation submitted by the feepayer, but is not required to accept such documentation or analysis which the city manager or his designee reasonably deems to be inaccurate or not reliable, and may, in the alternative, require the feepayer to submit additional or different documentation for consideration. The city manager or his designee is authorized to adjust the impact fees on a case-by-case basis based on the independent fee calculation, the specific characteristics of the development, and/or principles of fairness, subject to approval of city council. The approved fees or alternative fees and the calculations shall be set forth in writing and shall be mailed to the feepayer.

E. Determinations made by the city manager or his designee pursuant to this section may be appealed to the office of the hearing examiner as set forth in SMC 22.12.070. (Ord. 2010-008 § I-12)


22.12.130 Review.*

The fee rates set forth in SMC 22.12.110 may be reviewed and adjusted by the council as it deems necessary and appropriate in conjunction with the annual update of the capital facilities plan element of the city’s comprehensive plan. The fee rates shall be adjusted 12 months after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or 12 months after the most recent review by the council. The council may determine the amount of the adjustment taking into consideration changes in costs of real property, materials and labor. The council may revise the fee rates set forth in SMC 22.12.110. If the council does not determine the amount of the adjustment, the adjustment shall be by the same amount that the Engineering News Record Construction Price Index changed for the most recent 12-month period prior to the date of the adjustment. (Ord. 2010-008 § I-13)

*Code reviser’s note: Ord. 2015-006, Section 1, keeps impact fees at their present level, providing, “The automatic adjustments of transportation and park impact fees as provided for in SMC 22.04.130 and SMC 22.12.130 respectively shall not be applied this year until further action by the City Council.”


22.12.140 Interpretation and implementation.

The city council authorizes the city manager or his designee to administratively interpret the provisions of this division as necessary to implement the intent of the city council. The city manager or his designee shall be authorized to adopt guidelines for the implementation of this division that may include a procedures guide for impact fees. (Ord. 2010-008 § I-14)


Chapter 22.16 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

Sections:

22.16.010    Existing authority unimpaired.

22.16.020    Captions.


22.16.010 Existing authority unimpaired.

Nothing in this division shall preclude the city from requiring the feepayer or the proponent of a development activity to mitigate adverse environmental impacts of a specific development pursuant to the State Environmental Policy Act, Chapter 43.21C RCW, based on the environmental documents accompanying the underlying development approval process, and/or Chapter 58.17 RCW, governing plats and subdivisions; provided, that the exercise of this authority is consistent with the provisions of Chapters 43.21C and 82.02 RCW. (Ord. 2010-008 § II-1)


22.16.020 Captions.

The chapter and section captions used in this division are for convenience only and shall not control or affect the meaning or construction of any of the provisions of this division. (Ord. 2010-008 § II-2)


Chapter 22.20 DEFERRAL OF IMPACT FEES

Sections:

22.20.010    Deferral of impact fee collection.


22.20.010 Deferral of impact fee collection.

In accordance with ESB 5923(2015), impact fees assessed for single-family detached or attached new residential construction may be deferred at the election of an applicant for impact fee deferral under the following terms and conditions:

A. For each single-family residence for which any impact fee deferral is applied for, an administrative fee set in the annual fee ordinance must simultaneously be paid to the city due to the increased burden placed on city staff for processing and monitoring such deferral.

B. A separate application must be submitted for each single-family residence being constructed. Only the first 20 applications per calendar year by each applicant for impact fee deferral are eligible for impact fee deferral under this chapter.

C. The period of deferral expires at the earliest of:

1. The time of final inspection by the city;

2. The time of issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the city;

3. The time of closing of the first transfer of the property occurring after the issuance of the applicable building permit; or 

4. Eighteen months after the building permit is issued by the city.

D. Final inspection approval, certificate of occupancy, and hookups to water and sewer will not be issued or made until payment in full of the impact fees is made. For the first transfer of the property, the impact fees shall be paid at closing if they have not been previously paid. 

E. The applicant for impact fee deferral must grant and record in favor of the city of Sequim an impact fee lien in the amount of the deferred impact fee. The lien must be in a form signed, dated and approved by the city attorney, and signed by all owners of the property and persons or entities holding any interest in the property, with all signatures acknowledged as required for a deed, and recorded among the appropriate land records of Clallam County. Proof of such recording shall be submitted to the city before a building permit may be issued. The lien must specify that it is binding on all successors in title after the recordation. The lien may specify that it is subordinate to one mortgage for the purpose of construction upon the same real property granted by the applicant for impact fee deferral. A mortgage, deed of trust or other financing mechanism shall be limited to the property upon which construction on one single-family residence will occur. A lien not paid when due shall bear interest at the statutory rate. A lien shall become due at the expiration of the deferral date.

F. If impact fees are not paid in accordance with ESB 5923(2015), the city may institute foreclosure proceedings in accordance with Chapter 61.12 RCW.

G. After full payment of impact fees, and upon written request of the person paying said fees containing the name and address of the requester together with a copy of a proposed lien release form, the city, upon approval by the city attorney, shall sign a lien release and deliver it to the person paying said fee either in person or by first class mail. (Ord. 2015-016 § 2 (Exh. B))



-----------------------------

The Sequim Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 2020-008, passed July 27, 2020.

Disclaimer: The city clerk’s office has the official version of the Sequim Municipal Code. Users should contact the city clerk’s office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited above.

City  Website: https://www.sequimwa.gov/ City  Telephone: (360) 683-4139

Code Publishing Company