


Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Chapters:

1.01    Code Adoption

1.05    General Provisions

1.10    General Penalty

1.15    Initiative and Referendum


Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION

Sections:

1.01.010    Code adopted.

1.01.020    Title, citation, reference.

1.01.030    Reference applies to amendments.

1.01.040    Amendment.

1.01.050    Reservation of prosecutions.

1.01.060    Severability.

1.01.070    Effective date.


1.01.010 Code adopted.

Pursuant to RCW 35.21.500 through 35.21.570, the Sammamish Municipal Code, which consists of the ordinances of the City that have ongoing effect and which have not expired according to their own terms, is hereby adopted. (Ord. O2003-131 § 1)


1.01.020 Title, citation, reference.

This code may be cited as the Sammamish Municipal Code or the SMC in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. Any codes or regulations adopted by reference as part of the SMC may be cited by making reference to the original code or regulation followed by the term “adopted.” For example, a King County Code section may be cited as “KCC XX.XX.XXX, adopted” and a Revised Code of Washington section may be cited as “RCW XX.XX.XXX, adopted.” (Ord. O2003-131 § 2)


1.01.030 Reference applies to amendments.

Whenever a reference is made to the Sammamish Municipal Code or to any portion thereof, that reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions thereto adopted by the City council, regardless of whether such amendments, corrections and additions have been incorporated into the text of the Sammamish Municipal Code by means of codification. (Ord. O2003-131 § 3)


1.01.040 Amendment.

This code may be amended by reference to code section without the necessity of referring to the underlying ordinance. If an ordinance amending this code is enacted with a numbering system that is inconsistent with the code numbering system, the City clerk is authorized to assign an appropriate code number and to codify the ordinance accordingly. The repeal of any code section does not revive the original text of the code section, but rather, repeal of an existing section repeals the underlying ordinance section and all of its amendments. (Ord. O2003-131 § 4)


1.01.050 Reservation of prosecutions.

The adoption of this code shall not affect any prosecution for violations of the City ordinances codified herein that were committed prior to the effective date of the adoption of the code; nor shall the adoption of the code be construed as a waiver of any license, fee, or penalty due and owing at the effective date of the code adoption; nor shall adoption affect the validity of any bond or cash deposited with the City pursuant to the terms of any ordinance codified herein; but rather, all rights and obligations pertaining under ordinances in effect prior to codification shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. O2003-131 § 5)


1.01.060 Severability.

Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or its application to any person or circumstance, be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid for any reason, or should any portion of the ordinance codified in this chapter be pre-empted by state or federal law or regulation, such decision or pre-emption shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of the ordinance codified in this chapter or its application to other persons or circumstances. (Ord. O2003-131 § 6)


1.01.070 Effective date.

The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be published in the official newspaper of the City, and shall take effect and be in full force five days after the date of publication. (Ord. O2003-131 § 7)


Chapter 1.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS

(Reserved)


Chapter 1.10 GENERAL PENALTY

Sections:

1.10.010    General penalties.

1.10.020    Separate offense.

1.10.030    Nuisance.


1.10.010 General penalties.

Unless otherwise specified by City ordinance, anyone who violates the provisions of any ordinance of the City shall be punished pursuant to the general penalty provisions set forth below:

(1) Criminal Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of any ordinance of the City is guilty of a misdemeanor. Unless otherwise provided, any person convicted of a misdemeanor under this code shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00, or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

(2) Civil Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of any ordinance of the City that is designated a civil offense or civil violation shall have committed a civil infraction. Unless otherwise provided, any person committing a civil infraction shall be assessed a monetary penalty not to exceed $250.00 for each day that the violation occurs. (Ord. O99-14 § 1)


1.10.020 Separate offense.

Every person violating any of the provisions of any ordinance of the City is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which the violation is committed, continued, or permitted by any such person. (Ord. O99-14 § 2)


1.10.030 Nuisance.

In addition to the penalties set forth in Sammamish Municipal Code (SMC) 1.10.010, all remedies provided by law for the prevention and abatement of nuisances shall apply regardless of any other remedy. (Ord. O99-14 § 3)


Chapter 1.15 INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM

Sections:

1.15.010    Purpose.

1.15.020    Ordinances not subject to initiative and referendum.

1.15.030    Initiative – Procedures.

1.15.040    Initiative – Sufficiency of the petition – Determination.

1.15.050    Initiative – City council action – Calling election.

1.15.060    Initiative – Ballot title – Ballot statement.

1.15.070    Initiative – Effective date – Recording.

1.15.080    Initiative – Appeal to court.

1.15.090    Initiative – Repeal or amendment.

1.15.100    Referendum – Procedures.

1.15.110    Referendum – Filing suspends ordinance – City council action.

1.15.120    Referendum – Effective date – Record.

1.15.130    Referendum – Other initiative provisions to apply.

1.15.140    Restriction or abandonment of powers.

1.15.150    Ordinances restricting or abandoning powers – Effective date.


1.15.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide to the qualified electors of the City of Sammamish the powers of initiative and referendum in accordance with Chapters 35.17 and 35A.11 RCW. (Ord. O2015-394 § 1)


1.15.020 Ordinances not subject to initiative and referendum.

Ordinances of the City of Sammamish which shall not be subject to the powers of initiative and referendum and which shall become effective five days following their passage and legal publication, or as otherwise provided by the general law or by applicable sections of RCW Title 35A, as now or hereafter amended, are as follows:

(1) Ordinances initiated by petition;

(2) Ordinances necessary for immediate preservation of public peace, health, and safety or for the support of City government and its existing public institutions which contain a statement of urgency and are passed by unanimous vote of the City council;

(3) Ordinances providing for local improvement districts;

(4) Ordinances appropriating money;

(5) Ordinances providing for or approving collective bargaining matters;

(6) Ordinances providing for the compensation of or working conditions of City employees;

(7) Ordinances authorizing or repealing the levy of taxes;

(8) Any other ordinance or subject matter exempted now or hereafter by state law from initiative and referendum processes; and

(9) Ordinances enacted under authority delegated exclusively to the legislative body of the City by the state. (Ord. O2015-394 § 1)


1.15.030 Initiative – Procedures.

Ordinances may be initiated by petition of electors of the City of Sammamish only in accordance with the provisions of this chapter:

(1) Recommended Filing. Persons or groups desiring to initiate an ordinance by petition are strongly encouraged to submit to the City clerk copies of the petition and proposed ordinance by initiative prior to seeking or obtaining signatures. Upon receipt of any such petitions or ordinances, the City clerk shall forward the same to the City attorney. Within 15 business days of receipt of the petition and proposed ordinance by initiative, the City attorney shall determine and report to the City council whether the proposed ordinance by petition is subject to the initiative process, and, if so, shall thereafter formulate an initiative statement, as described in subsection (2)(b) of this section, and shall transmit the initiative statement to the City clerk, City council, City manager, and the petitioner.

(2) Initiative Petition – Requirements – Form. All initiative petitions submitted to the City clerk for validation shall contain the following:

(a) Title of the Proposed Ordinance. The petition shall indicate the title of the proposed ordinance. The title shall be subject to change by the City as may be necessary to comply with state law or City code.

(b) Initiative Statement. Every petition page shall contain an initiative statement, not exceeding 100 words, phrased in the form of a question that can be answered only with an affirmative or negative response. The initiative statement may be distinct from the petitioner’s title of the measure, and shall express and give an impartial statement of the purpose of the measure.

(3) Petition Page(s). An initiative petition may include any number of pages; provided, that each page shall contain the initiative statement defined in subsection (2)(b) of this section.

(4) A copy of the proposed ordinance shall be attached to the petition and shall be made available to every person signing a petition.

(5) Signature Lines. Every petition page shall contain consecutively numbered lines for signatures and shall include space for the printed name of the person signing, his or her address, and the date of signing. Signature lines shall be in substantially the following format:

	Petitioner’s Signature	Petitioner’s Printed Name	Address	Date

	1. ________	________	________	________

	2. ________	________	________	________

	3. ________	________	________	________

(6) Warning. Every petition page shall contain the following warning directly above the signature lines:

WARNING

Any person who signs this petition with a name other than his/her true and legal name, or who knowingly signs more than one petition page, or who signs a petition when he/she is not a qualified elector of Sammamish, or who signs a petition when he/she is otherwise not qualified to sign, or who otherwise makes herein any false statement, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

(Ord. O2015-394 § 1)


1.15.040 Initiative – Sufficiency of the petition – Determination.

(1) Signatures. To be sufficient, an initiative petition submitted for validation to the City clerk must contain valid signatures of not less than 15 percent of the number of persons registered to vote at the last preceding general City election.

(2) Determination of Sufficiency. Within 10 business days, or such additional time as may reasonably be necessary, from the filing of the petition for validation, the City clerk or the City clerk’s designee shall determine the sufficiency of the signatures and shall either accept the petition and issue a certificate of sufficiency, or reject the petition for insufficiency and issue a certificate of insufficiency. For purposes of this section, the City clerk or designee shall use the registration records and returns of the preceding general City election.

(3) Basis for Determination of Sufficiency. The following bases shall apply to determinations of sufficiency:

(a) There shall be signatures of not less than 15 percent of the number of persons registered to vote in the last, preceding general City election;

(b) Variations in signatures between the petition and the voter’s permanent registration caused by a substitution of initials instead of the voter’s first or middle name, or both, shall not invalidate the signature if it is otherwise valid;

(c) Signatures, excluding the first time, of any person who has signed a petition two or more times shall be stricken; and

(d) Petitions shall also include the printed name of the person signing, his or her address, and the date signed. (Ord. O2015-394 § 1)


1.15.050 Initiative – City council action – Calling election.

(1) If the petition accompanying the proposed ordinance is determined to be sufficient by the City clerk, the City council shall, within 20 days after the City clerk’s certification of sufficiency, pass the proposed ordinance without alteration, or reject the proposed ordinance.

(2) The City council may, after rejection of any initiative measure, propose and pass an alternative ordinance dealing with the same subject; provided, that if the City council rejects any initiative measure, or fails to pass an initiative measure without alteration within 20 days of certification of sufficiency, or passes a different measure dealing with the same subject, then the initiative measure without alteration and the council’s alternative measure, if any, shall be submitted to the qualified electors of the City for approval or rejection.

(3) If the initiative and/or any alternative council measure are to be submitted to the voters, the City council shall call an election to be held pursuant to state law. (Ord. O2015-394 § 1)


1.15.060 Initiative – Ballot title – Ballot statement.

(1) When any initiative petition is determined to be sufficient by the City clerk and is to be submitted to the voters, the City clerk shall forward the initiative statement and summary to the City attorney.

(2) The City attorney shall prepare, within 10 business days of receipt of the initiative statement and summary:

(a) A ballot title to permit the voters readily to identify the proposition and distinguish it from other propositions on the ballot; and

(b) A ballot statement, not to exceed 100 words, containing the essential features of the initiative as expressed in the initiative statement and summary. The ballot statement shall accompany the ballot title on the ballot. (Ord. O2015-394 § 1)


1.15.070 Initiative – Effective date – Recording.

(1) If a majority of the number of votes cast in an election on an initiative favor the initiative, it shall become effective and shall be made a part of the record of ordinances of the City.

(2) In case the City council, after rejection of the initiative measure, has passed an alternative measure, the alternative measure shall be submitted at the same election with the initiative measure. If both the initiative and the council’s alternative measure are approved by a majority vote, and if they are conflicting in any substantive manner, then the measure receiving the highest number of affirmative votes shall thereby be adopted, and the other shall be deemed rejected. (Ord. O2015-394 § 1)


1.15.080 Initiative – Appeal to court.

If the City clerk finds the initiative petition insufficient or if the City council refuses either to pass an initiative ordinance or to order an election thereon, any aggrieved person may commence an action in the superior court against the City seeking to order an election to be held in the City for the purpose of voting upon the proposed ordinance. Any such action shall be filed with the court within 10 calendar days of such refusal by the City council or finding of insufficiency by the City clerk. (Ord. O2015-394 § 1)


1.15.090 Initiative – Repeal or amendment.

(1) Upon the adoption of an ordinance by initiative, the City clerk shall write on the margin of the record thereof “Ordinance by Petition No. _________” or “Ordinance by Vote of the People.”

(2) The City council may, by ordinance, submit to a vote of the people at any general election a proposition for the repeal or amendment of an ordinance initiated by a petition. If a majority of the votes cast upon the proposition favor it, the ordinance by petition shall be repealed or amended accordingly. Propositions for repeal or amendment of an ordinance by petition shall meet the notice, publication and voting requirement of initiatives.

(3) Upon the adoption of a proposition to repeal or amend an ordinance by petition, the City clerk shall write upon the margin of the record of the ordinance “Repealed (or Amended) by Ordinance No. ________” or “Repealed (or Amended) by Vote of the People.” (Ord. O2015-394 § 1)


1.15.100 Referendum – Procedures.

(1) A petition for referendum may be timely filed with the City clerk within 30 days from the adoption of an ordinance by the City council, petitioning the council to reconsider an ordinance which is subject to referendum, or to submit the same to a vote of the people for their approval.

(2) Referendum Petition – Requirements – Form. All referendum petitions submitted to the City clerk for validation shall contain the following:

(a) Referendum Statement. The petition for referendum shall contain a referendum statement that shall be phrased substantially in the following language:

Should City of Sammamish Ordinance No. _______ relating to _______________, enacted by the Sammamish City Council on ___________________, be repealed in its entirety? Your signature on this petition indicates your vote in favor of repeal of the attached ordinance in its entirety.

(b) A copy of the challenged ordinance in the form adopted by the City council shall be attached to each referendum petition for the information of the parties requested to sign such petition and shall be made available to every person signing a petition.

(c) Petition Pages. A referendum petition may contain any number of pages; provided, that each page contains the referendum statement described in subsection (2)(a) of this section.

(d) Signature Lines. Every petition page shall contain consecutively numbered lines for signatures, and shall include space for the printed name of the person signing, his or her address and the date of signing. Signature lines shall be in substantially the following format:

	Petitioner’s Signature	Petitioner’s Printed Name	Address	Date

	1. ________	________	________	________

	2. ________	________	________	________

	3. ________	________	________	________

(e) Warning. Every petition page shall contain the following warning directly above the signature lines:

WARNING

Any person who signs this petition with a name other than his/her true and legal name, or who knowingly signs more than one petition page, or who signs a petition when he/she is not a qualified elector of Sammamish, or who signs a petition when he/she is otherwise not qualified to sign, or who otherwise makes herein any false statement, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

(Ord. O2015-394 § 1)


1.15.110 Referendum – Filing suspends ordinance – City council action.

Upon the timely filing of a referendum petition determined to be sufficient by the City clerk, the City council shall reconsider the challenged ordinance and upon reconsideration shall defeat it in its entirety or shall submit it to a vote of the people. The operation of an ordinance timely challenged by referendum shall be suspended from the time a referendum petition is submitted for validation until the referendum petition is finally found insufficient or until the ordinance challenged has received a majority of the votes cast thereon at the election held for the purposes of the referendum. (Ord. O2015-394 § 1)


1.15.120 Referendum – Effective date – Record.

If a majority of the number of votes cast thereon oppose the ordinance subject to the referendum, such ordinance shall be deemed repealed immediately. (Ord. O2015-394 § 1)


1.15.130 Referendum – Other initiative provisions to apply.

The following provisions of this chapter relating to initiatives shall also apply to every referendum:

(1) Sufficiency of the petition (SMC 1.15.040);

(2) Ballot title and ballot statement (SMC 1.15.060); and

(3) Appeal to court (SMC 1.15.080). (Ord. O2015-394 § 1)


1.15.140 Restriction or abandonment of powers.

The exercise of the initiative and referendum powers governed by this chapter may be restricted or abandoned upon passage of a resolution by the City council declaring the council’s intent to put a vote to the people calling for restriction or abandonment of the initiative and referendum powers, or by the filing of a petition meeting the sufficiency requirements of SMC 1.15.040, and seeking the abandonment or restriction of the initiative and referendum powers. The council resolution or the petition shall be submitted to the voters at the next general municipal election if one is to be held within 180 days from the date of filing of the petition or passage of the resolution, or at a special election to be called for that purpose not less than 90 days nor more than 180 days after the passage of the resolution or the certification of sufficiency of the petition. The ballot title and ballot statement of the proposition shall be prepared by the City attorney as provided in SMC 1.15.060. (Ord. O2015-394 § 1)


1.15.150 Ordinances restricting or abandoning powers – Effective date.

If a majority of votes cast at the election favor restriction or abandonment, such powers of initiative or referendum shall be deemed so restricted or abandoned. (Ord. O2015-394 § 1)


Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL

Chapters:

2.05    City Council

2.10    City Manager

2.15    City Officials’ Oaths and Bonds

2.20    Legal Defense of City Employees, Officials, and Volunteers

2.25    Repealed

2.30    Parks and Recreation Commission

2.35    City Clerk

2.40    City Office Hours

2.45    Repealed

2.50    Contract Approval

2.55    Rules of City Departments

2.60    Planning Commission

2.65    Arts Commission

2.70    Emergency Management Organization

2.75    Human Services Commission


Chapter 2.05 CITY COUNCIL

Sections:

2.05.010    Salaries.


2.05.010 Salaries.

(1) Salary Levels Established. Effective January 1, 2020, each councilmember shall be paid a monthly salary equal to the sum of $1,167 per month plus cost of living adjustments applied on January 1, 2018; January 1, 2019; and January 1, 2020. Each such cost of living adjustment shall be calculated by using an average of the preceding four-year CPIU, for the period June to June, for the Seattle-Tacoma-Bremerton (Seattle-Tacoma-Bellevue beginning with January 1, 2019) areas as published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (“COLA”). Effective January 1, 2020, the mayor shall be paid a monthly salary equal to $1,304 plus COLAs calculated in the same manner as calculated for councilmembers under this subsection. 

(2) Annual Salary Adjustments. Effective January 1, 2021, and on each succeeding January 1st thereafter, all councilmembers and the mayor shall receive a COLA adjustment to their salaries in an amount as calculated for a COLA in subsection (1) of this section. (Ord. O2017-449 §§ 2, 3; Ord. O99-16 § 1)


Chapter 2.10 CITY MANAGER

Sections:

2.10.010    Offices established – Appointment.

2.10.020    Duties.

2.10.030    Creation of departments, offices, and positions.

2.10.040    Auditing officer – Appointment.

2.10.050    Auditing officer – Temporary services.


2.10.010 Offices established – Appointment.

Pursuant to RCW 35A.13.010 and 35A.13.090, there is established for the City of Sammamish the office of City manager. The City council shall appoint the City manager in accordance with Chapter 35A.13 RCW. (Ord. O99-07 § 1)


2.10.020 Duties.

The City manager shall be the chief executive officer and head of the administrative branch of the City. The City manager shall be responsible to the City council for the proper administration of all affairs of the City. The City manager shall have all the powers and shall perform all of the duties specified by Chapter 35A.13 RCW, together with any other duties that may be conferred upon the City manager by ordinance or statute. (Ord. O99-07 § 2)


2.10.030 Creation of departments, offices, and positions.

The City manager is authorized to create, eliminate, consolidate, and modify such departments, offices, and positions as the manager may find necessary or advisable for the efficient operations of the City and to determine the powers and duties of each department, office, and position. The City manager may delegate to any officer or position any duties required or authorized to be performed by the City manager. (Ord. O99-07 § 3)


2.10.040 Auditing officer – Appointment.

The City council hereby appoints the City manager or his or her designee as auditing officer. (Ord. O99-10 § 1)


2.10.050 Auditing officer – Temporary services.

In the event municipal incorporation services are provided by a private entity through a contract with the City, then the auditing officer shall be the mayor. The mayor may appoint a designee in the event the mayor will be unable to perform this duty because of absence from the City or incapacity. (Ord. O99-10 § 2)


Chapter 2.15 CITY OFFICIALS’ OATHS AND BONDS

Sections:

2.15.010    Oath required.

2.15.020    Bond required.


2.15.010 Oath required.

Any City officer, before entering upon the performance of the duties of office, shall be required to take an oath or affirmation for the faithful performance of his or her duties. The oath or affirmation shall be filed with the King County department of records and elections. (Ord. O99-06 § 1)


2.15.020 Bond required.

Prior to entering upon the performance of duties, the City manager, the City finance director, and the City clerk shall be required to furnish an official bond, to be renewed annually, conditioned on the honest and faithful performance of their official duties. The premium on the bond(s) shall be paid by the City. The amount of the bond(s) shall be:

(1) City manager, $50,000;

(2) City finance director, $50,000;

(3) City clerk, $10,000. (Ord. O99-06 § 2)


Chapter 2.20 LEGAL DEFENSE OF CITY EMPLOYEES, OFFICIALS, AND VOLUNTEERS

Sections:

2.20.010    Indemnification of employees, officials, and volunteers.

2.20.020    Defense provision – Failure to cooperate.

2.20.030    No duty to indemnify – Conditions.

2.20.040    Duty to indemnify – Common law.


2.20.010 Indemnification of employees, officials, and volunteers.

The City shall indemnify, hold harmless, and defend a City employee, elected official, or volunteer for any liability that may arise from acts or omissions committed by the employee, volunteer, or elected official where said acts or omissions were made in good faith either while performing duties as an elected official or during the course of and within the scope of City employment or volunteer activity for the City. (Ord. O99-19 § 1)


2.20.020 Defense provision – Failure to cooperate.

If the City determines that it will provide a defense for the affected City employee, elected official, or volunteer, then the affected employee, elected official, or volunteer must fully cooperate with the City in preparing a defense and trying the case should it go to trial. If the City employee, elected official, or volunteer fails to cooperate, then the City may refuse to provide defense and indemnity. (Ord. O99-19 § 2)


2.20.030 No duty to indemnify – Conditions.

The City shall have no duty to indemnify, hold harmless, or defend a City employee, elected official, or volunteer affected with regards to the following:

(1) Nonmonetary orders that are entered against the employee, elected official, or volunteer;

(2) Consequences of the lawsuit that occur prior to the time the employee, elected official, or volunteer notifies the City attorney about the claim;

(3) Any criminal complaint;

(4) Any intentional tort or for any conduct that is willful or wanton; provided, however, if the City employee, elected official, or volunteer denies that he or she has committed a willful, wanton, or intentional wrongful act, then the City shall provide the defense but shall have no duty to indemnify the employee, elected official, or volunteer if any judgment is entered against him or her for a willful, wanton, or intentional wrongful act; provided further, if the trier of fact finds that the employee, elected official, or volunteer has committed a willful, wanton, or intentional wrongful act, then he or she shall be required to reimburse the City for defense costs, including attorney fees, incurred in defending the employee, elected official, or volunteer in said lawsuit. The City shall require the employee to sign an agreement indicating that he or she will reimburse the City for defense costs, including attorney fees, should the trier of fact determine the employee committed a willful, wanton, or intentional wrongful act. This document shall be signed before the City is obligated to provide a defense; and

(5) Provided, however, the City attorney shall defend an elective City official in a judicial hearing to determine the sufficiency of a recall charge as provided in RCW 29.82.023 if the official requests such defense. Said defense by the City attorney shall include the cost of appealing the decision rendered by the superior court concerning the sufficiency of the recall charge if the City attorney determines there is legal merit for an appeal and the official requests such an appeal. (Ord. O99-19 § 3)


2.20.040 Duty to indemnify – Common law.

The City’s duty to indemnify, hold harmless, and defend is recognized as a common law duty. (Ord. O99-19 § 4)


Chapter 2.25 COMPENSATION PLAN

(Repealed by Ord. O2004-144)


Chapter 2.30 PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION

Sections:

2.30.010    Created.

2.30.020    Membership.

2.30.030    Meetings.

2.30.040    Duties and responsibilities.

2.30.050    Reporting.


2.30.010 Created.

There is hereby created a parks and recreation commission, consisting of nine members, to provide guidance and direction in meeting the parks and recreational needs of the City by advising the City council and staff on matters relating to planning, acquisition, development, and operation of park facilities and recreational programs within the City. (Ord. O99-37 § 1)


2.30.020 Membership.

(1) Number of Members.

(a) The parks and recreation commission shall consist of nine voting members and three nonvoting alternate members. At the discretion of the chair, a nonvoting member(s) may be designated a voting member if there are voting members absent.

(b) The current terms for all voting positions on the commission shall be staggered as shown in Attachment A.

(c) Following the completion of each new term established by subsection (1)(b) of this section, the term for each voting position shall thereafter be four years and shall commence on February 1st. The term for each nonvoting position shall thereafter be one year and shall commence on February 1st.

(2) Appointment. Members of the parks and recreation commission shall be selected from residents living within the City limits. Up to one exception to this rule may be made, at the discretion of the City council, in instances where an appointee brings a special interest or talent to the commission. Park and recreation commission members shall be selected without respect to political affiliation and shall serve without compensation. Parks and recreation commission members shall be subject to confirmation by the City council.

(3) Removal. Members of the parks and recreation commission may be removed by a majority vote of the entire City council for neglect of duty, conflict of interest, malfeasance in office or other just cause, or for unexcused absence for more than three consecutive regular meetings. The decision of the City council shall be final and there shall be no appeal. 

(4) Vacancies. Vacancies, occurring other than through the expiration of term, shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as for appointments as provided by this chapter.


[IMAGE]


(Ord. O2015-388 § 1; Ord. O2011-311 § 1; Ord. O2009-267 § 1; Ord. O2002-101 § 1; Ord. O2001-90 § 1; Ord. O2001-88 § 1; Ord. O99-37 § 2)


2.30.030 Meetings.

(1) Election of Officers. The parks and recreation commission shall elect from among its members a chairperson, who shall preside at all meetings, a vice chairperson, who shall preside in the absence of the chairperson, and a secretary, who shall be responsible for maintaining the official minutes and other records of the parks and recreation commission. The chairperson, vice chairperson, and secretary shall be elected annually. A majority of the parks and recreation commission members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business and a majority vote of those present shall be necessary to carry any motion.

(2) Rules and Regulations. The parks and recreation commission shall adopt such rules and regulations as are necessary for the conduct of its business.

(3) Meeting Schedule. The parks and recreation commission shall provide a regular meeting schedule, including time, place and frequency of meetings as necessary, but no less frequent than once a month. The commission may, from time to time, provide for special meetings in accordance with Chapter 42.30 RCW. All meetings shall be open to the public, in accordance with Chapter 42.30 RCW, the Open Public Meetings Act.

(4) Staffing. Staff provided to the commission shall be advisory.

(5) Documentation. The commission shall adopt such procedures to insure minutes of the meeting are recorded and a monthly summary of minutes of meetings are recorded along with all decisions. (Ord. O99-37 § 3)


2.30.040 Duties and responsibilities.

The parks and recreation commission shall be an advisory board to the City council, responsible for providing guidance and direction concerning the following matters:

(1) Comprehensive park planning;

(2) Acquisition of land and/or facilities;

(3) Development, design and operation of parks and recreation programming and facilities;

(4) Use fees and procedures for collecting fees;

(5) Park, playfield, and facility design;

(6) Capital improvements planning;

(7) Regulations and restrictions governing the hours of park and facilities use;

(8) Concessions;

(9) Contracts, interlocal agreements, and lease agreements regarding parks and recreation activities;

(10) Proposed annual budget for the acquisition, development, and operation of parks and recreation facilities and programs;

(11) All matters as may, from time to time, be referred to the parks and recreation commission by the City council or the City manager. (Ord. O99-37 § 4)


2.30.050 Reporting.

The commission shall provide a written report to the City council at least once each quarter on progress made on established work plans of the commission. The commission shall report at other times to the City council such recommendations, events, and activities as necessary or directed by the City council to carry out the duties and responsibilities established by this chapter. (Ord. O99-37 § 5)


Chapter 2.35 CITY CLERK

Sections:

2.35.010    Appointed as agent.

2.35.020    Recording with auditor.


2.35.010 Appointed as agent. 

The City clerk is hereby appointed to be the City agent responsible to receive claims for damages made under Chapter 4.96 RCW. Other than vacation, sick leave, and other temporary absences, the City clerk shall be available to receive claims for damages during normal City Hall business hours at Sammamish City Hall, 486 228th Avenue NE, Sammamish, Washington 98074-7209. (Ord. O2001-91 § 1)


2.35.020 Recording with auditor. 

The City clerk is requested to record the ordinance codified in this chapter with the King County auditor. (Ord. O2001-91 § 2)


Chapter 2.40 CITY OFFICE HOURS

Sections:

2.40.010    Hours of operation.


2.40.010 Hours of operation.

The hours of operation of City offices will be from 8:30 a.m. through 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday; provided, that the City manager may alter the hours of operation of City offices on a temporary basis, as the City manager deems necessary for the efficient operation of the City. (Ord. O2000-47 § 1; Ord. O99-18 § 1)


Chapter 2.45 PUBLIC RECORDS DISCLOSURE

(Repealed by Ord. O2018-463)


Chapter 2.50 CONTRACT APPROVAL

Sections:

2.50.010    Contract approval authorization.


2.50.010 Contract approval authorization.

The following procedure is hereby established for the approval of certain contracts and granting the City manager authority with respect to such contracts:

(1) The City council authorizes the City manager to enter into and execute on behalf of the City the following contracts without individual approval of each contract by the City council, so long as the contract is consistent with the approved annual budget for the City, and the City’s liability under the contract does not exceed available fund balances:

(a) Contracts for purchase of goods, supplies, materials, or equipment involving a cost or fee (including sales tax) of less than $50,000.

(b) Professional service contracts, including contracts for architectural, engineering, legal, and consulting services involving a cost or fee of less than $50,000.

(c) Maintenance contracts involving a cost or fee (including sales tax) of less than $50,000 per year.

(d) Public works projects involving a cost or fee of less than $65,000 for projects involving multiple trades and $40,000 for projects involving a single trade or such limits as may otherwise be established by RCW 35.23.352 as now in effect or hereafter amended.

(e) Settlement agreements involving a cost or fee of less than $50,000.

(f) Retention of legal counsel and expert consultants, involving claims or suits in which the City is a party.

(g) Other routine agreements where no expenditure is involved, or the cost, expenditure, or fee (including sales tax) does not exceed $50,000.

(h) Lease agreements for materials, supplies, and equipment where the expenditure or fee does not exceed $50,000 per year.

(i) Sale of unneeded surplus personal property with an estimated cumulative value of $50,000 or less, which has been declared surplus personal property by the City may be disposed of by the City manager in accordance with state law and informal procedures that reflect the best interest of the City.

(j) Contracts that carry out or implement a provision of the Sammamish Municipal Code or established City policy, e.g., maintenance or performance bonds for plat improvements.

(k) Emergency Contracts. “Emergency” means a set of unforeseen circumstances that either:

(i) Presents a real, immediate threat to the proper performance of essential functions; or

(ii) May result in material loss or damage to property, bodily injury, or loss of life if immediate action is not taken; or

(iii) For public works projects, may result in a substantial loss to the City if the contract is not immediately entered into.

(l) Employment and Personnel Matters. Unless otherwise provided by statute, ordinance, or resolution, e.g., salaries and compensation are subject to City resolution.

(m) Contracts to accept real property conveyances and other real property rights as set forth below, which may include the cost of required site work, approved by the City council; provided, the funds to purchase the easements or rights-of-way have been budgeted for that purpose and the purchase price of the given easement or right-of-way, excluding the cost of the required site work, is within 10 percent of its appraised value and the cost of any individual conveyance does not exceed $50,000:

(i) Utility easements;

(ii) Easements and right-of-way dedications associated with an administrative development approval;

(iii) Trail and nonmotorized easements;

(iv) Construction easements for City projects;

(v) Ingress and egress easements for access and for maintenance of streams and stormwater management and other facilities;

(vi) Easements for discharge and/or conveyance of stormwater, and for installation of stormwater facilities;

(vii) Right-of-way dedications for capital projects and operations or maintenance needs; and

(viii) Conservation easements resulting from a transfer of development rights (TDR) program approved by the City council.

(ix) Other property rights transfers of a similar character and nature.

(2) The breaking down of any purchase or contract into units or phases for the purpose of avoiding the maximum dollar amount is prohibited. The amount of a contract includes all amendments.

(3) The City manager may present any contract to the City council for prior approval, even if the contract is allowed to be approved without prior City council approval.

(4) All interlocal agreements shall be presented to the City council for prior approval.

(5) The City manager may promptly, within 10 days, provide to the City council a copy (or summary) of any contract (or amendment) that has not received prior approval by the City council.

(6) “Contract” means any agreement creating a legal relationship between the City and another person or entity, or any amendment thereto. (Ord. O2017-434 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-145 § 1; Ord. O2001-76 § 1; Ord. O2000-50 § 1)


Chapter 2.55 RULES OF CITY DEPARTMENTS

Sections:

2.55.010    Chapter intent.

2.55.020    Definitions.

2.55.025    Application.

2.55.030    Statements filed with City clerk.

2.55.040    Index of department records, reports, and manuals required.

2.55.050    Information exempt from public inspection.

2.55.060    Rules change notice filing.

2.55.070    Emergency rules or amendments.

2.55.080    Effective date of rules.


2.55.010 Chapter intent.

Within the City of Sammamish government, the rulemaking process shall consist of the establishment of formal procedures through which ordinances adopted by the City council and implemented by the City manager are translated into sets of specific requirements to be carried out and enforced by City departments. It is the intent of the City council to adopt a policy with regard to rulemaking by departments of City government that will be consistent with the spirit and law of the “Public Disclosure Act” (Chapter 42.17 RCW) specifically those sections pertaining to public records. It is the further intent of the council that rules adopted by City government shall be consistent with the “Open Public Meetings Act” (Chapter 42.30 RCW). Finally, it is the intent of the council that rules shall be adopted by City government in such a manner as to promote efficiency of government and also afford citizens fair notice and due process. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


2.55.020 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter:

(1) “Department” means any City administrative office, executive department, officer, or other organizational unit of the City authorized by law to make rules or to adjudicate contested cases, except those in the legislative branch.

(2) “Contested case” means a proceeding before a department in which an opportunity for a hearing before such department is required by law or constitutional right prior or subsequent to the determination by the department of the legal rights, duties or privileges of specific parties. Contested cases shall also include cases in which the granting of an application is contested by a person having standing to contest under the law or department rules.

(3) “Penalty” means a punishment established by law or ordinance imposed as a consequence of failing to abide by or comply with lawful orders, rules or regulations. A penalty may be in the form of a sum of money, imprisonment, loss of privilege or status, or administrative sanction appropriate to the nature of the offense.

(4) “Rule” means any department order, directive or regulation of general applicability:

(a) The violation of which subjects a person outside City employment to a penalty;

(b) Which subjects a person outside of City employment to the payment of a fee;

(c) Which establishes, alters, or revokes any procedure, practice, or requirement relating to department hearings; 

(d) Which establishes, alters, or revokes any qualifications or standards for the issuance, suspension, or revocation of licenses to pursue any commercial activity, trade, or profession. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


2.55.025 Application.

(1) In keeping with the intent of this chapter, the policy promulgated herein shall apply only to rules involving matters other than the internal management of City departments.

(2) The following shall not apply to rules, penalties, or fees set pursuant to state law. Rules shall apply to the implementation of policy established by ordinance or state law. Any rule that is in conflict with such a policy shall be null and void. Penalties shall be established only by ordinance. Fees and the amount of fees shall be authorized as set forth in the policies and procedures established in the City code and by resolution. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


2.55.030 Statements filed with City clerk.

(1) Each department shall adopt rules, as defined in SMC 2.55.020, and shall file such rules with the City clerk.

(2) In addition, each department shall file with the City clerk and shall prominently display and make available for inspection and copying at the central office of such department, for guidance of the public:

(a) Descriptions of its central and field organization and the established places at which the employees from whom, and the methods whereby, the public may obtain information, make submittals or requests, or obtain copies of department decisions;

(b) Statements of the general course and method by which its operations are channeled and determined, including the nature and requirements of all formal and informal procedures available;

(c) Rules of procedure;

(d) Substantive rules of general applicability adopted as authorized by law, statements of general policy, or interpretations of general applicability formulated and adopted by the department; 

(e) Each amendment, revision, or repeal of any of the foregoing.

(3) Except to the extent that a person has actual and timely notice of the terms thereof, a person may not in any manner be required to resort to, or be adversely affected by, a matter required to be published or displayed and not so published or displayed.

(4) Rules adopted by departments and prepared for filing, distribution, and display shall as a minimum comply with the following format requirements:

(a) Rules shall be reproduced on eight-and-one‑half-inch by 11-inch white paper.

(b) Each set of rules shall contain a cover sheet on which shall be displayed in capitalized letters the title of the department issuing the rules, the subject or title of the rules, and the date the rules become effective.

(c) There shall be displayed on the top of each subsequent page the title of the issuing department and the effective date of the rules.

(d) Reference shall be made, either in a foreword to the rules or within the rules themselves, to the law or ordinance upon which the rules are based.

(5) Changes to rules shall follow the same format as used in preparing the initial issue. Each change shall be sequentially numbered. All changes shall be prepared as replacements or insert pages, and shall include an insertion guide providing instructions for the addition or deletion of affected pages. (Ord. O99-29 § 1) 


2.55.040 Index of department records, reports, and manuals required.

(1) Each department shall maintain and make available for public inspection and copying a current index providing identifying information as to the following records issued, adopted, or promulgated after September 1, 1999:

(a) Final opinions, including concurring and dissenting opinions, as well as orders, made in the adjudication of cases;

(b) Those statements of policy and interpretations of policy, statute, and the constitution that have been adopted by the department;

(c) Administrative staff manuals and instructions to staff that affect a member of the public;

(d) Planning policies and goals, and interim and final planning decisions;

(e) Factual staff reports and studies, factual consultant’s reports and studies, scientific reports and studies, and any other factual information derived from tests, studies, reports, or surveys, whether conducted by public employees or others; and

(f) Correspondence, and materials referred to therein, by and with the department relating to any regulatory, supervisory, or enforcement responsibilities of the department whereby the department determines, opines upon, or is asked to determine or opine upon the rights of the state, the public, a subdivision of state government, or of any private party.

(2) A department need not maintain such an index if to do so would be unduly burdensome, but it shall in that event:

(a) Issue and publish a formal order specifying the reasons why and the extent to which compliance would unduly burden or interfere with department operations; and

(b) Make available for public inspection and copying all indexes maintained for department use. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


2.55.050 Information exempt from public inspection. 

(1) The following shall be exempt from public inspection and copying:

(a) Personal information in any files;

(b) Personal information in files maintained for employees, appointees, or elected officials of any public agency to the extent that disclosure would violate their right to privacy;

(c) Information required of any taxpayer in connection with the assessment or collection of any tax if the disclosure of the information to other persons would violate the taxpayer’s right to privacy or would result in unfair competitive disadvantage to such taxpayer;

(d) Specific intelligence information and specific investigative files compiled by investigative, law enforcement, and penology departments vested with the responsibility to discipline members of any profession, the nondisclosure of which is essential to effective law enforcement or for the protection of any person’s right to privacy;

(e) Information revealing the identity of persons who file complaints with investigative, law enforcement, or penology departments, except as the complainant may authorize;

(f) Test questions, scoring keys, and other examination data used to administer a license, employment, or academic examination;

(g) Except as provided by Chapter 8.26 RCW, the contents of real estate appraisals, made for or by any agency relative to the acquisition of property, until the project is abandoned or until such time as all of the property has been acquired, but in no event shall disclosure be denied for more than three years after the appraisal;

(h) Valuable formulae, designs, drawings, and research data obtained by any department within five years of the request for disclosure when disclosure would produce private gain and public loss;

(i) Preliminary drafts, notes, recommendations, and memorandums in which opinions are expressed or policies formulated or recommended except that a specific record shall not be exempt when publicly cited by the City in connection with any City action;

(j) Records that are relevant to a controversy to which the City is a party but which records would not be available to another party under the rules or pretrial discovery for causes pending in the superior courts.

(2) The exemptions of this section shall be inapplicable to the extent that information, the disclosure of which would violate personal privacy or vital governmental interests, can be deleted from the specific records sought. No exemption shall be construed to permit the nondisclosure of statistical information not descriptive of any readily identifiable person or persons. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


2.55.060 Rules change notice filing.

(1) Prior to the adoption, amendment or repeal of any rule, each department shall give at least 20 days’ notice of its intended action by filing the notice with the City clerk, mailing the notice to all persons or agencies who have made timely request of the department for advance notice of its rulemaking proceedings on a specific topic, and giving public notice by one publication in the official newspaper of the City of Sammamish. Such notice shall include:

(a) Reference to the authority under which the rule is proposed;

(b) A statement of either the terms or substance of the proposed rule or a description of the subjects and issues involved; and

(c) The time when, the place where, and the manner in which interested persons may present their views thereon.

(2) No rule hereafter adopted is valid unless adopted in substantial compliance with this section, or, if an emergency rule designated as such, adopted in substantial compliance with SMC 2.55.070, as now or hereafter amended. In any proceeding a rule cannot be contested on the ground of noncompliance with the procedural requirements of this section, or of SMC 2.55.070, as now or hereafter amended, after two years have elapsed from the effective date of the rule. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


2.55.070 Emergency rules or amendments. 

If the department finds that immediate adoption or amendment of a rule is necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety, or general welfare, and that observance of the requirements of notice and opportunity to present views on the proposed action would be contrary to the public interest, the department may dispense with such requirements and adopt the rule or amendment as an emergency rule or amendment. The department’s finding and a brief statement of the reasons for its finding shall be incorporated in the emergency rule or amendment as filed with the City clerk. An emergency rule or amendment shall not remain in effect for longer than 90 days. This section does not relieve any department from compliance with any law requiring that its rules be approved by designated persons or bodies before they become effective. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


2.55.080 Effective date of rules.

(1) Emergency rules adopted under SMC 2.55.070 shall become effective upon filing with the City clerk. All other rules hereafter adopted shall become effective upon the expiration of 30 days after the date of filing, unless a later date is required by statute or specified in the rule.

(2) The City clerk shall, as soon as practicable after the effective date of this chapter, compile and index all rules adopted by each department. 

(3) To continue effective, all rules adopted prior to the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter must be filed with the City clerk within 60 days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


Chapter 2.60 PLANNING COMMISSION

Sections:

2.60.010    Establishment of planning commission. 

2.60.020    Membership. 

2.60.030    Bylaws and procedures.

2.60.040    Duties and responsibilities. 

2.60.050    Comprehensive plan responsibilities.


2.60.010 Establishment of planning commission. 

The City council hereby establishes the City of Sammamish planning commission to serve in an advisory capacity to the City council in order to carry out the duties and responsibilities described herein. (Ord. O2003-122 § 1)


2.60.020 Membership. 

(1) Number of Members.

(a) The planning commission shall consist of seven members.

(b) The current terms for all positions on the commission shall be staggered as shown in Attachment B.

(c) Following the completion of each new term established by subsection (1)(b) of this section, the term for each position shall thereafter be four years and shall commence on February 1st.

(d) Implementation. The City council, prior to the final council meeting of 2007, shall assign a new term for each planning commission member in accordance with the time limits established by subsection (b) of this section and shall designate each position by a number, one through seven.

(2) Appointment. Each councilmember shall nominate one initial member of the planning commission who shall be subject to confirmation by the City council. Members of the planning commission must reside within the City limits of the City of Sammamish. Planning commission members shall be selected without respect to political affiliation and shall serve without compensation. Planning commission members shall be subject to confirmation by the City council. 

(3) Term Limit. No person shall serve more than two consecutive terms, provided a person appointed to fill an unexpired term of less than two years shall be eligible to serve two successive four-year terms in addition to the unexpired term; and provided further, a person who is ineligible to serve for having served two consecutive terms may again serve after two years have elapsed from the end of the second such term.

(4) Removal. The planning commission chairperson, or acting chairperson, shall report inadequate performance of duties of a member to the City council. Members may be removed, after a hearing, by a majority vote of the entire council for reasons including inefficiency, neglect of duty, four or more consecutive unexcused absences, conflict of interest, or malfeasance in office. Notice of the charge and of the hearing shall be given by mail directed to the residence of the member at least 10 days before the date of the council hearing.


[IMAGE]


(Ord. O2011-311 § 2; Ord. O2007-220 §§ 1, 2; Ord. O2005-179 § 1; Ord. O2003-122 § 2)


2.60.030 Bylaws and procedures.

(1) The planning commission shall elect from among its members a chair who shall preside at all meetings and a vice chair who shall preside in the absence of the chair. A majority of the planning commission members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business and a majority vote of members present shall be necessary to carry any motion. The commission may adopt such other bylaws and procedures as are necessary for the conduct of its business.

(2) Meeting Schedule. The planning commission shall establish a regular meeting schedule, including time, place, and frequency of meetings as necessary, but no less frequent than once a month. The commission may, from time to time, provide for special meetings in accordance with Chapter 42.30 RCW. All meetings shall be open to the public, in accordance with Chapter 42.30 RCW, the Open Public Meetings Act.

(3) Staffing. Staff provided to the commission shall be advisory. 

(4) Documentation. The commission shall adopt procedures to insure minutes of the meetings are recorded and open to the public. (Ord. O2003-122 § 3)


2.60.040 Duties and responsibilities. 

(1) The planning commission shall periodically review the comprehensive plan of the City including any subarea plans that have been considered, and other planning documents, to determine if the City’s plans, goals, policies, land use ordinances, and regulations are promoting orderly and coordinated development within the City. The commission shall make recommendations concerning these matters to the City council.

(2) The planning commission shall review and make recommendations to the City council relating to the City’s land use ordinances and regulations.

(3) The planning commission shall maintain liaison with the planning agencies of other eastside municipalities and regional planning agencies.

(4) The planning commission may hold public hearings in the exercise of its duties and responsibilities as it deems necessary.

(5) The planning commission shall have such other duties and powers as may be conferred upon the commission by City ordinances or as directed by council resolution.

(6) The planning commission shall provide at least monthly communications to the City council highlighting major activities, future work plans, any changes in work plans and any policy direction requested. (Ord. O2003-122 § 4)


2.60.050 Comprehensive plan responsibilities.

The planning commission is charged with the responsibility of monitoring the development of the City in relation to the comprehensive plan. Where development or absence of development indicates a condition, a problem, a new element of expansion, unforeseen and not anticipated by the plan, the commission shall notify the City council and, at the direction of a majority of the City council, shall study the subject; and if the commission determines that an amendment, refinement, or clarification of the plan is advisable, a public hearing shall be held, with notice of the time, place, and subject and published in the manner provided by law. Following the hearing the commission may, at a regular meeting, recommend an amendment of the plan to the council. (Ord. O2003-122 § 5)


Chapter 2.65 ARTS COMMISSION

Sections:

2.65.010    Commission established – Membership.

2.65.020    Rules of procedure.

2.65.030    Authority of commission.

2.65.040    Meetings and staff services.


2.65.010 Commission established – Membership.

(1) The Sammamish arts commission, consisting of nine voting members and three nonvoting members, appointed and confirmed by a majority vote of the members of the City council, is established. The term of office for voting members shall be four years. The term of office for nonvoting members shall be one year. Commission voting members shall be selected for staggered terms as shown in Attachment C. All subsequent appointments of voting members shall be for four years, or for the durations of an unexpired term in the case of an appointment to a vacancy. All commission members’ terms shall expire on January 31st and all successive terms shall commence on February 1st. At the discretion of the chair, a nonvoting member(s) may be designated a voting member if there are commissioners absent.

(2) Commission members shall be appointed upon the basis of demonstrated interest in and knowledge and support of the arts. Members shall serve without salary or other compensations; provided, that members shall be reimbursed for necessary expenses actually incurred with prior administrative approval.

(3) Prior to filling each vacancy in the membership of the commission, public notice of available positions shall be provided to the news media at least two weeks in advance of appointment.


[IMAGE]


(Ord. O2015-388 § 1; Ord. O2011-311 § 3; Ord. O2008-233 § 2; Ord. O2007-216 §§ 1, 2; Ord. O2003-128 § 1)


2.65.020 Rules of procedure.

The commission shall adopt procedural rules governing the transaction of its business. The rules shall include provisions for the date, time and place of regular meeting of the commission. Provisions shall be made for maintaining minutes of commission meetings and records of all commission reports, conclusions and recommendations. The rules of procedure shall provide for the election of commissions officers, which shall include a chairperson and vice chairperson who shall serve for at least one year. The rules of the commission shall provide that all commission meetings shall be open to the public and that notice of meetings shall comply with the Washington Open Public Meetings Act, to the extent proceedings of the commission are governed by such Act. The procedures shall address receipt and processing of citizen proposals and requests. (Ord. O2003-128 § 2)


2.65.030 Authority of commission.

The arts commission is authorized to take the following actions: 

(1) Subject to City council approval, to encourage, conduct, sponsor or cosponsor public programs to further the development and public awareness of, and interest in, the fine and performing arts;

(2) To provide recommendations to the City council in connection with cultural and artistic endeavors and projects in which the City becomes involved and to act as a representative of the community in such matters;

(3) To encourage donations, grants and other support to further expand the arts and cultural services and programs available to the citizens of Sammamish and members of the Sammamish community;

(4) To take such other actions as the City council may direct from time to time. (Ord. O2003-128 § 3)


2.65.040 Meetings and staff services.

(1) The arts commission shall meet regularly at least once per month at a date, time and place to be established by the commission. 

(2) The City manager’s office shall be responsible for providing administrative and staff services for the commission.

(3) The commission shall make a report to the City council regarding its goals, activities and plans at least annually. (Ord. O2003-128 § 4)


Chapter 2.70 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION

Sections:

2.70.010    Purpose.

2.70.020    Definitions.

2.70.030    Emergency management organization.

2.70.040    Comprehensive emergency management plan.

2.70.050    City manager – Disaster and emergency powers.

2.70.060    City manager – Duties and powers as director of emergency management.

2.70.070    National Incident Management System.

2.70.080    Emergency management coordinating committee.

2.70.090    Severability.

2.70.100    Liability.


2.70.010 Purpose. 

The purpose of this chapter is to create an emergency management organization, which will carry out emergency management functions and provide for the preparation and implementation of emergency management plans to prevent, mitigate, prepare for, respond to and recover from an emergency or disaster. Further, this chapter provides for coordination of the emergency management and disaster functions between the City and other public agencies, affected private persons, corporations and organizations. (Ord. O2017-433 § 4 (Att. A))


2.70.020 Definitions. 

For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:

(1) “City” means the City of Sammamish, Washington.

(2) “Emergency” and “disaster” shall mean an event or set of circumstances which:

(a) Demands immediate action to preserve public health; protect life, property, or natural resources; or provide relief to any stricken community overtaken by such occurrences; or

(b) Has been proclaimed by the Governor as a state of emergency pursuant to RCW 43.06.010.

(3) “Emergency management” or “comprehensive emergency management” means the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency functions, other than functions for which the military forces are primarily responsible, to mitigate, prepare for, respond to and recover from emergencies and disasters, whether natural or manmade, and to provide support for search and rescue operations for persons and property in distress.

(4) “Emergency management organization” or “EMO” means the City’s emergency management function operating within the City manager’s department.

(5) “Emergency manager” means the individual designated by the City manager to oversee the administration and operation of the City’s emergency management organization pursuant to SMC 2.70.030(2).

(6) “Hazard vulnerability analysis” means the comprehensive examination and reporting of all potential technological or natural hazards that the City may be exposed to and/or suffer loss from. This analysis is used as a basis for developing the City’s hazard mitigation plan.

(7) “Mitigation” includes risk analysis, review and identification of technological and natural hazards, development of strategies to minimize such hazards, and development of resources and capabilities to respond effectively to risks not controlled through conventional methods. Mitigation strategies may be developed in conjunction with the hazard vulnerability analysis.

(8) “National Incident Management System” or “NIMS” refers to the emergency management doctrine adopted by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in response to Homeland Security Presidential Directive 5.

(9) “Preparation” means the active planning, writing and revising of operational procedures and policies to prepare for responding to a disaster. It includes coordination with local, county, state and federal agencies to ensure cohesive working relationships and compatible emergency plans.

(10) “Recovery” includes assessment of community needs after an emergency or disaster event; prioritization of actions for relief, reconstruction or rehabilitation and coordination of agencies regarding same; documentation of costs for future reimbursement; and facilitation of disaster assistance offices in providing the community with efficient mechanisms to obtain federal, state and local assistance.

(11) “Response” includes the initiation of warnings for a potential disaster, initiation of actions necessary to effectively act during a disaster, damage assessment and evaluation, coordination of operations, logistics, planning and finance activities during a disaster, and documentation of actions taken during a disaster.

(12) “Whole community engagement” means a process to regularly engage the whole community to seek and obtain continued and coordinated stakeholder involvement and input regarding the emergency management program, including but not limited to policies, plans, ordinances, training, exercises, budget, public education, strategies and other emergency management topics. (Ord. O2017-433 § 4 (Att. A))


2.70.030 Emergency management organization. 

There is hereby created, in accordance with Chapter 38.52 RCW, a local emergency management organization (“EMO”) within the City, which shall operate under the City manager’s department. The EMO shall represent only the City and operate only within the City’s incorporated limits.

(1) Purpose. The purpose of the EMO is to perform local emergency management functions in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The EMO provides a critical public safety function in partnership with community partners, creating a framework to reduce the City’s vulnerability to threats and hazards and help the community cope with disasters.

(2) Organization. The EMO shall consist of such officers and employees of the City as specified in the comprehensive emergency management plan promulgated under this chapter. The EMO shall be headed by the City manager, who shall be directly responsible for the organization, administration, and operation of the EMO as director of emergency management for the City. The City manager may elect to appoint an emergency manager to assist with the day-to-day administration and operation of the EMO. (Ord. O2017-433 § 4 (Att. A))


2.70.040 Comprehensive emergency management plan.

A comprehensive emergency management plan (CEMP) shall be prepared for the City by, or under the direction of, the emergency management director. The plan shall conform to the requirements of Chapter 118-30 WAC, as they now exist or may hereafter be amended, and shall comply with any other administrative rules and regulations of the state of Washington promulgated under authority of Chapter 38.52 RCW governing emergency management of subdivisions of the state. (Ord. O2017-433 § 4 (Att. A))


2.70.050 City manager – Disaster and emergency powers.

(1) In the event of an emergency or disaster, the City manager is authorized:

(a) To make and issue emergency rules, regulations and orders on matters reasonably related to the protection of life, property and natural resources affected by such emergency or disaster; provided, that such rules, regulations and orders must be confirmed at the by the City council at the next regular meeting thereof;

(b) To issue a proclamation of local emergency and transmit such proclamation to federal, state, regional and local agencies. Upon issuance of a proclamation pursuant to this subsection, the EMO may take necessary measures to combat a disaster; protect persons, property and natural resources; provide emergency assistance to victims of the disaster; and exercise all other powers authorized by RCW 38.52.070, without regard to time-consuming procedures and formalities (excepting mandatory constitutional requirements). Such a proclamation must be approved by the City council at the next regular meeting thereof;

(c) To control and direct the efforts of the EMO;

(d) To requisition necessary personnel or material of any City department or agency;

(e) To require the emergency services of any City officer or employee and, in the event of a proclamation of emergency in the City or of a proclamation of emergency or disaster by the county executive or the state’s Governor affecting the City, to command the service and equipment of as many citizens of the City as may be deemed necessary in light of the emergency or disaster proclaimed;

(f) To execute all of the special powers conferred by any other county, state or federal statute or rule, or by any agreement or other lawful authority; and

(g) To establish and maintain continuity of government by ensuring proper provisions for succession of authority are included in the City’s CEMP.

(h) The City manager shall have the power to sign, on behalf of the City, mutual aid agreements with other municipalities, the county and other governmental subdivisions, which have been approved by the City council. (Ord. O2017-433 § 4 (Att. A))


2.70.060 City manager – Duties and powers as director of emergency management.

In addition to the emergency powers set forth in SMC 2.70.050, the City manager, as director of emergency management, shall have the duties and powers described below.

(1) Duties. It shall be the duty of the director of emergency management, or his or her designee, to:

(a) Prepare and submit all plans, annexes, attachments, program papers, progress reports, and other documents required by Chapter 118-30 WAC, as amended, or any other administrative rules and regulations of the state of Washington promulgated under the authority of Chapter 38.52 RCW governing emergency management plans of subdivisions of the state;

(b) Review and update such documents within the time frames prescribed by Chapter 38.52 RCW and Chapter 118-30 WAC;

(c) Represent the City in all interjurisdictional matters relating to emergency management;

(d) Conduct such emergency operations exercises as may be required by law;

(e) Conduct periodic inspections of the City’s emergency facilities and systems, including but not limited to an emergency operations center and communication system, to determine their state of readiness;

(f) Monitor the City’s compliance with the requirements of relevant state laws and regulations related to emergency management;

(g) Prepare and implement the mandates of the National Incident Management System; and

(h) Facilitate coordination with the City’s emergency management coordinating committee.

(2) Powers. In the event of an emergency or disaster, the emergency management director, or his or her designee, is authorized:

(a) To direct coordination and cooperation between departments and employees of the City, and to resolve questions of authority and responsibility;

(b) To activate the City’s emergency operations center, as needed for coordination; and

(c) To execute all of the special powers conferred upon the director of emergency management by any local, state or federal statute or rule, or by any agreement or other lawful authority. (Ord. O2017-433 § 4 (Att. A))


2.70.070 National Incident Management System.

The National Incident Management System (NIMS) promulgated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency is established as the standard for incident management within the City. (Ord. O2017-433 § 4 (Att. A))


2.70.080 Emergency management coordinating committee.

(1) To facilitate whole community engagement in the City’s emergency management planning, there is hereby created an emergency management coordinating committee for the City of Sammamish, which shall, to the extent possible, consist of the following:

(a) The City’s emergency manager, who shall act as chair;

(b) The City manager, or his or her designee;

(c) The public works director, or his or her designee;

(d) The community development director, or his or her designee;

(e) The City police chief, or his or her designee;

(f) The chief of Eastside Fire and Rescue, or his or her designee;

(g) A representative of each school district located within the City;

(h) A representative of each utility that serves citizens of Sammamish;

(i) A representative of the Sammamish citizen corps council.

(2) As appropriate, the City manager may appoint additional members to the emergency management coordinating committee from City staff, faith-based organizations, neighboring jurisdictions, human services organizations, neighborhood associations, major local employers, or small business representatives, based upon such member’s knowledge, experience, resources or capabilities in the area of emergency management.

(3) The emergency management coordinating committee shall meet at a frequency established by the committee, but at a minimum biannually. The committee shall choose a vice-chair to act in the absence of the emergency manager.

(4) It shall be the duty of the emergency management coordinating committee to review and advise the City manager and City council on the City’s emergency management programs, mutual aid agreements, ordinances, resolutions, contracts and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The committee shall report to the City council annually on the “state of emergency management” in the City, and more frequently if an emergency or disaster event warrants such a report. (Ord. O2017-433 § 4 (Att. A))


2.70.090 Severability.

If any provision of this chapter or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter or the application of the provision to other persons or circumstances is not affected. (Ord. O2017-433 § 4 (Att. A))


2.70.100 Liability.

Liability for actions or services rendered in accordance with this chapter shall be as set forth in RCW 38.52.180. (Ord. O2017-433 § 4 (Att. A))


Chapter 2.75 HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION

Sections:

2.75.010    Created.

2.75.020    Membership.

2.75.030    Organization and meetings.

2.75.040    Duties and responsibilities.


2.75.010 Created.

There is hereby created a human services commission, consisting of seven members, to provide guidance and direction in meeting the human services needs of the City by advising the City council on such matters. (Ord. O2017-443 § 1 (Att. A))


2.75.020 Membership.

(1) Number of Members.

(a) The human services commission shall consist of seven members.

(b) The terms for all positions on the commission shall be staggered as shown in subsection (5) of this section.

(c) Following the completion of each new term established by subsection (1)(b) of this section, the term for each voting position shall thereafter be four years and shall commence on February 1st. 

(2) Appointment. 

(a) Members of the human services commission shall be selected from residents living within the City limits. Exceptions to this requirement may be made, by vote of the City council, in instances where an appointee is involved in providing human services to the Sammamish community. 

(b) Human services commission members shall be selected without respect to political affiliation and shall serve without compensation. 

(c) Human services commission members shall be subject to confirmation by the City council.

(d) To the extent practicable, appointments shall reflect a balance of human services delivery interests in the community.

(3) Removal. Members of the human services commission may be removed by a majority vote of the entire City council for neglect of duty, conflict of interest, malfeasance in office or other just cause, or for unexcused absence for more than three consecutive regular meetings. The decision of the City council shall be final and there shall be no appeal.

(4) Vacancies. Vacancies, occurring other than through the expiration of term, shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as for appointments as provided by this chapter.

(5) Term. Commission voting members shall be selected for staggered terms as follows, and for four-year terms thereafter:
[IMAGE]


(Ord. O2017-443 § 1 (Att. A))


2.75.030 Organization and meetings.

The human services commission shall elect a chair and vice chair each year from among its voting members. Such officers shall hold office until December 31st of the year in which they are elected or until their successors are elected. The City manager shall appoint appropriate staff to assist the human services commission in the preparation of such reports and records as are necessary for the proper operation of the commission. The human services commission shall adopt and be governed by its own rules of procedure. (Ord. O2017-443 § 1 (Att. A))


2.75.040 Duties and responsibilities.

The human services commission shall make reports and recommendations to the City council concerning human services issues including:

(1) Development and assessment of human services in the City.

(2) Determination of priorities of human services needs within the City.

(3) Evaluation and recommendation on funding requests submitted to the City.

(4) Review of City actions which may affect the availability and quality of human services provision in the City.

(5) Coordination with other groups and human services planning agencies and organizations to pursue the goal of regional cooperation in the planning, funding and delivery of human services.

(6) Commission may provide recommendations to the City council on emerging issues and concerns related to human services. (Ord. O2017-443 § 1 (Att. A))


Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE

Chapters:

3.05    City Credit Card Use

3.10    Real Estate Excise Tax

3.15    Sales and Use Tax

3.20    Gambling Tax

3.25    Admissions and Entertainment Tax

3.30    Leasehold Excise Tax

3.35    Registration of Bonds and Obligations

3.40    Equipment Rental Fund


Chapter 3.05 CITY CREDIT CARD USE

Sections:

3.05.010    Implementation.

3.05.020    Distribution.

3.05.030    Authorization and control.

3.05.040    Application.

3.05.050    Credit limits.

3.05.060    Credit card restriction.

3.05.070    Disallowed charges.

3.05.080    Return of credit card.

3.05.085    Payment of bills.

3.05.090    Additional policies.


3.05.010 Implementation.

The City manager and finance director shall implement and maintain the following system for the distribution, authorization, and control of credit cards issued to or for the benefit of the City and used by City officials and employees. (Ord. O2001-79 § 1(A))


3.05.020 Distribution.

Credit cards may be distributed to those City officials and employees who, in the opinion of the City manager, or his or her designee, have job responsibilities that would benefit or otherwise be facilitated by use of a credit card. (Ord. O2001-79 § 1(A)(1))


3.05.030 Authorization and control.

The finance director shall develop specific administrative guidelines and accounting controls to ensure the proper usage of credit cards and credit card funds. The purchasing card is to be used when it is in the best interest of City administrative affairs. (Ord. O2001-79 § 1(A)(2))


3.05.040 Application.

The individual holder, upon prior approval of the City manager or his or her designee, shall hold each credit card responsibly. (Ord. O2001-79 § 1(A)(3))


3.05.050 Credit limits.

The City manager or his/her designee shall set credit limits on each card issued subject to the approval of the City council. The credit card limit shall not exceed $25,000 for the City manager or $10,000 for any other individual credit card. The limit may be temporarily revised by the City manager or his/her designee to accommodate purchases made under special circumstances, up to the limit of the City manager’s signing authority. (Ord. O2019-487 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2009-260 § 1(A)(4); Ord. O2001-79 § 1(A)(4))


3.05.060 Credit card restriction.

The following will be considered an unauthorized purchase or use of any City purchasing/credit card:

(1) Cash advances;

(2) Personal purchases of any kind. (Ord. O2019-487 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2001-79 § 1(A)(5))


3.05.070 Disallowed charges.

(1) Disallowed charges, or charges not properly identified, will be paid by the employee before the charge card billing is due. Failure to do so will render the employee personally liable where the City shall have a prior lien against and a right to withhold any and all funds payable or to become payable to the employee up to the unpaid amount, plus interest and/or fees at the rate charged by the bank that issued the card. Employee shall not use the credit card if any disallowed charges are outstanding.

(2) The act of obtaining a City credit card does not indicate pre-approval of expenditures/ expenses. (Ord. O2001-79 § 1(A)(6))


3.05.080 Return of credit card.

The employee shall return all City credit cards at the request of the City manager or designee, or upon separation of employment. Final paycheck will be held until all outstanding City property has been returned. (Ord. O2001-79 § 1(A)(7))


3.05.085 Payment of bills.

The finance department will pay the credit card bills after receiving the necessary documentation and authorized signatures from the credit card holders. (Ord. O2009-260 § 1(A)(8); Ord. O2001-79 § 1(A)(8))


3.05.090 Additional policies.

The City manager and finance director are authorized to implement any additional policies or administrative procedures necessary to implement the provisions of this section. (Ord. O2001-79 § 1(B))


Chapter 3.10 REAL ESTATE EXCISE TAX

Sections:

3.10.010    One-quarter percent excise tax on real estate sales.

3.10.020    Additional one-quarter percent excise tax on real estate sales.

3.10.030    County to collect payment.

3.10.040    Tax is obligation of seller.

3.10.050    Tax lien on real property.

3.10.060    Duties of county treasurer.

3.10.070    Payment due.

3.10.080    Refunds.

3.10.090    Creation of special capital improvement fund.

3.10.100    Violation – Penalty.


3.10.010 One-quarter percent excise tax on real estate sales.

(1) Imposition. Pursuant to RCW 82.46.010, there is imposed an excise tax on each sale of real property in the City constituting a taxable event as defined in Chapter 82.45 RCW, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended. The tax imposed under this section shall be collected from persons who are taxable by the state under Chapter 82.45 RCW, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended, and such tax shall comply with all applicable rules, regulations, laws, and court decisions regarding real estate excise taxes as imposed by the state under Chapters 82.45 and 82.46 RCW and Chapter 458-61 WAC, as the same now exist or may hereafter be amended.

(2) Tax Rate. The rate of tax imposed by this section pursuant to RCW 82.46.010, as the same exists or may hereafter be amended, shall be one-quarter of one percent of the selling price of all real property upon which this tax is imposed.

(3) Use of Proceeds. All proceeds from the tax imposed by this section shall be placed by the City manager or authorized designee in the City’s capital improvement fund established under SMC 3.10.090 and shall be used as authorized by RCW 82.46.010, as now or hereafter be amended. (Ord. O2012-333 § 1; Ord. O99-03 § 1)


3.10.020 Additional one-quarter percent excise tax on real estate sales.

(1) Imposition. Pursuant to RCW 82.46.035, there is imposed an additional excise tax on each sale of real property constituting a taxable event as defined in Chapter 82.45 RCW and occurring within the corporate limits of the City. The tax imposed under this section shall be collected from persons who are taxable by the state under Chapter 82.45 RCW and such tax shall comply with all applicable rules, regulations, laws, and court decisions regarding real estate excise taxes as imposed by the state under Chapter 82.45 RCW.

(2) Tax Rate. The rate of tax imposed by this section, pursuant to RCW 82.46.035, shall be one-quarter of one percent of the selling price of all real property upon which this tax is imposed by subsection (1) of this section.

(3) Use of Proceeds. Revenues generated from the tax imposed by this section shall be used as authorized by RCW 82.46.035, as now or hereafter amended. (Ord. O2012-333 § 2; Ord. O99-03 § 2)


3.10.030 County to collect payment.

The county treasurer shall collect the taxes imposed by this chapter. The county treasurer shall place one percent of the proceeds of the taxes imposed and collected by this chapter in the county’s current expense fund to defray costs of collection. The remaining proceeds from City taxes imposed by this chapter shall be distributed to the City monthly. (Ord. O99-03 § 3)


3.10.040 Tax is obligation of seller.

The taxes imposed by this chapter are the obligation of the seller and may be enforced through the action of debt against the seller or in the manner prescribed for the foreclosure of mortgages, without the necessity of an election of remedies. (Ord. O99-03 § 4)


3.10.050 Tax lien on real property.

The taxes imposed by this chapter and any interest or penalties thereon are a specific lien upon each piece of real property sold from the time of sale or until the tax is paid, such lien may be enforced in the manner prescribed for the foreclosure of mortgages. Resort to one course of enforcement is not an election not to pursue the other. (Ord. O99-03 § 5)


3.10.060 Duties of county treasurer.

The taxes imposed by this chapter shall be paid to and collected by the county treasurer. The county treasurer shall cause a stamp evidencing satisfaction of the lien to be affixed to the instrument of sale or conveyance prior to its recording, or to the real estate excise tax affidavit in the case of used mobile home sales. A receipt issued by the county treasurer for the payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidence of the satisfaction of the lien imposed by this chapter and may be recorded in the manner prescribed for recording satisfactions of mortgages. No instrument of sale or conveyance evidencing a sale subject to the tax may be accepted by the King County department of records and elections for filing or recording until the tax is paid and the stamp affixed thereto. In case the tax is not due on the transfer, the instrument shall not be accepted until suitable notation of this fact is made on the instrument by the county treasurer. (Ord. O99-03 § 6)


3.10.070 Payment due.

The tax imposed by this chapter shall become due and payable immediately at the time of the sale, and if not so paid within 30 days thereafter, shall bear interest at the maximum rate permitted by law from the time of sale until the date of payment. (Ord. O99-03 § 7)


3.10.080 Refunds.

If, upon written application by a taxpayer to the county treasurer for a refund, it appears that tax has been paid in excess of the amount actually due or upon a sale or other transfer declared to be exempt, such excess amount or improper payment shall be refunded by the county treasurer to the taxpayer; provided, that no refund shall be made unless the state has first authorized the refund of an excessive amount or an improper amount paid, unless such improper amount was paid as a result of miscalculation. Any refund made shall be withheld from the next monthly distribution to the City. (Ord. O99-03 § 8)


3.10.090 Creation of special capital improvement fund.

(1) There is created a special fund to be known as the special capital improvement fund, into which shall be deposited all proceeds of the tax imposed by SMC 3.10.010.

(2) Revenues generated by the tax imposed by SMC 3.10.020 shall be deposited in a separate subaccount of the special capital improvement fund. (Ord. O99-03 § 9)


3.10.100 Violation – Penalty.

It is unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to pay taxes with intent to violate the provisions of this chapter. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, punished pursuant to state law or City ordinance. (Ord. O99-03 § 10)


Chapter 3.15 SALES AND USE TAX

Sections:

Article I. Sales and Use Tax

3.15.010    Imposition of a sales and use tax as authorized by RCW 82.14.030(1).

3.15.020    Administration – Collection.

3.15.030    Inspection of records – Agreement with Department of Revenue.

3.15.040    Violation – Penalty.

Article II. Additional Sales and Use Tax

3.15.050    Imposition of an additional sales and use tax as authorized by RCW 82.14.030(2).

3.15.060    Administration – Collection.

3.15.070    Inspection of records – Agreement with Department of Revenue.

3.15.080    Subject to referendum.

3.15.090    Violation – Penalty.

Article III. Sales and Use Tax for Affordable Housing

3.15.100    Imposition of a sales and use tax for affordable housing.

3.15.110    Administration and collection.

3.15.120    Purpose of tax.

3.15.130    Inspection of records – Agreement with the Department of Revenue.

3.15.140    Violation – Penalty.

Article I. Sales and Use Tax


3.15.010 Imposition of a sales and use tax as authorized by RCW 82.14.030(1).

(1) Imposition. There is imposed a separate sales and/or use tax, as the case may be, upon every taxable event as defined in Chapter 82.14 RCW, as the same exists or may hereafter be amended, which occurs within the City limits. The tax shall be imposed upon and collected from those persons from whom the state sales and/or use tax is collected pursuant to Chapters 82.08 and 82.12 RCW, as the same now exist or may hereafter be amended.

(2) Tax Rate. The rate of tax imposed by subsection (1) of this section shall be one-half of one percent of the selling price or value of the article used, as the case may be; provided, that during such period as there is in effect a sales and/or use tax imposed by King County pursuant to RCW 82.14.030(1), the rate imposed by this chapter shall be as provided in RCW 82.14.030(1), as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended. The rate at the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article shall be 425/1000th of one percent. (Ord. O99-04 § 1)


3.15.020 Administration – Collection.

The administration and collection of the tax imposed by this chapter shall be in accordance with the provisions of RCW 82.14.050, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended. (Ord. O99-04 § 2)


3.15.030 Inspection of records – Agreement with Department of Revenue.

The City consents to the inspection of such records as are necessary to qualify the City for inspection of records of the Department of Revenue, pursuant to RCW 82.32.330, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended. The City manager is authorized to enter into an agreement with the Department of Revenue for the administration of the tax. (Ord. O99-04 § 3)


3.15.040 Violation – Penalty.

It is unlawful for any seller to fail or refuse to collect taxes with intent to violate the provisions of this chapter, or to gain some advantage or benefit, whether direct or indirect, or for any buyer to refuse to pay any tax due under the provisions of this chapter. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof punished pursuant to state law or City ordinance. (Ord. O99-04 § 4)

Article II. Additional Sales and Use Tax


3.15.050 Imposition of an additional sales and use tax as authorized by RCW 82.14.030(2).

(1) Imposition. In addition to other taxes that may be imposed by the City, there is imposed a separate sales and/or use tax, as the case may be, upon the same taxable events and upon which the tax imposed pursuant to RCW 82.14.030(1) is levied, as the same exists or may hereafter be amended, and as specifically authorized by RCW 82.14.030 (2).

(2) Tax Rate. The rate of tax imposed by this section, which shall be in addition to the rate of tax permitted to be imposed by City ordinance pursuant to RCW 82.14.030(1), as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended, shall be one-half of one percent of the selling price (in the case of a sales tax) or value of the article used (in the case of a use tax); provided, that if King County shall impose a sales and/or use tax pursuant to RCW 82.14.030 (2), as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended, at a rate that is equal to or greater than the rate imposed under this article, then said county shall receive 15 percent of the City tax; provided further, that if King County shall impose a sales and/or use tax pursuant to RCW 82.14.030 (2), at a rate that is less than the rate imposed under this article, the county shall receive that amount of revenues from the City tax equal to 15 percent of the rate of tax imposed by the county. (Ord. O99-05 § 1)


3.15.060 Administration – Collection.

The administration and collection of the tax imposed by this chapter shall be in accordance with the provisions of RCW 82.14.050, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended. (Ord. O99-05 § 2)


3.15.070 Inspection of records – Agreement with Department of Revenue.

The City consents to the inspection of such records as are necessary to qualify the City for inspection of records of the Department of Revenue, pursuant to RCW 82.32.330, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended. The City manager is authorized to enter an agreement with the Department of Revenue for the administration of the tax. (Ord. O99-05 § 3)


3.15.080 Subject to referendum.

Pursuant to RCW 82.14.036, the tax imposed by this article is subject to referendum. A referendum petition to repeal the tax imposed by this article must be filed with the interim City clerk or the interim City manager within seven days of passage of this article. Within 10 days of filing of the referendum petition, the interim City manager shall confer with the petitioner concerning the form and style of the petition, issue an identification number for the petition and write a ballot title for the measure. The ballot title shall be posed as a question so that an affirmative answer to the question and an affirmative vote on the measure results in the tax or tax rate increase being imposed, and a negative answer to the question and a negative vote on the measure results in the tax or tax rate increase not being imposed. The petitioner shall be notified of the identification number and ballot title within the 10-day period.

After notification of the identification number and ballot title, the petitioner shall have 30 days to secure on petition forms the signatures of not less than 15 percent of the registered voters of the City and to file the signed petitions with the interim City clerk or the interim City manager. Each petition form must contain the ballot title and the full text of the measure to be referred. (Ord. O99-05 § 4)


3.15.090 Violation – Penalty.

It is unlawful for any seller to fail or refuse to collect taxes with intent to violate the provisions of this chapter, or to gain some advantage or benefit, whether direct or indirect, or for any buyer to refuse to pay any tax due under the provisions of this chapter. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof punished pursuant to state law or City ordinance. (Ord. O99-05 § 5)

Article III. Sales and Use Tax for Affordable Housing


3.15.100 Imposition of a sales and use tax for affordable housing.

(1) Imposition. There is imposed a sales and use tax as authorized by Washington State Legislature Chapter 338, Laws of 2019, and codified in RCW 82.14.540, upon every taxable event which occurs within the City limits, as defined in RCW 82.14.020, as the same exists or may hereafter be amended. The tax shall be imposed upon and collected from those persons from whom the state sales and/or use tax is collected pursuant to Chapters 82.08 and 82.12 RCW, as the same now exist or may hereafter be amended.

(2) Tax Rate. The rate of tax imposed by subsection (1) of this section shall be 0.0073 percent of the selling price or value of the article used, as the case may be. The tax imposed under RCW 82.14.540(2) must be deducted from the amount of tax otherwise required to be collected or paid to the Department of Revenue under Chapters 82.08 and 82.12 RCW.

(3) Tax Amount. The Washington State Department of Revenue will calculate the maximum amount of annual tax distributions for the City of Sammamish based on the taxable retail sales in the City in the state’s fiscal year ending June 30, 2019. The tax imposed under subsection (1) of this section will cease to be distributed to the City for the remainder of any state fiscal year in which the amount of tax exceeds the maximum amount of tax distributions for the City as calculated by the Department of Revenue. Distributions to the City that have ceased during a state fiscal year shall resume at the beginning of the next state fiscal year.

(4) Expiration Date. The tax imposed under this section will expire 20 years after the date on which the tax is first imposed. (Ord. O2019-489 § 1 (Att. A))


3.15.110 Administration and collection.

(1) The administration and collection of the tax imposed by this chapter shall be in accordance with the provisions of RCW 82.14.050, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended.

(2) The City must report annually to the Washington State Department of Commerce on the collection and use of the revenue. The Department of Commerce must adopt rules prescribing content of such reports. By December 1, 2019, and annually thereafter, and in compliance with RCW 43.01.036, the Department of Commerce must submit a report annually to the appropriate legislative committees with regard to such uses. (Ord. O2019-489 § 1 (Att. A))


3.15.120 Purpose of tax.

Moneys collected or bonds issued under this article may only be used, as required by RCW 82.14.540(6), for the following purposes:

(1) Acquiring, rehabilitating, or constructing affordable housing, which may include new units of affordable housing within an existing structure or facilities providing supportive housing services under RCW 71.24.385; or

(2) Funding the operations and maintenance costs of new units of affordable or supportive housing; or

(3) Providing rental assistance to tenants. (Ord. O2019-489 § 1 (Att. A))


3.15.130 Inspection of records – Agreement with the Department of Revenue.

The City consents to the inspection of such records as are necessary to qualify the City for inspection of records of the Department of Revenue, pursuant to RCW 82.32.330, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended. The City manager is authorized to enter into an agreement with the Department of Revenue for the administration of the tax. (Ord. O2019-489 § 1 (Att. A))


3.15.140 Violation – Penalty.

It is unlawful for any seller to fail or refuse to collect taxes with intent to violate the provisions of this chapter, or to gain some advantage or benefit, whether direct or indirect, or for any buyer to refuse to pay any tax due under the provisions of this chapter. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof punished pursuant to state law or City ordinance. (Ord. O2019-489 § 1 (Att. A))


Chapter 3.20 GAMBLING TAX

Sections:

3.20.010    Imposed.

3.20.020    Exemptions.

3.20.030    Administration.

3.20.040    Charitable, nonprofit organization – Declaration of intent to conduct gambling activity.

3.20.050    Tax due date – Delinquency.

3.20.060    Financial records.

3.20.070    Definitions.

3.20.080    Unlawful acts.

3.20.090    Violation – Penalty.


3.20.010 Imposed.

Pursuant to RCW 9.46.110, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended, there is levied upon all persons, associations, or organizations a tax on all gambling activities occurring within the City as permitted by state law at the following rates:

(1) Bingo or raffles at a rate of 10 percent of the gross revenues received therefrom, less the amount paid for as prizes;

(2) Amusement games at a rate of two percent of the sum of the gross revenues received therefrom, less the amount paid for as prizes, and which rate will generate an amount sufficient to pay the actual costs of enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 9.46 RCW;

(3) Punchboards or pull-tabs at a rate of five percent of gross receipts;

(4) All social card game rooms licensed under the provisions of RCW 9.46.030(1) and (4) at a rate equal to 11 percent of the annual gross receipts exceeding $10,000. (Ord. O99-08 § 1)


3.20.020 Exemptions.

No tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter on bingo or amusement games when such gambling activities, or any combination thereof, are conducted by a bona fide charitable or nonprofit organization as defined in RCW 9.46.020, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended, which organization has no paid operating or management personnel for the gambling activities and has gross income from bingo or amusement games, or any combination thereof, not exceeding $5,000 per year, less the amount paid for as prizes. No tax shall be imposed on the first $10,000 of net proceeds from raffles conducted by bona fide charitable organizations. (Ord. O99-08 § 2)


3.20.030 Administration.

The administration and collection of the tax imposed by SMC 3.20.010 shall be by the department of finance and pursuant to the rules and regulations of the Washington State Gambling Commission. The department of finance is instructed and authorized to adopt appropriate reporting requirements, to ensure the effective administration of license holders exempt from the payment of the tax and to make such further rules and regulations for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. O99-08 § 3)


3.20.040 Charitable, nonprofit organization – Declaration of intent to conduct gambling activity.

For the purpose of identifying the persons, associations, or organizations that shall be subject to the tax imposed by SMC 3.20.010, any bona fide charitable or nonprofit corporation intending to conduct or operate any bingo game, raffle, or amusement game that requires licensing as provided in and authorized by Chapter 9.46 RCW, as the same now exists or may be hereafter amended, shall, prior to commencement of any such activity, file with the department of finance a sworn declaration of intent to conduct or operate such activity, together with a copy of the license issued in accordance with Chapter 9.46 RCW, as the same now exists or may be hereafter amended, as amended. Thereafter, for any period covered by such state license or any renewal thereof, any such licensed bona fide charitable or nonprofit corporation shall, on or before the fifteenth day of the month following the end of the quarterly period in which the tax accrued, file with the department of finance a sworn statement, on a form to be provided and prescribed by the department of finance for the purpose of ascertaining the tax due for the preceding quarterly period. (Ord. O99-08 § 4)


3.20.050 Tax due date – Delinquency.

(1) The tax imposed by SMC 3.20.010 shall be due and payable in quarterly installments, and remittance therefor shall accompany such return and be made on or before the thirtieth day of the month next succeeding the quarterly period in which the tax accrued.

(2) For each payment due, if such payment is not made by the due date thereof, there shall be added a penalty as follows:

(a) If paid on or before the fifteenth day of the second month next succeeding the quarterly period in which the tax accrued, 10 percent with a minimum penalty of $5.00;

(b) If paid prior to the thirtieth day of the second month next succeeding the quarterly period in which the tax accrued, 15 percent with a minimum penalty of $10.00;

(c) Failure to make payment by the thirtieth day of the second month succeeding the quarterly period in which the tax accrued shall result in a penalty of 20 percent with a minimum penalty of $15.00. (Ord. O99-08 § 5)


3.20.060 Financial records.

It shall be the responsibility of all officers, directors and managers of any corporation conducting any gambling activities subject to taxation under this chapter to make available at all reasonable times such financial records as the department of finance may require to determine full compliance with this chapter. (Ord. O99-08 § 6)


3.20.070 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the terms used herein shall have the same meanings as defined in Chapter 9.46 RCW, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended. (Ord. O99-08 § 7)


3.20.080 Unlawful acts.

It is unlawful for any person liable for the tax imposed by this chapter to fail to pay the tax when due or for any person to make any false or fraudulent return or any false statement in connection with the return. (Ord. O99-08 § 8)


3.20.090 Violation – Penalty.

Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof punished pursuant to state law or City ordinance. (Ord. O99-08 § 9)


Chapter 3.25 ADMISSIONS AND ENTERTAINMENT TAX

Sections:

3.25.010    Admission charge – Definition.

3.25.020    Admissions tax levied.

3.25.030    Collection – Remittance to City manager.

3.25.040    Violation – Penalty.


3.25.010 Admission charge – Definition.

“Admission charge” shall mean a charge made for admission to any movie theater. (Ord. O99-12 § 1)


3.25.020 Admissions tax levied.

Effective the first day of the first full calendar month after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, there is hereby levied a five percent tax on the ticket price or other charge for admission to any movie theater in the City of Sammamish. (Ord. O99-12 § 2)


3.25.030 Collection – Remittance to City manager.

(1) The theater receiving payment for admissions on which a tax is levied under this chapter shall collect the amount of the tax imposed from the person making payment for admission at the time the admission charge is paid; such taxes shall be remitted by the theater collecting the tax to the City manager or designee in quarterly remittances on or before the last day of the month succeeding the end of the quarterly period in which the tax is due.

(2) Any theater receiving any payment for admissions shall make a return upon such forms and setting forth such information as the City manager or designee may reasonably require, showing the amount of the tax upon admissions for which the theater is liable for the preceding quarterly period, and shall sign and transmit the same to the City manager or designee, with a remittance for the amount; provided, that the City manager or designee may at his or her discretion require verified annual returns from any theater receiving admission payments setting forth such additional information as the City manager or designee may deem necessary to determine correctly the amount of tax collected and payable.

(3) If the return provided for herein is not made and transmitted and the tax is not collected and remitted to the City by the last day of the month succeeding the end of the quarter in which the tax was due, the City manager or designee shall add a penalty of 10 percent of the tax due, which penalty shall be added to amount of the tax due, and remitted in the same manner.

(4) Every theater liable for the collection and payment of the tax imposed by this chapter shall keep and preserve for a period of three years all unused tickets, ticket manifests, books and all other records from which can be determined the amount of admission tax such theater was liable to remit under the provisions of this chapter, and all such tickets, books, and records shall be open for examination and audit at all reasonable times by the City manager or his or her duly authorized agent.

(5) The City manager or designee shall have the authority to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with the terms of this chapter for carrying out and enforcing the payment, collection, and remittance of the tax herein levied; and a copy of the rules and regulations shall be on file and available for public examination in the City clerk’s office. (Ord. O99-12 § 3)


3.25.040 Violation – Penalty.

(1) Violation a Misdemeanor. Each violation of or failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter constitutes a separate offense and is a misdemeanor.

(2) Collection of Tax by Civil Action. Any tax due under the provisions of this chapter and all penalties thereon may be collected by civil action, which remedies shall be in addition to any and all other existing remedies. In the event of any civil action regarding unpaid taxes, the prevailing party shall be entitled to additionally recover its attorney fees and costs, expressly including expert witness fees for accountants or others used in the proceeding.

(3) Violators Designated. Any person or entity who directly or indirectly performs or omits to perform any act in violation of the provisions of this chapter, or aids or abets the same, and every person or entity who directly or indirectly counsels, encourages, hires, commands, induces, or otherwise procures another to commit such violation is and shall be a principal under the terms of this chapter and may be proceeded against as such. (Ord. O99-12 § 4)


Chapter 3.30 LEASEHOLD EXCISE TAX

Sections:

3.30.010    Imposition of leasehold excise tax.

3.30.020    Rate of leasehold excise tax.

3.30.030    Exemptions.

3.30.040    Administration and collection.

3.30.050    City and state to contract.

3.30.060    Violation – Penalty.


3.30.010 Imposition of leasehold excise tax.

Pursuant to authorization of RCW 82.29A.040, there is hereby imposed a leasehold excise tax on the act or privilege of occupying or using publicly owned real or personal property through a leasehold interest in publicly owned property within the territorial limits of the City. The tax shall be imposed upon and collected from those persons holding such leasehold interest within the City from whom a leasehold excise tax is collected by the State Department of Revenue, pursuant to Chapter 82.29A RCW. (Ord. O99-27 § 1)


3.30.020 Rate of leasehold excise tax.

The rate of the tax imposed by SMC 3.30.010 shall be four percent of the taxable rent, as defined by RCW 82.29A.020(2), less any allowable credits pursuant to RCW 82.29A.120. (Ord. O99-27 § 2)


3.30.030 Exemptions.

Leasehold interests exempted from leasehold excise taxes by RCW 82.29A.130 and 82.29A.135 shall also be exempt from the tax imposed by SMC 3.30.010. (Ord. O99-27 § 3)


3.30.040 Administration and collection.

The administration and collection of the tax imposed by SMC 3.30.010 shall be in accordance with the provisions of RCW 82.29A.080. (Ord. O99-27 § 4)


3.30.050 City and state to contract.

The City manager is hereby authorized on behalf of the City to enter into a contract with the State Department of Revenue for the administration of the taxes imposed herein, pursuant to RCW 82.29A.080. A copy of the contract shall be maintained on file in the office of the City clerk and is, by this reference, incorporated herein. (Ord. O99-27 § 5)


3.30.060 Violation – Penalty.

It is unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to pay taxes with intent to violate the provisions of this chapter. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof punished pursuant to state law or City ordinance. (Ord. O99-27 § 6)


Chapter 3.35 REGISTRATION OF BONDS AND OBLIGATIONS

Sections:

3.35.010    Definitions.

3.35.020    Findings.

3.35.030    Adoption of registration system.

3.35.040    Statement of transfer restrictions.


3.35.010 Definitions.

The following words have the following meanings when used in this chapter:

(1) “Bond” or “bonds” has the meaning defined in RCW 39.46.020(1), as the same may be amended from time to time.

(2) “City” means the City of Sammamish, Washington.

(3) “Fiscal agencies” means the duly appointed fiscal agencies of the state of Washington serving as such at any given time.

(4) “Obligation” or “obligations” has the meaning defined in RCW 39.46.020(3), as the same from time to time may be amended.

(5) “Registrar” means the person, persons or entity designated by the City to register ownership of bonds or obligations under this chapter or under an ordinance of the City authorizing the issuance of such bonds or obligations.

(6) “Treasurer” means the treasurer of the City. (Ord. O99-38 § 1)


3.35.020 Findings.

The City council of the City finds that it is in the City’s best interest to establish a system of registering the ownership of the City’s bonds and obligations in the manner permitted by law. (Ord. O99-38 § 2)


3.35.030 Adoption of registration system.

The City adopts the following system of registering the ownership of its bonds or obligations:

(1) Registration Requirement. All bonds and obligations offered to the public, having a maturity of more than one year, on which the interest is intended to be excluded from gross income for federal income tax purposes, shall be registered as to both principal and interest as provided in this chapter.

(2) Method of Registration. The registration of all City bonds and obligations required to be registered shall be carried out either by:

(a) A book entry system of recording the ownership of the bond or obligation on the books of the registrar, whether or not a physical instrument is issued; or

(b) Recording the ownership of the bond or obligation and requiring as a condition of the transfer of ownership of any bond or obligation the surrender of the old bond or obligation and either the reissuance of the old bond or obligation or the issuance of a new bond or obligation to the new owner.

No transfer of any bond or obligation subject to registration requirements shall be effective until the name of the new owner and the new owner’s mailing address, together with such other information deemed appropriate by the registrar, are recorded on the books of the registrar.

(3) Denominations. Except as may be provided otherwise by the ordinance authorizing their issuance, registered bonds or obligations may be issued and reissued in any denomination up to the outstanding principal amount of the bonds or obligations of which they are a part. Such denominations may represent all or a part of a maturity or several maturities and on reissuance may be in smaller amounts than the individual denominations for which they are reissued.

(4) Appointment of Registrar. Unless otherwise provided in the ordinance authorizing the issuance of registered bonds or obligations, the treasurer shall be the registrar for all interest-bearing warrants, installment contracts, interest-bearing leases, and other registered bonds or obligations not usually subject to trading without a fixed maturity date or maturing one year or less after issuance and the fiscal agencies shall be the registrar for all other City bonds and obligations with a fixed maturity date or maturing more than one year after issuance.

(5) Duties of Registrar. The registrar shall serve as the City’s authenticating trustee, transfer agent, registrar, and paying agent for all registered bonds and obligations for which he, she, or it serves as registrar and shall comply fully with all applicable federal and state laws and regulations respecting the carrying out of those duties.

The rights, duties, responsibilities, and compensation of the registrar shall be prescribed in each ordinance authorizing the issuance of the bonds or obligations, which rights, duties, responsibilities, and compensation shall be embodied in a contract executed by the City and the registrar, except that (i) when the fiscal agencies serve as registrar, the City adopts by reference the contract between the State Finance Committee of the State of Washington and the fiscal agencies in lieu of executing a separate contract and prescribing by ordinance the rights, duties, responsibilities, and compensation of the registrar, and (ii) when the treasurer serves as registrar, a separate contract shall not be required.

In all cases when the registrar is not the fiscal agencies and the bonds or obligations are assignable, the ordinance authorizing the issuance of the registered bonds or obligations shall specify the terms and conditions of:

(a) Making payments of principal and interest;

(b) Printing any physical instruments, including the use of identifying numbers or other designation;

(c) Specifying record and payment dates;

(d) Determining denominations;

(e) Establishing the manner of communicating with the owners of the bonds or obligations;

(f) Establishing the methods of receipting for the physical instruments for payment of principal, the destruction of such instruments, and the certification of such destruction;

(g) Registering or releasing security interests, if any; and

(h) Such other matters pertaining to the registration of the bonds or obligations authorized by such ordinance as the City may deem to be necessary or appropriate. (Ord. O99-38 § 3)


3.35.040 Statement of transfer restrictions.

Any physical instrument issued or executed by the City subject to registration under this chapter shall state on its face that the principal of and interest on the bonds or obligations shall be paid only to the owner thereof registered as such on the books of the registrar as of the record date defined in the instrument and to no other person, and that such instrument, either principal or interest, may not be assigned except on the books of the registrar. (Ord. O99-38 § 4)


Chapter 3.40 EQUIPMENT RENTAL FUND

Sections:

3.40.010    Fund created.

3.40.020    Purpose of the fund.

3.40.030    Fund administration.

3.40.040    Sources of revenue.

3.40.050    Operation.

3.40.060    Expenses.

3.40.070    Rental rates.

3.40.080    Transfers of equipment.

3.40.090    Dissolution of the fund.


3.40.010 Fund created.

There is hereby created an internal service fund to be known and designated as the equipment rental fund (together with such numerical designation as shall be assigned said fund by the chief financial officer of the City for accounting and budgetary purposes) in accordance with the provisions of RCW 35.21.088. (Ord. O2010-276 § 1)


3.40.020 Purpose of the fund.

The purpose of the equipment rental fund shall be for the control, operation and maintenance of municipal equipment and the rental of such equipment to the various departments of the City at rates sufficient to meet the costs of operation and to provide funds for the acquisition and replacement of equipment. (Ord. O2010-276 § 2)


3.40.030 Fund administration.

The equipment rental fund shall be administered by the finance and public works directors, subject to the general administrative authority of the City manager. (Ord. O2010-276 § 3)


3.40.040 Sources of revenue.

The equipment rental fund shall derive its monies in any of the following ways:

(1) By direct appropriation in the annual or biennial budget from tax levies or other sources of anticipated revenue;

(2) By appropriation or budgetary transfer made by ordinance from other funds of the City;

(3) From proceeds received from the rental of any of the equipment owned by the fund to other departments, offices or funds of the City; this shall include transfers from other funds or direct payment of amounts received for the use of such equipment on reimbursable projects done by the City;

(4) From the sale of any of the equipment owned by the fund. (Ord. O2010-276 § 4)


3.40.050 Operation.

The accounts of the equipment rental fund shall be set up and maintained in such a manner as to separately show the rental and other sources of revenues from the various departments and funds of the City and shall make an allocation of such revenues between those required for operational costs and those set aside for the acquisition and replacement of equipment. (Ord. O2010-276 § 5)


3.40.060 Expenses.

Revenues received in the equipment rental fund shall be expensed for salaries, wages and operations required for the repair, replacement, purchase and operation of equipment, and for the purchase of equipment, materials and supplies to be used in the administration and operation of the fund. (Ord. O2010-276 § 6)


3.40.070 Rental rates.

The administrator of the fund shall establish a schedule of reasonable rental rates and other charges sufficient to cover the maintenance, operation, and replacement of the equipment. The rates shall, at a minimum, take into consideration the costs and expenses of the following: operating supplies; maintenance expenses; insurance, depreciation, and other direct cost items; operational costs of the fund (overhead); a contingency for the purpose of adding equipment and replacement of old equipment, including shop and administrative equipment; and such other items as may be reasonable or necessary in the proper operation of the fund. The schedule shall be submitted to the City council for its approval and adoption and shall be reviewed and updated as necessary to reflect changes in operating, maintenance and depreciation costs. (Ord. O2010-276 § 7)


3.40.080 Transfers of equipment.

There shall be transferred to the equipment rental fund those items of equipment from the various funds, departments and offices of the City as shown on the “schedule of equipment transferred” as well as any similar types of equipment purchased by other funds in the future, without charge or credit given to the purchasing fund. (Ord. O2010-276 § 8)


3.40.090 Dissolution of the fund.

Should the equipment rental fund herein established be dissolved for any reason, a final disposition of the assets on hand shall be made among the various departments, offices and funds of the City participating in and utilizing the fund, in direct proportion to the amount of such participation and use, taking into consideration the transfer of equipment specially designed for the use of a certain department, office or fund. (Ord. O2010-276 § 9)


Title 4 (Reserved)


Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS

Chapters:

5.05    Business Licenses

5.06    Solicitor’s License


Chapter 5.05 BUSINESS LICENSES

Sections:

5.05.010    Purpose.

5.05.020    Definitions.

5.05.030    License required – Exceptions.

5.05.040    License fee.

5.05.050    License – Application and issuance.

5.05.060    Successor liability.

5.05.070    License – Suspension, denial or revocation.

5.05.080    Duties of the director.

5.05.090    Enforcement.

5.05.100    City manager authorized to enter into master license service agreement.


5.05.010 Purpose.

In order for the City to responsibly carry out the duties and authorities delegated to it by the Washington State Constitution and the laws of the state of Washington as a noncharter code city, maintenance of current information with respect to business, trade, service, commercial and professional activities carried on within the City is necessary and essential to the public health, safety and welfare. Such information can best be accumulated and maintained on a current basis through the establishment of a program for the licensing and registration of such activities. (Ord. O2002-118 § 1)


5.05.020 Definitions.

(1) Unless defined otherwise herein, this chapter incorporates by reference all definitions set forth in Chapter 82.04 RCW, or as hereafter amended.

(2) “Business” means all activities engaged in with the object of gain, benefit, or advantage to any person, directly or indirectly.

(3) “Director” means the City’s finance director or the director’s designee.

(4) Engaging in Business.

(a) The term “engaging in business” means commencing, conducting, or continuing in business, and also the exercise of corporate or franchise powers, as well as liquidating a business when the liquidators thereof hold themselves out to the public as conducting such business.

(b) This section sets forth examples of activities that constitute engaging in business in the City, and establishes safe harbors for certain of those activities so that a person who meets the criteria may engage in de minimis business activities in the City without having to pay a business license fee. The activities listed in this section are illustrative only and are not intended to narrow the definition of “engaging in business” in subsection (4)(a) of this section. If an activity is not listed, whether it constitutes engaging in business in the City shall be determined by considering all the facts and circumstances and applicable law.

(c) Without being all inclusive, any one of the following activities conducted within the City by a person, or its employee, agent, representative, independent contractor, broker or another acting on its behalf, constitutes engaging in business and requires a person to register and obtain a business license:

(i) Owning, renting, leasing, maintaining, or having the right to use, or using, tangible personal property, intangible personal property, or real property permanently or temporarily located in the City.

(ii) Owning, renting, leasing, using, or maintaining an office, place of business, or other establishment in the City.

(iii) Soliciting sales.

(iv) Making repairs or providing maintenance or service to real or tangible personal property, including warranty work and property maintenance.

(v) Providing technical assistance or service, including quality control, product inspections, warranty work, or similar services on or in connection with tangible personal property sold by the person or on its behalf.

(vi) Installing, constructing, or supervising installation or construction of real or tangible personal property.

(vii) Soliciting, negotiating, or approving franchise, license, or other similar agreements.

(viii) Collecting current or delinquent accounts.

(ix) Picking up and transporting tangible personal property, solid waste, construction debris, or excavated materials.

(x) Providing disinfecting and pest control services, employment and labor pool services, home nursing care, janitorial services, appraising, landscape architectural services, security system services, surveying, and real estate services including the listing of homes and managing real property.

(xi) Rendering professional services such as those provided by accountants, architects, attorneys, auctioneers, consultants, engineers, professional athletes, barbers, baseball clubs and other sports organizations, chemists, psychologists, court reporters, dentists, doctors, detectives, laboratory operators, teachers, veterinarians.

(xii) Meeting with customers or potential customers, even when no sales or orders are solicited at the meetings.

(xiii) Training or recruiting agents, representatives, independent contractors, brokers or others, domiciled or operating on a job in the City, acting on its behalf, or for customers or potential customers.

(xiv) Investigating, resolving, or otherwise assisting in resolving customer complaints.

(xv) In-store stocking or manipulating products or goods, sold to and owned by a customer, regardless of where sale and delivery of the goods took place.

(xvi) Delivering goods in vehicles owned, rented, leased, used, or maintained by the person or another acting on its behalf.

(d) If a person, or its employee, agent, representative, independent contractor, broker or another acting on the person’s behalf, engages in no other activities in or with the City but the following, it need not register and obtain a business license:

(i) Meeting with suppliers of goods and services as a customer.

(ii) Meeting with government representatives in their official capacity, other than those performing contracting or purchasing functions.

(iii) Attending meetings, such as board meetings, retreats, seminars, and conferences, or other meetings wherein the person does not provide training in connection with tangible personal property sold by the person or on its behalf. This provision does not apply to any board of directors member or attendee engaging in business such as a member of a board of directors who attends a board meeting.

(iv) Renting tangible or intangible property as a customer when the property is not used in the City.

(v) Attending, but not participating in, a “trade show” or “multiple vendor events.” Persons participating at a trade show shall review the City’s trade show or multiple vendor event ordinances.

(vi) Conducting advertising through the mail.

(vii) Soliciting sales by phone from a location outside the City.

(e) A seller located outside the City merely delivering goods into the City by means of common carrier is not required to register and obtain a business license; provided, that it engages in no other business activities in the City. Such activities do not include those in subsection (4)(d) of this section.

The City expressly intends that engaging in business include any activity sufficient to establish nexus for purposes of applying the license fee under the law and the Constitutions of the United States and the State of Washington. Nexus is presumed to continue as long as the taxpayer benefits from the activity that constituted the original nexus generating contact or subsequent contacts. (Ord. O2018-469 § 1; Ord. 2012-322 § 2; Ord. O2002-118 § 2)


5.05.030 License required – Exceptions. 

(1) Except as provided in subsection (4) of this section, every person who engages in business within the City, and who is required to register with the state of Washington as outlined in WAC 458-20-101, shall apply for and obtain from the director a license for each calendar year or portion thereof; provided, organizations meeting the requirements of SMC 5.05.040(3)(a) are not required to obtain a business license, but instead shall register with the City clerk.

(2) Every business shall post the license issued to the business pursuant to this chapter on the premises of the business. Every transient merchant or peddler shall have in his or her possession at all times, while conducting business as such, the license issued pursuant to this chapter or a copy of the completed license application with proof of payment.

(3) Repealed by Ord. O2012-322.

(4) The following shall be exempt from the licensing provisions of this chapter:

(a) The performance of governmental or proprietary functions by any instrumentality of the United States, the state of Washington, or any political subdivision thereof;

(b) Sales by farmers or gardeners of their own farm products raised and grown exclusively upon lands owned or occupied by them;

(c) Casual and isolated sales, including garage sales conducted on residential premises in compliance with this code; provided, that not more than four such sales are made during the calendar year;

(d) The delivery of goods by vehicle to a customer or client by a business where the sale occurred on a business premises outside of the City and the only event occurring within the City is a delivery;

(e) Taxi, limousine, airporter, or similar services where the business operates from premises located outside the City;

(f) Sales of goods or services by mail, telephone, Internet or similar means where the seller operates from premises located outside the City and the only event occurring within the City is receipt of such goods and services;

(g) Provision of Internet or wireless phone services where the provider operates from premises located outside the City and the only event occurring within the City is receipt of such services.

(5) Any person or business whose annual value of products, gross proceeds of sales, or gross of the business in the City is equal to or less than $2,000 and who does not maintain a place of business within the City shall be exempt from the general business license requirements in this chapter. The exemption does not apply to regulatory license requirements or activities that require a specialized permit. (Ord. O2018-469 § 2; Ord. 2012-322 § 2; Ord. O2005-177 § 2; Ord. O2003-126 § 2; Ord. O2002-118 § 3)


5.05.040 License fee.

(1) A business license fee shall be paid to the City in an amount set by resolution of the City council.

(2) The license fee shall be in addition to any license fee or tax imposed or levied under any law or other ordinance of the City, except as otherwise expressly provided.

(3) The following shall be exempt from payment of fee:

(a) Nonprofit and not-for-profit activities and fundraising sales carried on by religious, charitable, educational, benevolent, fraternal or social organizations which have been determined by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) of the United States to be exempt from the payment of income tax and whose charitable contributions would be deemed tax deductible; provided, that the organization shall file a true and correct copy of a current IRS 501(c) or 501(d) exemption certificate. (Ord. O2005-177 § 3; Ord. O2003-126 § 3; Ord. O2002-118 § 4)


5.05.050 License – Application and issuance. 

(1) A business license must be obtained and the license fee paid before a business commences operation within the City. If business is transacted by one person at two or more separate locations within the City, a separate license shall be obtained and displayed in each location.

(2) A business license shall expire on the date established by the master license service, and a licensee otherwise in compliance with the terms of this chapter may renew the licensee’s business license by payment of the annual licensing fee within the time period established by the master license service. 

(3) Applications for business licenses shall be made to the director on forms provided by the City, which shall state the residence of the applicants, the nature of the proposed business, the proposed location of the business, and such other information as the director may reasonably request. If the director finds that the application is complete and correct, that all required fees have been paid, and all laws and requirements have been complied with, a business license shall be issued. Business license applications submitted to the City, and business licenses, are public records open to inspection, except as otherwise provided by law.

(4) The director shall, when appropriate, refer applications to the department of community development, the police department, the fire department, or other governmental agencies for their review.

(5) If more than one business is conducted or operated on a single premises, a separate license shall be required for each business. If a business is conducted or operated on more than one premises in the City, a separate license shall be required for each premises in the City.

(6) The filing of an application for a license, or the renewal thereof, or the payment of any application or renewal fee, shall not authorize a person to engage in or conduct a business until such license has been granted or renewed.

(7) A business license shall be personal and nontransferable. Where a licensee’s place of business is changed, the licensee shall return the license to the director and a new license shall be issued for the new place of business without charge. No licensee shall allow another person to operate a business under, or display, the license, nor shall another person operate under or display the license.

(8) The City’s decision to issue or the issuance of a business license shall not be construed as permission or acquiescence in a prohibited activity or other violation; and the City shall not be held liable for the actions of any licensed business by virtue of having issued a license to conduct business.

(9) Every licensee shall permit reasonable inspections of the business premises by governmental authorities for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. O2003-126 § 4; Ord. O2002-118 § 5)


5.05.060 Successor liability.

(1) Whenever any person required to be licensed by this chapter quits business, or sells, exchanges or otherwise disposes of his/her business or stock of goods, any license fee, tax or penalty payable to the City shall immediately become due and payable, and such person shall, within 30 days, file the required forms and pay the amounts due. Any person who becomes a successor to such person shall become liable for the full amount of the license fee, tax or penalties due and owing, unless such person gives written notice to the director of such acquisition no less than 30 days before the date of closing.

(2) Each person’s account will remain on an active status and be subject to all license fees and penalties until such time as the director is notified in writing that the person has discontinued business activity within the City. (Ord. O2002-118 § 6)


5.05.070 License – Suspension, denial or revocation. 

(1) A business license may be denied, suspended or revoked by the director whenever the licensee or any of its officers, directors, agents, owners or employees fails or have failed:

(a) To maintain the licensed premises or business activity in compliance with applicable health, building, fire, safety laws, ordinances, or regulations; or

(b) To comply with the requirements of this chapter. Any suspension shall remain in effect until the conditions causing the suspension are cured and reasonable measures are taken to ensure that those conditions will not recur.

(2) The director shall, by certified mail, give written notice to the applicant of denial of a license or to the licensee of suspension or revocation of a license, including a summary of the complaints, objections and information considered by the director and the reason(s) for the action. Notice mailed to the mailing address on the application or most recent renewal shall be deemed received three days after mailing. The director’s decision may be appealed to the City hearing examiner upon payment of the appropriate appeal fee.

(3) A business license revoked for failure to pay the annual license fee or business and occupation tax shall be reinstated if payment of the amount due, together with any penalties due thereon, is made within 15 days of the date of the notice. (Ord. O2002-118 § 7)


5.05.080 Duties of the director. 

(1) The director shall keep full and accurate records of all funds received under the provisions of this chapter. Upon receipt of such amount, the director shall deposit the amounts collected into the current expense fund of the City.

(2) The director may adopt, publish and enforce rules and regulations for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter, and it is unlawful to violate or fail to comply with any such rule or regulation. (Ord. O2002-118 § 8)


5.05.090 Enforcement.

(1) Collection. The license fee and all penalties imposed under this chapter shall constitute a debt to the City and may be collected by court proceedings, which remedy shall be in addition to all other existing remedies. Any judgment entered in favor of the City shall include an award to the City of all court and collection costs, including attorney’s fees. Amounts delinquent more than 90 days may be assigned for collection, in which case the amount of any collection charges shall be in addition to all other amounts owed.

(2) Penalties.

(a) It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to engage in nonpeddler business within the City without first obtaining or renewing a business license or to fail to comply with any provision of this chapter.

(b) It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to make any false representation in connection with an application for a business license.

(c) Except as set forth in subsection (2)(e) of this section, it shall be a misdemeanor for any peddler to engage in business within the City without first obtaining or renewing a business license or for any peddler to fail to comply with any provision of this chapter.

(d) A second or subsequent violation of subsection (2)(a), (b) or (c) of this section shall be a gross misdemeanor.

(e) It shall be a civil infraction with a penalty of up to $1,000 for a peddler to conduct business without a valid business license or license application in his or her possession as required under SMC 5.05.030(2) if that peddler has in his or her possession federal, state, or local government-issued identification from which an officer can ascertain the peddler’s identity. A second or subsequent violation of this subsection within one year of a first violation shall be a gross misdemeanor.

(f) Persons employing or supervising peddlers who violate subsection (2)(c) or (2)(e) of this section shall be deemed to be in violation of those subsections as well. (Ord. O2005-177 § 1; Ord. O2002-118 § 9)


5.05.100 City manager authorized to enter into master license service agreement.

The City manager is hereby authorized to enter into an agreement with the state of Washington master license service under which that agency shall accept and process City business license applications. (Ord. O2003-126 § 1)


Chapter 5.06 SOLICITOR’S LICENSE

Sections:

5.06.010    Definitions.

5.06.020    License – Required – No soliciting signs – Exemptions.

5.06.030    License – Application.

5.06.040    Investigation of application – Issuance and denial of license.

5.06.050    Fees.

5.06.060    Exhibition of license.

5.06.070    Expiration.

5.06.080    Revocation or suspension of license – Grounds.

5.06.090    Appeal.

5.06.110    Use of streets.

5.06.120    Hours.

5.06.130    Records.

5.06.140    Penalty for violation.


5.06.010 Definitions.

A “solicitor” is defined as follows:

(1) Any person, both principals and agents, who shall sell, offer or expose for sale, or trade, deal or traffic in any personal property at retail or services in the City by going from house to house or from place to place or by indiscriminately approaching individuals.

(2) Sales by sample or for future delivery, and executory contracts of sale by solicitors, are embraced within the preceding subsection; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to any salesman or canvasser who solicits trade from wholesale or retail dealers in the City. (Ord. O2012-329 § 1; Ord. O2012-322 § 1 (Att. A))


5.06.020 License – Required – No soliciting signs – Exemptions.

(1) No person or individual shall act as a solicitor within the City limits without first obtaining a license therefor as provided in this chapter. It is a violation of this chapter to solicit without a valid license.

(2) It is a violation to solicit on premises that conspicuously display a “no solicitors” sign, or a sign with similar language. 

(3) The following persons are eligible for an exemption to the license requirements and fee provisions of this chapter:

(a) Farmers, gardeners, or other persons who sell, deliver, or peddle agricultural, horticultural or farm products (including fruits, vegetables, berries, eggs, or other edibles) which they have actually grown, harvested, manufactured or produced; provided, that this exception does not apply to sale of firewood;

(b) Charitable, religious or nonprofit organizations or corporations which have received tax exempt status under 26 U.S.C. 501(c)(3) or other similar civic, charitable, educational, political, or nonprofit organizations; and 

(c) Newspaper subscription solicitors and vendors of books and periodicals.

Provided, however, that any such person must first apply for an exemption on forms furnished by the City clerk. Upon determination by the City clerk that such person is exempt from the license requirements, a copy of the approved “application for exemption” shall be provided and must be carried by the person at all times the person solicits in the City. (Ord. O2012-322 § 1 (Att. A))


5.06.030 License – Application.

(1) License applicants must file with the City clerk a sworn application in writing on a form furnished by the City clerk.

(2) All applicants must supply the following information:

(a) Name, home address, home telephone number, date of birth, valid driver’s license(s), vehicle description(s), and license plate number(s);

(b) Name, business address, mailing address, and phone number of sponsor, employer or association which the solicitor is representing, if applicable;

(c) Description of item(s) for sale;

(d) Business references;

(e) Whether or not the solicitor has ever been convicted of a crime related to the sale or representation of any goods, wares, merchandise or anything of value, and, if so, the details thereof (i.e., burglary, theft or crimes against the person). (Ord. O2012-322 § 1 (Att. A))


5.06.040 Investigation of application – Issuance and denial of license.

(1) The City clerk or designee shall verify the information included in the application.

(2) After verifying the information contained in the application, the City clerk shall, upon payment of the prescribed fee, issue the license to the applicant. The City clerk shall deny a license if the applicant has:

(a) Within the last 10 years been convicted of a crime or offense directly related to the sale or representation of any goods, wares, merchandise or anything of value, including, but not limited to, burglary, theft, and fraud;

(b) Made a false or misleading statement in the application. (Ord. O2012-322 § 1 (Att. A))


5.06.050 Fees.

Solicitor’s license shall be as shown in the most current City fee schedule. Such fees shall be paid at the time of filing the application without proration. (Ord. O2012-322 § 1 (Att. A))


5.06.060 Exhibition of license.

Solicitors are required to exhibit their license at the time of any solicitation and upon request by a police officer and any person being solicited. (Ord. O2012-322 § 1 (Att. A))


5.06.070 Expiration.

All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire one year from date of issuance. (Ord. O2012-329 § 2; Ord. O2012-322 § 1 (Att. A))


5.06.080 Revocation or suspension of license – Grounds.

The City clerk may, at any time, suspend or revoke any license issued under the provisions of this chapter whenever the licensee, or any officer, employee or partner thereof:

(1) Has violated any federal, state or City statute, law, regulation or ordinance directly related to his or her fitness for a solicitor’s license, whether or not the licensee, or officer or partner thereof, has been convicted in any court of competent jurisdiction of such violation; or

(2) Is conducting or has conducted, engaged in or operated a business stated in the license which does not conform to the ordinances of the City; or

(3) Has maintained or permitted the business stated in the license to be conducted, engaged in or operated in such manner as to constitute a public nuisance; or

(4) Has made any material false statement or representation in connection with obtaining the license. (Ord. O2012-322 § 1 (Att. A))


5.06.090 Appeal.

(1) Whenever the City clerk determines that there is cause for denial, suspension or revocation of a solicitor’s license, the clerk shall, by certified mail, notify the applicant or licensee of the clerk’s determination, including the grounds for denial, suspension or revocation. Notice mailed to the address on the application or license shall be deemed received three days after mailing.

(2) The licensee may appeal the decision of the City clerk to deny, suspend or revoke a solicitor’s license by filing a written notice of appeal to the hearing examiner within 21 days of the City clerk’s decision, pursuant to the procedures in Chapter 20.10 SMC. (Ord. O2012-322 § 1 (Att. A))


5.06.110 Use of streets.

No solicitor shall have any right to a stationary location in a public right-of-way. (Ord. O2012-322 § 1 (Att. A))


5.06.120 Hours.

No person required to obtain a solicitor’s license shall engage in the business of solicitation between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. Monday through Friday and between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. (Ord. O2012-322 § 1 (Att. A))


5.06.130 Records.

The police shall report to the City clerk all convictions for violations of this chapter, and the City clerk shall maintain a record for each license issued and record the reports of violation therein. (Ord. O2012-322 § 1 (Att. A))


5.06.140 Penalty for violation.

Any person failing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to the penalties provided in Chapter 1.10 SMC. (Ord. O2012-322 § 1 (Att. A))


Title 6 TAXIS

Chapters:

6.05    Taxis – Businesses and Drivers


Chapter 6.05 TAXIS – BUSINESSES AND DRIVERS

Sections:

6.05.010    Chapter 6.64 KCC adopted.

6.05.020    Delegation of authority.

6.05.030    County enforcement.

6.05.040    City authority retained.


6.05.010 Chapter 6.64 KCC adopted.

King County Code Chapter 6.64, Taxis – Businesses and Drivers, a copy of which is attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter and incorporated by reference, is hereby adopted by reference as presently constituted or hereinafter amended. (Ord. O2002-110 § 1)


6.05.020 Delegation of authority.

The City council hereby delegates to King County the authority to determine eligibility for licenses issued under the terms of this chapter, subject to the review power of the King County board of appeals. (Ord. O2002-110 § 2)


6.05.030 County enforcement. 

The City council hereby delegates to King County the authority to enforce the terms of this chapter, including authority to deny, suspend or revoke licenses issued thereunder, subject to the conditions set forth in this chapter, and subject to the review power of the King County board of appeals. (Ord. O2002-110 § 3)


6.05.040 City authority retained.

Nothing in this chapter shall divest the City of authority to issue notices of violation and court citations for alleged violations of this or any other City ordinance. The authority to issue notices of violations and court citations for violations of this chapter may be exercised by either the county or City. (Ord. O2002-110 § 4)


Title 7 PARKS AND RECREATION

Chapters:

7.12    Park Rules


Chapter 7.12 PARK RULES

Sections:

Article I. General

7.12.010    Definitions.

7.12.020    Program – Purpose.

Article II. Administration

7.12.030    Administrative rules – Hours and conditions of operation.

7.12.040    Permits for community groups.

7.12.050    Special use permits.

7.12.060    Cancellation of permit.

7.12.070    Religious services or group rallies.

7.12.080    Use of facilities – Building use hours.

7.12.090    Cleanup.

7.12.100    Liability.

7.12.110    Liability insurance.

7.12.120    Adults to accompany minors.

7.12.130    Storage of equipment – Liability of City.

7.12.140    Equipment regulations – Failure to conform.

7.12.150    Facility use – Sale of goods or services.

Article III. Rules Governing Use of Facilities – Infraction

7.12.220    Picnicking.

7.12.230    Food waste, washing of clothes or animals prohibited.

7.12.240    Parking lots and roadways – Games prohibited.

7.12.250    Motor vehicles – Parking.

7.12.260    Motor vehicles on roads and trails.

7.12.270    Motor vehicles – Speed limits.

7.12.280    Washing of vehicles.

7.12.290    Motor vehicles – Trucks and commercial vehicles.

7.12.295    Trail use.

7.12.300    Boating – Occupancy policy.

7.12.310    Commercial watercraft prohibited.

7.12.320    Overnight moorage.

7.12.330    Tandem moorage.

7.12.340    Use of marine heads.

7.12.350    Camping – In designated areas only.

7.12.360    Tents and shelters on beaches.

7.12.370    Clothing.

7.12.380    Ice.

7.12.390    Game fish.

7.12.400    Shellfish and food fish.

7.12.410    Pets in City park facilities.

7.12.420    Disturbances by animals prohibited.

7.12.430    Horseback riding.

7.12.440    Littering.

7.12.450    Repealed.

7.12.460    Swimming and boating rules.

7.12.470    Swimming/scuba diving in boat launch areas prohibited.

7.12.480    Presence in parks during hours the park is closed.

7.12.485    Compliance with signage.

Article IV. Rules Governing Use of Facilities – Misdemeanors

7.12.490    Loitering.

7.12.500    Horseback riding – May not endanger others.

7.12.510    Mechanical trapping devices – Capturing or injuring animals.

7.12.520    False alarm of drowning prohibited.

7.12.530    Games on beaches.

7.12.540    Moorage in swimming area prohibited – Exception.

7.12.550    Damage to property/wildlife.

7.12.560    Removal of property.

7.12.570    Outside household or commercial waste.

7.12.580    Waste from vehicles.

7.12.590    Dumping in water prohibited.

7.12.600    Aircraft.

7.12.610    Solicitation.

7.12.620    Fireworks.

7.12.630    Firearms, weapons.

7.12.640    Alcoholic beverages.

7.12.642    Intoxication.

7.12.645    Interference with trails.

7.12.646    Tobacco and related products prohibited.

Article V. Penalties

7.12.650    Infractions.

7.12.660    Misdemeanors.

7.12.670    Administrative sanctions.

Article VI. Park Safety – Enforcement

7.12.680    Park safety.

7.12.690    Responsibilities.

7.12.700    Enforcement methods.

7.12.710    Repealed.

Article VII. Miscellaneous Provisions

7.12.720    Severability.

Article I. General


7.12.010 Definitions.

Whenever used in this chapter the following terms shall be defined as herein indicated:

(1) “Aircraft” means any machine or device designed to travel through the air including, but not limited to, airplanes, helicopters and balloons.

(2) “Alcoholic beverages” or “liquor” includes the four varieties of liquor defined as alcohol, spirits, wine and beer, all fermented, spirituous, vinous, or malt liquor, and all other intoxicating beverages, and every liquor, solid or semisolid or other substance, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer; all drinks or drinkable liquids and all preparations or mixtures capable of human consumption. Any liquor, semisolid, solid or other substance which contains more than one percent alcohol by weight shall be conclusively deemed to be intoxicating.

(3) “Associated marine area” means any water area within 100 feet of any “City of Sammamish trail, open space, park area” or “marine facility” such as a dock, pier, float, buoy, log boom, or other object which is part of a “City of Sammamish park area”; provided, that such area does not include private property.

(4) “Boat” means any contrivance up to 65 feet in length overall, used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on water.

(5) “Camper” means a motorized vehicle containing sleeping and/or housekeeping accommodations, and shall include a pickup truck with camper, a van-type body, a converted bus, or any similar type vehicle.

(6) “Camping” means erecting a tent or shelter or arranging bedding or both for the purpose of, or in such a way as will permit, remaining overnight, or parking a trailer, camper, or other vehicle for the purpose of remaining overnight.

(7) “Campsite” means designated camping sites which are designated for the use of tent campers, and which have no water and/or electrical facilities available for hookup to a trailer or a camper.

(8) “Discrimination” means any action or failure to act, whether by single act or part of a practice, the effect of which is to adversely affect or differentiate between or among individuals or groups of individuals, because of race, color, religion, national origin, age, sex, marital status, parental status, sexual orientation, the presence of any sensory, mental or physical handicap, or the use of an animal guide by a blind or deaf or otherwise physically or mentally challenged person.

(9) “Department” means the City of Sammamish department of parks and recreation.

(10) “Facility” or “facilities” means any building, structure, or park area operated by the City of Sammamish department of parks and recreation.

(11) “Floatation device” means a buoyancy device, life preserver, buoyant vest, ring or cushion, regardless of shape or size, that is designed to float a person in the water.

(12) “City of Sammamish open space, trail or park area” means any area under the ownership, management, or control of the department of parks and recreation.

(13) “Director” means director of the City of Sammamish department of parks and recreation or his or her designee.

(14) “Motor vehicle” means any self-propelled device capable of being moved upon a road, and in, upon, or by which any persons or property may be transported or drawn, and shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, motor scooters, jeeps or similar type four-wheel drive vehicles, and snowmobiles, whether or not they can be legally operated upon the public highways.

(15) “Motor powered craft or watercraft” means any description of watercraft on the water, other than a seaplane, that is equipped with motor propulsion machinery, whether inboard or outboard and whether electric or fuel operated, and that is used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on water and shall include, but not be limited to, motorboats, speedboats, powerboats, ski boats and jet skis; however, it does not include nonmotorized watercraft, including but not limited to canoes, kayaks, paddle boats, row boats, inner tubes, air mattresses, sailboards, and small rafts or floatation devices or toys customarily used by swimmers.

(16) “Person” means all persons, groups, firms, partnerships, corporations, clubs, and all associations or combination of persons whenever acting for themselves or as an agent, servant, or employee.

(17) “Rocket” means any device containing a combustible substance which when ignited propels the device forward.

(18) “Trail” means any path, track, or right-of-way designed for use by pedestrians, bicycles, equestrians, or other nonmotorized modes of transportation.

(19) “Trailer” means a towed vehicle which contains sleeping or housekeeping accommodations.

(20) “Trailer site” means a designated camping site which has water and/or electrical facilities available for hookup, and which is designed for the use of persons with trailers or campers. (Ord. O2014-368 § 2)


7.12.020 Program – Purpose. 

The parks, playgrounds, activity centers, pools, and other facilities of the department are established by law for public recreation purposes. The public recreation programs consist primarily of activities planned and directed by the department, and secondarily of recreation activities of community groups brought under control of the division when authorized by and conducted under permit issued by the department.

Article II. Administration


7.12.030 Administrative rules – Hours and conditions of operation.

The director shall promulgate rules setting forth the times and conditions upon which the City parks and recreation facilities will be open, closed, or used by the public.


7.12.040 Permits for community groups. 

The department may grant permits to community groups to meet or conduct activities in the department’s buildings or in the department’s other facilities if those buildings, portions of buildings, or facilities are not otherwise required by the department. A nominal fee may be charged according to the department’s current adopted fee resolution.


7.12.050 Special use permits. 

(1) Groups which do not meet all of the requirements set forth in SMC 7.12.040 and groups which desire to use City park facilities may be granted special use permits by the department, and will be charged a fee. Where appropriate, special conditions of use will be established by the department and so noted on the special use permit. A schedule of the charges for special services in City of Sammamish recreational facilities will be established by the department with the approval of the City of Sammamish council.

(2) Groups applying for special use permits for activities at which the consumption of alcoholic beverages is intended must meet the requirements of state law with respect to liquor permits as a precondition. During the course of the activity, the state liquor permit must be displayed within the area.


7.12.060 Cancellation of permit.

The department reserves the right to cancel a permittee’s reservation for cause or if the department wishes to make use of the facility which in the judgment of the department supersedes the need of the permittee. Notice of the department’s cancellation for priority use shall be given at least 24 hours in advance. Notice of cancellation for cause may be given at any time. (Ord. O2014-368 § 3)


7.12.070 Religious services or group rallies.

Religious services or group rallies may be permitted in City of Sammamish park areas where facilities are adequate, and where such activities will not conflict in any way with normal park usage. To avoid conflict, permission for such activities must be obtained in advance from the director. Permission for use of loudspeakers by groups must be obtained in advance. (Ord. O2014-368 § 4)


7.12.080 Use of facilities – Building use hours.

Activities for groups using the facilities Sundays through Thursdays shall normally cease at 10:00 p.m. unless otherwise approved on the use permit. On Fridays and Saturdays groups must agree to be out of the facilities by 12:30 a.m. unless otherwise approved in the use permit.


7.12.090 Cleanup. 

All persons must leave facilities in a condition considered satisfactory to the director. No person shall conduct activities causing extra custodial work unless previous agreement has been made to pay for such work and this is so stated in the use permit. (Ord. O2014-368 § 5)


7.12.100 Liability.

Persons using facilities by permit will be required to protect, save and hold the City, its elected and appointed officials and employees while acting within the scope of their duties harmless from and against all claims, demands and causes of action of any kind or character, including the cost of defense thereof, arising in favor of a person or group’s members or employees or third parties on account of any action including but not limited to personal injuries, death or damage to property arising out of the use of premises, or in any way arising out of the acts or omissions of the person, group and/or its agents, employees or representatives.


7.12.110 Liability insurance. 

(1) During all periods of use, persons using facilities by permit shall, except when a waiver is obtained from the department, obtain and maintain public liability insurance acceptable to the City and/or other insurance necessary to protect the public and the City on premises to be used, with limits of liability as established by the City.

(2) Persons shall provide a certificate of insurance, or, upon written request of the City, a duplicate of the policy, as evidence of the insurance protection provided. This insurance shall not be cancelled or reduced without prior written notice to the City at least 30 days in advance of the cancellation.


7.12.120 Adults to accompany minors. 

Adults must be present and responsible at all assemblies of minors throughout the entire function.


7.12.130 Storage of equipment – Liability of City.

Persons using facilities should not expect storage space for equipment necessary for their programs. If temporary storage is provided, the City of Sammamish shall not be held responsible for loss or damage. City equipment shall not be loaned to any non-City person, group or organization without prior written permission from the department.


7.12.140 Equipment regulations – Failure to conform. 

The misuse of a park facility or the failure to conform with these regulations, the instructions of department employees, or the conditions of a permit may be sufficient reason for denying any future permits. (Ord. O2014-368 § 6)


7.12.150 Facility use – Sale of goods or services.

The use of park facilities for financial gain shall be allowed only through concession contracts secured by the City’s competitive bid process, negotiated concession contracts or by special use permit issued by the department. (Ord. O2014-368 § 7)

Article III. Rules Governing Use of Facilities – Infraction


7.12.220 Picnicking.

Picnicking is permitted only in designated and marked picnicking areas, or in such other places within a City park area as may from time to time be designated by the director. (Ord. O2014-368 § 8)


7.12.230 Food waste, washing of clothes or animals prohibited.

No person shall clean fish or other food, or wash any clothing or other articles for personal or household use, or wash any dog or other animal, except at designated areas in any City park area. (Ord. O2014-368 § 9)


7.12.240 Parking lots and roadways – Games prohibited. 

Games of any kind are prohibited in parking lots and roadways of all department facilities. (Ord. O2014-368 § 10)


7.12.250 Motor vehicles – Parking. 

No operator of any automobile, trailer, camper, boat trailer, or other vehicle shall park such vehicle in any City of Sammamish park area, except where the operator is using the area for the designated recreational purpose and the vehicle is parked either in the designated parking area, or in another area with the permission of the director. No person shall park, leave standing, or abandon a vehicle in any City of Sammamish park area after closing time except persons who have paid the applicable use fees to camp in designated campsites or trailer sites or to moor boats overnight at designated sites, and persons using park facilities as part of an event authorized by the department. In addition to the penalties found in Article V of this chapter, any vehicle found parked in violation may be towed away at the owner’s expense. (Ord. O2014-368 § 11)


7.12.260 Motor vehicles on roads and trails.

No person shall operate any motor vehicle on a trail in any City of Sammamish park area unless such trail has been specifically designated and posted for such use. No person shall operate a motor vehicle within the boundaries of a City of Sammamish park area except on roads, streets, highways, parking lots, parking areas, or where otherwise permitted by proper posting; provided, that this section shall not apply to emergency vehicles, maintenance vehicles, or construction vehicles authorized by the department.


7.12.270 Motor vehicles – Speed limits.

No person shall drive a motor vehicle within any City park area at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour or as otherwise posted, having due regard for traffic on and the surface and width of the road, and in no event at a speed which endangers the safety of persons, property, or wildlife; provided, however, that in no event shall a vehicle be driven at a speed greater than 15 miles per hour in camp, picnic, utility, or headquarters areas, or in areas of general public assemblage.


7.12.280 Washing of vehicles. 

No person shall clean or wash any automobile or other vehicle in any City of Sammamish park area except in areas specifically designated for that use.


7.12.290 Motor vehicles – Trucks and commercial vehicles. 

No person shall cause a truck or other vehicle while being used for commercial purposes to enter upon, use, or traverse any portion of any City of Sammamish park area or any park road except in the service of the department at the request of the employees of the department, or by express permission of the director for a special activity not inconsistent with City park use; provided, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to City roads or state highways. (Ord. O2014-368 § 12)


7.12.295 Trail use. 

(1) No person shall travel on a trail at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual and potential hazards then existing. In every event, speed shall be so controlled as may be necessary to avoid colliding with others who are complying with the law and using reasonable care. Travel at speeds in excess of 15 miles per hour shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the person violated this section.

(2) No person shall travel on a trail in a negligent manner. For the purposes of this section “travel on a trail in a negligent manner” shall be construed to mean any form of travel on a trail in such a manner as to endanger or be likely to endanger any persons or property.

(3) For the purposes of this section “travel” shall be construed to include all forms of movement or transportation on a trail, including but not limited to foot, bicycle, horse, skateboard, and roller skates.

(4) Every person traveling on a trail shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with applicable laws unless otherwise directed by a police officer.

(5) No motorized vehicles shall be allowed on City of Sammamish trails. For the purposes of this section “motorized vehicles” means any form of transportation powered by an internal combustion or electric motor. This includes but is not limited to automobiles, golf carts, mopeds, motor scooters, and motorcycles. This section shall not apply to wheelchairs powered by electric motors, or authorized maintenance, police or emergency vehicles.

(6) Regional trails, local trail corridors, and paved pathways are open to all nonmotorized users unless otherwise designated and posted. Pedestrians, bicyclists and equestrians are permitted on all maintained soft surface trails unless otherwise posted and designated. Trail restrictions may be posted at park entrances, trailheads or, in some cases, on individual trails. Trail use designations will be based on the park master plan, resource conservation, trail user conflicts, maintenance issues, and safety hazards.

(7) Every person who shall use or travel on a trail shall obey the model trail user code of conduct.

(8) Model Trail User Code of Conduct.

(a) Using a Trail. Every person using a trail shall stay as near to the right side of the trail as is safe, excepting those movements necessary to prepare to make or make turning movements, or while overtaking and passing another user moving in the same direction.

(b) Regard for Other Trail Users. Every user shall exercise due care and caution to avoid colliding with any other trail user. All users shall travel in a consistent and predictable manner.

(c) Groups on Trail. No group of trail users, including their animal(s), shall occupy more than one-half of the trail as measured from the right side, so as to impede the normal and reasonable movement of trail users.

(d) Audible Signal When Passing. Every user shall give an audible warning signal before passing another trail user. The signal must be produced in such a manner as to allow adequate time for response. The signal may be given by voice, bell or horn.

(e) Overtaking Trail Users on the Left. Any trail user overtaking another trail user proceeding in the same direction shall pass to the left of such overtaken user at a safe distance, and shall stay to the left until safely clear of the overtaken user.

(f) Entering and Crossing Trail. Trail users entering or crossing the trail at uncontrolled points shall yield to traffic on the trail.

(g) Lights on Trail Users. All bicyclists using the trail from one-half hour before sunset to one-half hour before sunrise shall equip their bicycles with a headlight visible 500 feet to the front, and a red or amber light visible 500 feet to the rear.

(h) Regard for Equestrian Users on Trail. Trail users shall exercise extreme caution to prevent frightening horses with sudden noise or movement and shall always yield right-of-way to horses and warn equestrian users when approaching from behind and attempting to pass.

(i) Regard for Adjacent Property Owners. Trail users should respect private lands adjacent to City trails and should stay on trails to avoid trespassing on or interfering with adjacent private property.


7.12.300 Boating – Occupancy policy. 

In order to afford the general public the greatest possible use of marine facilities, continuous occupancy of marine facilities by the same person or group in any area is limited to any three days in a seven-day period, beginning midnight Wednesday and ending midnight the following Wednesday unless otherwise posted. Shorter or longer limitation of occupancy may be established and posted by the department for any individual facility or area. In addition to the penalties in Article V of this chapter, any boat found to be in violation of this chapter may be towed away at the owner’s expense. No person shall launch a boat in any City of Sammamish park except in areas specifically designated and/or marked for that purpose. (Ord. O2014-368 § 13)


7.12.310 Commercial watercraft prohibited.

Use of marine areas and marine facilities by commercial watercraft is prohibited. For the purpose of this rule “commercial watercraft” means watercraft used for any commercial purpose but shall not include a commercial watercraft operated within the terms of a concession lease with the department. (Ord. O2014-368 § 14)


7.12.320 Overnight moorage. 

No person or persons shall moor, anchor, dock or berth a boat or other object overnight in a City of Sammamish park area or associated marine area unless the area has been designated for such use.


7.12.330 Tandem moorage. 

No more than three boats or other objects may be tied or rafted together when moored, docked or berthed adjacent to a dock, pier, or float in a City of Sammamish park area or associated marine area. (Ord. O2014-368 § 15)


7.12.340 Use of marine heads.

No person shall use or flush any marine head which when flushed emits its contents directly into the waters of a lake, river, or any other water area, nor cause any human or animal waste to be dumped into the waters while moored, anchored, docked or berthed in a City of Sammamish park area or associated marine area or when entering or leaving the area.


7.12.350 Camping – In designated areas only.

No person shall camp in any City of Sammamish park area or associated marine area except in areas specifically designated and/or marked for that purpose. (Ord. O2014-368 § 16)


7.12.360 Tents and shelters on beaches.

No person shall erect, maintain, use or occupy a temporary tent or shelter on any swimming beach in any City of Sammamish park area or associated marine area unless there is an unobstructed view through such tent or shelter from at least two sides; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize overnight camping except in designated areas. (Ord. O2014-368 § 17)


7.12.370 Clothing.

Clothing sufficient to conform to community standards shall be worn at all times.


7.12.380 Ice. 

No person shall go out onto ice in any City of Sammamish park or park area, except in areas specifically designated for that purpose. This includes, but is not limited to, lakes, ponds, streams, rivers, and other bodies of water.


7.12.390 Game fish.

All laws, rules and regulations of the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife relating to season, limits, and methods of fishing are applicable to fishing for game fish in City of Sammamish park areas and associated marine areas. No person may fish for or possess any fish taken from any dam, dike, bridge, dock, boat launch, or beach, which is posted with a sign prohibiting fishing. (Ord. O2014-368 § 18)


7.12.400 Shellfish and food fish. 

All laws, rules and regulations of the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife relating to season, limits, and methods of taking are applicable to the taking of shellfish or food fish in City of Sammamish park areas and associated marine areas, and in addition to such laws, the department may, upon its finding and for good cause, close certain City of Sammamish park areas and associated marine areas to the taking of shellfish for specific periods of time. Such closed areas shall be posted with appropriate signs. (Ord. O2014-368 § 19)


7.12.410 Pets in City park facilities.

(1) Dogs, pets or domestic animals are not permitted on any designated swimming beach, athletic field, picnic shelter area or play area in any City of Sammamish park or associated marine area or in any building, unless specifically permitted by posting of the department; provided, that this section shall not apply to service animals.

(2) In permissible areas, dogs or pets or other domestic animals must be kept on a leash no greater than 16 feet in length, and under control at all times.

(3) Any person whose dog or other pet is in any City of Sammamish park area shall be responsible for the conduct of the animal and for removing feces deposited by such animal from the park area. (Ord. O2014-368 § 20; Ord. O2009-255 § 1)


7.12.420 Disturbances by animals prohibited.

No person shall allow his or her dog or other pet or domestic animal to bite or in any way molest or annoy park visitors or other pet or domestic animals or wildlife. No person shall permit his or her dog or other pet or domestic animal to bark continuously or otherwise disturb the peace and tranquility of any City of Sammamish park area or associated marine area. (Ord. O2014-368 § 21)


7.12.430 Horseback riding.

Horses are permitted on trails unless otherwise posted and designated. Horses shall be permitted in other City of Sammamish park areas that are specifically posted to permit such activity. Horses shall not be permitted in any designated swimming area or picnic area. No person shall allow a horse or other animal to stand unattended or insecurely tied.


7.12.440 Littering.

No person shall leave, deposit, drop or scatter bottles, broken glass, ashes, food, waste paper, cans, or other rubbish in a City of Sammamish park area or associated marine area, except in a garbage can or other receptacle designated for such purposes. (Ord. O2014-368 § 22)


7.12.450 Swimming – In designated areas only.

Repealed by Ord. O2014-368.


7.12.460 Swimming and boating rules.

Swimmers must obey rules. All persons using City parks, beaches and water resources shall obey all posted beach rules and/or the instructions of lifeguards or other City employees.

(1) Designated swimming areas shall be marked with buoys, log booms, or other markers clearly designating the boundaries of such areas. At City parks, beaches and associated marine areas, swimming shall be permitted only within designated swimming areas. Swimming is prohibited at the north dock of the Sammamish Landing Park.

(2) In designated swimming areas, floatation devices are allowed only at lifeguards’ discretion. Swimmers must stay within designated swimming areas when using floatation devices. In designated swimming areas, the use or operation of nonmotorized watercraft, including but not limited to canoes, kayaks, paddle boats and row boats, is prohibited; provided further, the use or operation of toy motorized boats in designated swimming areas is prohibited.

(3) False alarm of drowning is prohibited. No person shall give or transmit a false signal or false alarm of drowning in any manner.

(4) Swimming in boat launch areas is prohibited. No person shall swim or sunbathe in any designated boat launching areas.

(5) In the interests of safe navigation and the protection of life and property and consistent with SMC 12.05.010(3) (boating regulations), no person shall operate any motor powered watercraft while the propeller is engaged within 50 feet of any swimmer with or without a floatation device or within 50 feet of any nonmotorized watercrafts, including but not limited to kayaks, canoes, paddle boats or row boats, on any lake within the City of Sammamish, except as otherwise allowed for water skiing; this section shall not apply to patrol or rescue watercraft or in the case of an emergency.

(6) In the interests of safe navigation and the protection of life and property and consistent with SMC 12.05.010 (boating regulations), boat launching is permitted in designated areas only. No person shall land, launch, dock or operate any motorized watercraft in any City park except in areas specifically designated and/or marked for that purpose and consistent with this code; provided, that this provision does not apply in an emergency situation. (Ord. O2014-368 § 24)


7.12.470 Swimming/scuba diving in boat launch areas prohibited.

No person shall swim, sunbathe, or scuba dive in any designated boat launching area.


7.12.480 Presence in parks during hours the park is closed. 

No person shall enter or be present in a City park area or associated marine area during hours the park is closed except persons who have paid the applicable use fees to camp in designated campsites or trailer sites, or to moor boats overnight at designated sites and persons using park facilities as part of an event authorized by the department. Park areas and associated marine areas are open dawn to dusk unless open for scheduled or reserved recreational activities. (Ord. O2014-368 § 25)


7.12.485 Compliance with signage.

The director is authorized to post signage in any City of Sammamish open space, trail, park area or associated marine area. All persons must comply with signage posted in any City of Sammamish open space, trail, park area or associated marine area. (Ord. O2020-507 § 1)

Article IV. Rules Governing Use of Facilities – Misdemeanors


7.12.490 Loitering.

Loitering is prohibited in restrooms and bathhouses in City of Sammamish park and recreation facilities.


7.12.500 Horseback riding – May not endanger others.

No person shall ride any horse or other animal in such a manner that could cause physical harm to any person.


7.12.510 Mechanical trapping devices – Capturing or injuring animals. 

The use of a mechanical trapping device within any City of Sammamish park is prohibited. A “mechanical trapping device” shall be defined as any device, including but not limited to snares or machines, that shut suddenly upon contact by an animal, or a device which kills or inflicts physical pain and injury upon a captured animal. The act of capturing an animal, by other than lawful means, is prohibited.


7.12.520 False alarm of drowning prohibited.

No person shall give or transmit a false signal or false alarm of drowning.


7.12.530 Games on beaches.

Activities including but not limited to sports and physical play which interfere or tend to interfere with and endanger other beach users and distract from or obstruct the performance of lifeguarding responsibilities of parks personnel are prohibited. When circumstances can safely permit games, such games will be conducted only with the consent of a lifeguard or other department employee. (Ord. O2014-368 § 26)


7.12.540 Moorage in swimming area prohibited – Exception.

No person or persons shall moor, dock, or berth a boat or other watercraft, whether motorized or nonmotorized, to a log boom or float line which delineates a swimming area in a City of Sammamish park area or associated marine area, except that watercraft, whether motorized or nonmotorized, may moor, dock or berth on the southern side of the south dock at Sammamish Landing Park, and on either side of the north dock at Sammamish

Landing Park, consistent with this code. (Ord. O2014-368 § 27)


7.12.550 Damage to property/wildlife.

(1) It is unlawful for any person except a duly authorized department employee in the performance of his or her duties, or other person duly authorized pursuant to law, to remove, destroy, mutilate or damage any structure, lawn, monument, statue, vase, fountain, wall, fence railing, vehicle, bench, shrub, tree, geological formation, plant, flower, lighting system, sprinkling system, gate, barricade or lock or other property lawfully in any park, or to remove sand, soil, or sod in any park. No person shall cut down, destroy, or in any way injure any vegetation, living or dead, in any City park areas or associated marine areas unless authorized to do so by the department. No person shall deface, damage or destroy any property, material or equipment which is under the jurisdiction of the department. 

(2) Damage to Wildlife. Except for fishing and shellfishing in authorized areas and subject to rules promulgated by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, it is unlawful in any City of Sammamish park area or associated marine area in any manner to attempt to capture, tease, annoy, disturb, or strike any animal with any stick, weapon or other device or throw or otherwise propel any missile or other object at or in the vicinity of any such animal.

(3) Feeding Wildlife Prohibited. It is unlawful for any person in any City of Sammamish park area or associated marine area to feed wildlife, except that this prohibition does not include licensed fishing or shellfishing activity in designated areas. (Ord. O2014-368 § 28)


7.12.560 Removal of property.

No person shall change the position of or remove any City property, material, or equipment including vegetation and wildlife from its original position in any area under the jurisdiction of the department.


7.12.570 Outside household or commercial waste.

No person shall deposit any household or commercial garbage, refuse, waste, or rubbish which is brought in such form from any private property, in any City of Sammamish park area garbage can or other receptacle designated for such purpose.


7.12.580 Waste from vehicles.

No person shall drain or dump refuse or waste from any trailer, camper, automobile, or other vehicle, except in designated disposal areas or receptacles in any City of Sammamish park area.


7.12.590 Dumping in water prohibited.

No person shall pollute or in any way contaminate by dumping or otherwise depositing any waste or refuse of any nature, kind or description, including human and bodily waste, into any stream, river, lake or other body of water running in, through, or adjacent to any City park area.


7.12.600 Aircraft.

(1) Aircraft Landing/Take Off. No aircraft shall land or take off from any body of water or land area in a City of Sammamish park area except:

(a) Aircraft used to transport injured persons, evacuees, medical personnel, or public officials in the event of an accident, disaster, or emergency;

(b) Model aircraft as provided in subsection (2) of this section;

(c) No person shall be deemed to have violated the provisions of this section in the event of a bona fide emergency, provided the owner of the aircraft submits a written statement explaining the circumstances of the emergency to the director within 72 hours of an emergency landing.

(2) Model Aircraft and Rockets.

(a) No person shall fly rockets or model aircraft in any City of Sammamish park area except in areas specifically designated and/or posted for that purpose;

(b) All engines over 0.15 cubic inches used in model aircraft being flown in designated City of Sammamish park areas shall be muffled;

(c) All persons flying model aircraft in designated City of Sammamish park areas shall abide by the Official Academy of Model Aeronautics Safety Code;

(d) All persons desiring to shoot model rockets in a City of Sammamish park area shall obtain a permit to do so from the parks and recreation services office.


7.12.610 Solicitation.

No person shall solicit, sell, or peddle any goods, services, wares, merchandise, liquids, or edibles for human consumption, or distribute or post any handbills, circulars, or signs, or use any loudspeakers or other amplifying devices in any City of Sammamish park area or associated marine area, except by concession contract or by special use permit issued by the department. (Ord. O2014-368 § 29)


7.12.620 Fireworks.

No person shall possess, discharge, set off, or cause to be discharged, in or into any City of Sammamish park area or associated marine area, any firecracker, torpedo, rocket, firework, explosive, or substance harmful to the life or safety of persons or property, unless so authorized by the department. (Ord. O2014-368 § 30)


7.12.630 Firearms, weapons.

No person except duly authorized law enforcement personnel shall possess a bow and arrow, crossbow, or air or gas weapon in a City park. No person shall discharge across, in, or into any City of Sammamish park area a firearm, bow and arrow, crossbow, air or gas weapon, or any device capable of injuring or killing any person or animal, or damaging or destroying any public or private property; provided, that where the department for good cause has authorized in writing a special recreational activity upon finding that it is not inconsistent with City of Sammamish park use, this section shall not apply.


7.12.640 Alcoholic beverages. 

Selling, opening or possessing alcoholic beverages in an open container, or consuming any alcoholic beverage in a City of Sammamish park, recreation area or associated marine area is prohibited except in the following designated areas subject to approval by the director and under the following conditions:

(1) The sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages is permissible at designated indoor and outdoor locations within any park; provided, that the activities conform to the requirements of the Washington Liquor Control Board under RCW Title 66; and

(2) The serving and consumption of alcoholic beverages shall be confined to the designated location. The director shall designate the locations within the park and recreational facility where the activity is permissible. (Ord. O2014-368 § 31)


7.12.642 Intoxication. 

Being or remaining in, or loitering about in any City park, recreation area, or associated marine area while in a state of intoxication is prohibited.


7.12.645 Interference with trails. 

It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or otherwise cause or suffer to be located any structure, device, or natural or artificial thing that threatens or endangers any portion of a trail owned or maintained by the City of Sammamish, or that tends to endanger persons traveling thereon, obstructs or tends to obstruct or constitutes a hazard to persons traveling thereon. This section shall not apply to employees of the City of Sammamish in the performance of their duties or to persons acting pursuant to written direction of the City of Sammamish.


7.12.646 Tobacco and related products prohibited.

No person shall light cigarettes, vapor electric cigarettes, cigars, pipes of any kind, including but not limited to hookah pipes, or otherwise use any tobacco products, including but not limited to chewing tobacco, in any City of Sammamish park area or associated marine area. (Ord. O2014-368 § 32)

Article V. Penalties


7.12.650 Infractions.

(1) Failure to perform any act required or the performance of any act prohibited by Article III of this chapter shall be designated as an infraction.

(2) Any person cited for a violation of Article III of this chapter shall be subject to the applicable Justice Court Rules and bail schedules.

(3) Any person found guilty of committing an infraction shall be assessed a monetary penalty not to exceed $500.00.

(4) A finding that an infraction has been committed shall not give rise to any other legal disability which is based upon conviction of a crime.


7.12.660 Misdemeanors.

Any person found guilty of violating any provision of Article IV of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00, or by imprisonment in the City’s jail for not more than 90 days, or both.


7.12.670 Administrative sanctions.

In addition to any prescribed penalty, any person failing to comply with any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the loss of park or recreation facility use privileges and ejection from the City park area or associated marine park area.

Article VI. Park Safety – Enforcement


7.12.680 Park safety.

(1) General. Park rules, as promulgated in this chapter, are established to provide a system by which the greatest number of people may obtain the maximum satisfaction from the use of City parks and recreation facilities. For the rules to serve this purpose, they must be understood and followed by the park users. Accordingly, park safety involves both public awareness and rule enforcement programs.

(2) Application of Park Safety Program. The degree and extent to which the application of park safety shall be adapted to City parks shall be based on purpose and location of each park and recreation facility, its environment and surrounding community, the number and type of persons using it, the number and type of rule violations that have occurred in the past, and the perception that the people of the City have of the park or facility as a safe place to use. The department shall keep records of safety problems and rules violations in each facility and continuously evaluate its safety program for each facility based on those records. (Ord. O2014-368 § 33)


7.12.690 Responsibilities.

Park safety is the responsibility of both the police department and the department of parks and recreation. Specific responsibilities include the following:

(1) Department of Parks and Recreation.

(a) Enforcing rules of conduct set forth in the ordinance for which department personnel have appropriate authority.

(b) Developing and implementing public awareness programs regarding the purpose of the facilities and the rules governing their use.

(c) Encouraging voluntary compliance with rules based on awareness.

(d) Training department personnel in the appropriate use of administrative sanctions as a means of park rule enforcement.

(e) Notifying law enforcement officers who have primary jurisdiction in a particular geographic area whenever department personnel observe violations of park rules requiring further law enforcement authority or other violations of local, state, or federal laws; whenever there is an emergency requiring law enforcement assistance; or whenever they need assistance in executing their responsibilities pursuant to this chapter.

(2) Police Department.

(a) Deputizing and training of personnel authorized to issue citations for infractions and misdemeanor offenses.

(b) Providing supplementary patrols in parks facilities as jointly determined by the City manager, director of the department of parks and recreation and the City police chief.

(c) Responding, as appropriate, to requests from department personnel for assistance in situations beyond their capacity or authority to act. (Ord. O2014-368 § 34)


7.12.700 Enforcement methods.

Violation of the park rules may be a civil infraction or criminal misdemeanor. The initial method of enforcement may be by a request for voluntary compliance. Violation of the City of Sammamish Municipal Code may be subject to enforcement by the City of Sammamish police department pursuant to SMC 7.12.650 and 7.12.660. In addition, any person failing to comply with the park rules may be subject to the loss of park or recreation facility use privileges and ejection from City park areas or associated marine park areas. In the future, at the direction of the director, this chapter may be updated to request that certain department personnel be commissioned by the City of Sammamish police for the purpose of issuing citations to the violators of adopted park rules. (Ord. O2014-368 § 35)


7.12.710 Contractual agreements. 

Repealed by Ord. O2014-368.

Article VII. Miscellaneous Provisions


7.12.720 Severability.

Should any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter be ordered unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of this chapter.


Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY

Chapters:

8.05    Repealed

8.10    Fireworks

8.15    Public Disturbance Noise

8.20    Underage Drinking of Alcoholic Beverages


Chapter 8.05 NUISANCES

(Repealed by Ord. O2012-324)


Chapter 8.10 FIREWORKS

Sections:

8.10.010    Definitions.

8.10.020    Sale of fireworks unlawful.

8.10.030    Permit required for public display of fireworks.

8.10.040    Discharge or possession of fireworks prohibited.

8.10.050    Permit fee.

8.10.060    Issuance – Nontransferable – Voiding.

8.10.070    Application for public display permit.

8.10.080    Standards for public fireworks displays.

8.10.090    Inspection.

8.10.100    Applicability.

8.10.110    Chapter implements state law.

8.10.120    Enforcement.

8.10.130    Penalty for violations.


8.10.010 Definitions.

(1) The definitions of Chapter 70.77 RCW as now stated or hereinafter amended shall govern the construction of this chapter, when applicable, and are hereby adopted by this reference.

(2) For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

(a) “Property” shall mean private property, rented residential premises, or private rented commercial spaces, including but not limited to a home, yard, garage, apartment, condominium, or other dwelling unit, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling, or used for a party or other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented, or used with or without compensation.

(b) “Responsible person” includes:

(i) The person(s) with the right to control the property at the time that the discharge of fireworks occurs, whether such control arises by ownership, lease, or other legal right and whether or not such person(s) are present at the time of such discharge;

(ii) The person(s) in immediate control of property at which the discharge of fireworks takes place; or

(iii) The person(s) who organizes, supervises, sponsors, conducts, allows, controls, or controls access to the discharge of fireworks. (Ord. O2018-461 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-176 § 1; Ord. O2000-65 § 1)


8.10.020 Sale of fireworks unlawful.

It is unlawful for any person to sell any fireworks within the City. (Ord. O2018-461 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-176 § 1; Ord. O2000-65 § 2)


8.10.030 Permit required for public display of fireworks.

It is unlawful for any person to hold, conduct, or engage in any public display of fireworks within the City without first having obtained and being the holder of a valid permit under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. O2018-461 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-176 § 1; Ord. O2000-65 § 3)


8.10.040 Discharge or possession of fireworks prohibited. 

Except as authorized by a state license and City permit granted pursuant to RCW 70.77.260(2) (application for permit), RCW 70.77.280 (public display permit) or RCW 70.77.311(2) (use by individual or group for religious or other specified purpose on approved date and at approved location), no person shall possess, ignite, explode, or discharge fireworks within the City. (Ord. O2018-461 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-176 § 1; Ord. O2000-65 § 4)


8.10.050 Permit fee. 

The annual fee for a public display permit for the public display of fireworks shall be established by resolution and be payable to the City of Sammamish. (Ord. O2018-461 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-176 § 1; Ord. O2000-65 § 7. Formerly 8.10.070)


8.10.060 Issuance – Nontransferable – Voiding.

Each public display permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid only for the specific authorized public display event, shall be used only by the designated permittee, and shall be nontransferable. Any transfer or unauthorized use of a permit is a violation of this chapter and shall void the permit in addition to all other sanctions provided in this chapter. (Ord. O2018-461 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-176 § 1; Ord. O2000-65 § 8. Formerly 8.10.080)


8.10.070 Application for public display permit.

Applications for a permit to hold, conduct, or operate a public display of fireworks shall be made to the City of Sammamish at least 30 days prior to the scheduled event. Applicants shall meet all qualifications and requirements of state law regarding public display of fireworks and all fire and safety requirements in SMC 8.10.080. (Ord. O2018-461 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-176 § 1; Ord. O2000-65 § 9. Formerly 8.10.090)


8.10.080 Standards for public fireworks displays. 

All public fireworks displays shall conform to the following minimum standards and conditions:

(1) All public fireworks displays must be planned, organized, and discharged by a state-licensed pyrotechnician;

(2) A permit must be obtained from the City of Sammamish prior to any display of public fireworks. The permit shall include the name of the applicant and his or her address; the name of the pyrotechnician and his or her address; the exact location, date and time of the proposed display; the number, type and class of fireworks to be displayed; the manner in which the fireworks are being stored prior to the public fireworks display; and shall include the name and address of the insurance company providing the bond required pursuant to RCW 70.77.285 (Public display permit – Bond or insurance for liability) or RCW 70.77.295 (Public display permit – Amount of bond or insurance);

(3) A drawing shall be submitted to the fire chief showing a plan view of the fireworks discharge site and the surrounding area with a radius that reflects 70 feet for every inch of the largest mortar, and not less than a 500-foot radius. This is required for land and water displays (Ref. UFC 78, Table 7802.3-A and NFPA 1123, Table 3-1.3);

(4) A fire pumper and a minimum of three trained firefighters shall be on site from 30 minutes prior to until 30 minutes after the discharge of any fireworks. All cost for fire personnel and apparatus shall be paid to Sammamish fire services, in an amount calculated in accordance with the Washington State Fire Chief’s fee schedule, and shall be paid prior to the actual display; provided, however, that all costs for required fire personnel and apparatus may be waived at the discretion of the fire chief if permittee is a community or charitable organization sponsoring a public event;

(5) All combustible debris and trash shall be removed from the area of discharge for a distance of 300 feet in all directions by the applicant;

(6) All unfired or undischarged fireworks shall be disposed of in a safe manner by the state-licensed pyrotechnician;

(7) A minimum of two 2A-rated pressurized water fire extinguishers and one fire blanket shall be required to be at the fireworks discharge site;

(8) The permit may be immediately revoked at any time deemed necessary by the fire chief or his or her designee due to any noncompliance or weather conditions such as extremely low humidity or wind factor. The display may also be canceled by accidental ignition of any form of combustible or flammable material in the vicinity due to falling debris from the display;

(9) Areas of public access shall be determined by the fire chief or his or her designee and maintained in an approved manner; and

(10) The applicant shall also be responsible for securing any and all required state, county, or City permits for use of locations or facilities. (Ord. O2018-461 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-176 § 1; Ord. O2000-65 § 10. Formerly 8.10.100)


8.10.090 Inspection.

After the discharge site has been completely set up, and prior to the display, the discharge site shall be inspected and approved by the fire chief or his or her designee. (Ord. O2018-461 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-176 § 1; Ord. O2000-65 § 11. Formerly 8.10.110)


8.10.100 Applicability. 

The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the sale and use of all fireworks except “toy caps,” and fireworks that are otherwise exempt pursuant to RCW 70.77.311 as now in effect or as may be subsequently amended. (Ord. O2018-461 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-176 § 1; Ord. O2000-65 § 12. Formerly 8.10.120)


8.10.110 Chapter implements state law.

This chapter is intended to implement Chapter 70.77 RCW, including the one-year delay in implementation set forth in RCW 70.77.250(4), and shall be construed consistent with that statute and any and all rules or regulations issued pursuant thereto. (Ord. O2018-461 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-176 § 1; Ord. O2000-65 § 13. Formerly 8.10.130)


8.10.120 Enforcement.

The fire chief or his or her designee, duly authorized police officers, or the City code enforcement officer are authorized to enforce all provisions of this chapter and in addition to criminal sanctions or civil remedies, they may revoke any permit issued pursuant to this chapter upon any failure or refusal of the permittee to comply with the orders and directives of the fire chief or his or her designee or duly authorized police officers, and/or to comply with any provisions of this chapter or other laws or regulations. (Ord. O2018-461 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-176 § 1; Ord. O2000-65 § 14. Formerly 8.10.140)


8.10.130 Penalty for violations.

(1) Except as set forth below, any person violating or failing to comply with the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided therefor.

(2) Except as allowed under SMC 8.10.040, the possession of fireworks by an individual, group, or organization shall be a civil infraction with a penalty of $500.00 for each violation.

(3) Except as allowed under SMC 8.10.040, the discharge of fireworks by any responsible person shall be a civil infraction with a penalty of:

(a) Prior to June 1, 2019: 

(i) One thousand dollars for each violation.

(b) On or after June 1, 2019:

(i) One thousand dollars for the first violation. 

(ii) Five thousand dollars for the second violation. 

(iii) Ten thousand dollars for the third and subsequent violations. 

(4) For purposes of this section, the term “individual” means a natural person and excludes any firm, partnership, joint venture, association, concern, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit. (Ord. O2018-461 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-176 § 1; Ord. O2004-146 § 1; Ord. O2000-65 § 15. Formerly 8.10.150)


Chapter 8.15 PUBLIC DISTURBANCE NOISE

Sections:

8.15.010    Declaration of policy.

8.15.020    Public nuisance and disturbance noises.

8.15.030    Penalty for violation.


8.15.010 Declaration of policy.

The City council finds that inadequately controlled noise adversely affects the health, safety and welfare of the people, the value of property, and the quality of the environment. Therefore, it is hereby declared to be the policy of the City of Sammamish to minimize the exposure of citizens to the harmful physiological and psychological effects of excessive noise. It is the express intent of the City to control the level of noise in a manner which promotes commerce, the use, value and enjoyment of property, sleep and repose, and the quality of the environment. (Ord. O2002-105 § 1)


8.15.020 Public nuisance and disturbance noises.

It is unlawful for any person to cause, or for any person in possession of property to allow to originate from said property, sound that is a public nuisance. The following sources of sound are defined to be public nuisances, except to the extent that they may be specifically exempted by other provisions of this chapter:

(1) Frequent, repetitive or continuous noise in connection with the starting, operation, repair, rebuilding or testing of any motor vehicle, motorcycle, off-highway vehicle or internal combustion engine so as to unreasonably disturb or interfere with the peace, comfort and repose of owners or possessors of real property; provided, however, this subsection shall not apply to airplanes and boats;

(2) Frequent, repetitive or continuous sounding of any horn or siren attached to a motor vehicle, except as a warning of danger or as specifically permitted or required by law;

(3) Any loud and raucous noise which unreasonably interferes with the use of any business or residential property, school or place of religious worship;

(4) Sound from motor vehicle public address or audio systems, such as, but not limited to, tape players, radios and compact disc players, operated at a volume so as to be audible greater than 75 feet from the source; and

(5) Sound from audio equipment, such as, but not limited to, tape players, radios and compact disc players, whether portable or placed in a fixed location, operated at a volume so as to be audible greater than 75 feet from the source.

The foregoing provisions shall not apply to regularly scheduled events at parks or stadiums, such as public address systems for baseball games or park concerts, or to community festivals or permitted parades. (Ord. O2002-105 § 2)


8.15.030 Penalty for violation.

Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be subject to a civil fine not to exceed $250.00 for a first offense. For second and subsequent offenses within any 12-consecutive-month period, the person shall be subject to a civil fine not to exceed $1,000. (Ord. O2002-105 § 3)


Chapter 8.20 UNDERAGE DRINKING OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES

Sections:

8.20.010    Definitions.

8.20.020    Underage gatherings prohibited.

8.20.030    Exemptions.

8.20.040    Civil penalty.


8.20.010 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

(1) “Alcoholic beverage” shall mean alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer that contain one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume; and is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances.

(2) “Property” shall mean private property, rented residential premises, or private rented commercial spaces, including but not limited to a home, yard, garage, apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a hall or meeting room, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling, or used for a party or other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented, or used with or without compensation.

(3) “Responsible person” includes:

(a) The person(s) with the right to actually control the property at the time that an underage gathering occurs, whether such actual control arises by ownership, lease, or other legal right;

(b) The person(s) in immediate control of property at which an underage gathering takes place; or

(c) The person(s) who organizes, supervises, sponsors, conducts, allows, controls, or controls access to the underage gathering.

(4) “Underage gathering” means a party or gathering of four or more persons at a property at which alcoholic beverages are being or have been consumed or possessed by one or more underage persons, or at which one or more underage persons are exhibiting effects of consuming alcoholic beverages.

(5) “Underage person” shall mean any person less than 21 years of age. (Ord. O2015-385 § 1)


8.20.020 Underage gatherings prohibited. 

(1) An underage gathering constitutes a public nuisance, and is prohibited.

(2) As a public nuisance, any underage gathering may be abated by any legal means. (Ord. O2015-385 § 1)


8.20.030 Exemptions. 

This chapter shall not apply to:

(1) Any location regulated by a permit or license issued by the Washington State Liquor Control Board;

(2) Underage gatherings where underage persons consuming alcoholic beverages are supervised in person by their parent or guardian while any such underage persons are consuming alcoholic beverages or while any such underage persons are exhibiting the effects of consuming alcoholic beverages; 

(3) Alcoholic beverages given for medicinal purposes to an underage person by a parent, guardian, physician, or dentist; or

(4) Alcoholic beverages given to an underage person when used in connection with religious services. (Ord. O2015-385 § 1)


8.20.040 Civil penalty.

In addition to public nuisance abatement, the first violation of this chapter by any responsible person shall constitute a civil infraction subject to a fine of $500.00 for each day that any violation occurs. The second and each succeeding violation of this chapter by any responsible person within the five-year period beginning from the date of the first such violation shall constitute a civil violation subject to a fine of $1,000 for each day that any violation occurs. (Ord. O2015-385 § 1)


Title 9 CRIMINAL CODE

Chapters:

9.05    Criminal Code


Chapter 9.05 CRIMINAL CODE

Sections:

9.05.010    Preliminary statement.

9.05.020    Purposes – Principles of construction.

9.05.030    City criminal jurisdiction.

9.05.040    Classes of crimes.

9.05.050    Punishment and restitution.

9.05.060    Limitation of action.

9.05.070    Proof beyond a reasonable doubt.

9.05.080    General provisions – Adoption by reference.

9.05.090    Principles of liability.

9.05.100    Defenses.

9.05.110    Anticipatory offenses.

9.05.120    Abandoned refrigeration equipment.

9.05.130    Advertising – Crimes relating to.

9.05.140    Animals – Crimes relating to.

9.05.150    Assault and other crimes relating to person.

9.05.160    Competitive bidding.

9.05.170    Corporations – Crimes relating to.

9.05.180    Custodial interference.

9.05.190    Domestic violence protection.

9.05.200    False representations.

9.05.210    False swearing and tampering.

9.05.220    Fire alarms – Crimes relating to.

9.05.230    Firearms and dangerous weapons.

9.05.240    Fraud.

9.05.250    Gambling offenses.

9.05.260    Harassment.

9.05.270    Inhaling toxic fumes.

9.05.280    Juries – Crimes relating to.

9.05.290    Miscellaneous crimes.

9.05.300    Misconduct in signing a petition.

9.05.310    Obstructing governmental operation.

9.05.320    Public disturbance.

9.05.330    Reckless burning and malicious mischief.

9.05.340    Sexual offenses – Unlawful acts of prostitution or pandering.

9.05.350    Special offenses relative to minors.

9.05.360    Telephone credit cards.

9.05.370    Theft and possession of stolen property.

9.05.380    Trademarks and other marks.

9.05.390    Trespass and prowling.

9.05.400    Violating right of privacy.

9.05.410    Interference with health care facility.

9.05.420    Abandonment of a dependent person in the third degree.

9.05.430    Antiharassment protection orders.


9.05.010 Preliminary statement.

(1) This chapter shall be known as, and may be cited as, the Sammamish criminal code.

(2) The provisions of this code shall apply to any offense committed on or after 12:01 a.m. on March 1, 2000.

(3) The provisions of this code do not apply to, nor govern the construction of and punishment for any offense committed prior to 12:01 a.m. on March 1, 2000, nor to the construction and application of any defense to a prosecution for such an offense. Such an offense must be construed and punished according to the provisions of the law existing in the City at the time of the commission thereof in the same manner as if this code had not been enacted.

(4) The sections of the Revised Code of Washington (RCW) and the King County Code (KCC), now in effect and as subsequently amended, specifically enumerated in this chapter are adopted by reference into this code.

(5) Section captions are for organizational purposes only and shall not be construed as part of this code. (Ord. O2000-52 § 1)


9.05.020 Purposes – Principles of construction.

(1) The general purposes of the provisions governing the definition of offenses are:

(a) To forbid and prevent conduct that inflicts or threatens substantial harm to individual or public interests;

(b) To safeguard conduct that is without culpability from condemnation as criminal;

(c) To give fair warning of the nature of the conduct declared to constitute an offense; and

(d) To differentiate on reasonable grounds between serious and minor offenses, and to prescribe proportionate penalties for each.

(2) The provisions of this code shall be construed according to the fair import of their terms, and when the language is susceptible to differing constructions, it shall be interpreted to further the general purposes stated in this code.

(3) In adopting state statutes by reference, only those crimes and offenses under the jurisdiction of a municipality are intended to be adopted and, in those sections adopted which define both misdemeanors and felonies, only the language applicable to misdemeanors and gross misdemeanors is to be applied. (Ord. O2000-52 § 2)


9.05.030 City criminal jurisdiction.

Any person who commits any offense defined by this code, in whole or in part, within the corporate limits of the City is liable to arrest, prosecution and punishment. (Ord. O2000-52 § 3)


9.05.040 Classes of crimes.

Any offense defined by this code for which a sentence of imprisonment is authorized constitutes a violation of City ordinance and is a crime. Crimes are classified as gross misdemeanors or misdemeanors. (Ord. O2000-52 § 4)


9.05.050 Punishment and restitution.

(1) Unless specifically provided otherwise, every person convicted of a gross misdemeanor, or a crime not otherwise classified, shall be punished by imprisonment in jail for a maximum term of not more than one year, or by a fine in an amount of not more than $5,000, or by both such imprisonment and fine.

(2) Unless specifically provided otherwise, every person convicted of a misdemeanor shall be punished by imprisonment in jail for a maximum term of not more than 90 days, or by a fine in an amount of not more than $1,000, or by both such imprisonment and fine.

(3) A person who is convicted of a misdemeanor violation of any provision of Chapter 69.50 RCW adopted by reference shall be punished by imprisonment for not less than 24 consecutive hours, and by a fine of not less than $250.00. On a second or subsequent conviction, the fine shall not be less than $500.00. These fines shall be in addition to any other fine or penalty imposed. Unless the court finds that the imposition of the minimum imprisonment will pose a substantial risk to the defendant’s physical or mental well-being or that local jail facilities are in an overcrowded condition, the term of imprisonment shall not be suspended or deferred. If the court finds such risk or overcrowding exists, it shall sentence the defendant to a minimum of 40 hours of community service. If a minimum term of imprisonment is suspended or deferred, the court shall state in writing the reason for granting the suspension or deferral and the facts upon which the suspension or deferral is based. Unless the court finds the person to be indigent, the minimum fine shall not be suspended or deferred.

(4) Every person found to have committed a civil infraction shall pay a fine of $71.00, unless otherwise provided for within this code or under the Infraction Rules for Courts of Limited Jurisdiction (IRLJ) 6.2.

(5) The court may impose restitution as provided in RCW 9A.20.030.

(6) In the event there is a conflict in the penalties which can be imposed upon conviction for a specific offense between the provisions of the Sammamish criminal code and the Revised Code of Washington, the penalty provisions of the Revised Code of Washington shall apply. (Ord. O2000-52 § 5)


9.05.060 Limitation of action.

(1) A gross misdemeanor, or a crime not otherwise classified, may not be prosecuted more than two years after its commission. A misdemeanor may not be prosecuted more than one year after its commission.

(2) Periods of limitation toll for any period of time the person charged is not usually and publicly resident within this state, or for any other reason authorized by law or court rule.

(3) If a complaint or information filed before the end of a period of limitation is thereafter set aside, then the period is extended by a period equal to the length of time from the filing to the setting aside. (Ord. O2000-52 § 6)


9.05.070 Proof beyond a reasonable doubt.

(1) Every person charged with an offense is presumed innocent unless proven guilty by competent evidence establishing each element of the offense beyond a reasonable doubt.

(2) When an offense has been proven against a person but a reasonable doubt exists as to the degree of the crime, a conviction shall be entered only as to the lowest degree. (Ord. O2000-52 § 7)


9.05.080 General provisions – Adoption by reference.

The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9A.04.050    People capable of committing crimes – Culpability of children.

9A.04.060    Common law to supplement statutes.

9A.04.070    Who amenable to criminal statutes.

9A.04.090    Application of general provisions of code.

9A.04.110    Definitions.

9.01.055    Citizen immunity if aiding officer, scope – When.

9.01.110    Omission, when not punishable.

9.01.130    Sending letter, when complete.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 8)


9.05.090 Principles of liability.

The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9A.08.010    General requirements of culpability.

9A.08.020    Liability for conduct of another – Complicity.

9A.08.030    Criminal liability of corporations and persons acting or under a duty to act in their behalf.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 9)


9.05.100 Defenses.

The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9A.12.010    Insanity.

9A.16.010    Definitions.

9A.16.020    Use of force – When lawful.

9A.16.060    Duress.

9A.16.070    Entrapment.

9A.16.080    Action for being detained on mercantile establishment premises for investigation – “Reasonable grounds” as defense.

9A.16.090    Intoxication.

9A.16.100    Use of force on children – Policy – Actions presumed unreasonable.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 10)


9.05.110 Anticipatory offenses.

The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9A.28.020    Criminal attempt.

9A.28.030    Criminal solicitation.

9A.28.040    Criminal conspiracy.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 11)


9.05.120 Abandoned refrigeration equipment.

The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9.03.010    Abandoning, discarding refrigeration equipment.

9.03.020    Permitting unused equipment to remain on premises.

9.03.040    Keeping or storing equipment for sale.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 12)


9.05.130 Advertising – Crimes relating to.

The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9.04.010    False advertising.

9.04.040    Advertising cures of lost sexual potency – Evidence.

9.04.090    Advertising fuel prices by service station.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 13)


9.05.140 Animals – Crimes relating to.

The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9.08.030    False certificate of registration of animals – False representation as to breed.

9.08.070    Pet animals – Taking, concealing, injuring, killing, etc. – Penalty.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 15)


9.05.150 Assault and other crimes relating to person.

The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9A.36.041    Assault in the fourth degree.

9A.36.050    Reckless endangerment.

9A.36.070    Coercion.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 17)


9.05.160 Competitive bidding.

The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9.18.120    Suppression of competitive bidding.

9.18.130    Collusion to prevent competitive bidding.

9.18.140    Penalty.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 18)


9.05.170 Corporations – Crimes relating to.

The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9.24.010    Fraud in stock subscription.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 21)


9.05.180 Custodial interference.

The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9A.40.010    Definitions.

9A.40.070    Custodial interference in the second degree.

9A.40.080    Custodial interference – Assessment of costs – Defense – Consent defense, restricted.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 22)


9.05.190 Domestic violence protection.

The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9A.36.150    Interfering with the reporting of domestic violence.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 25)


9.05.200 False representations.

The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9.38.010    False representation concerning credit.

9.38.020    False representation concerning title.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 27)


9.05.210 False swearing and tampering.

The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9A.72.010    Definitions.

9A.72.040    False swearing.

9A.72.050    Perjury and false swearing – Inconsistent statements – Degree of crime.

9A.72.060    Perjury and false swearing – Retraction.

9A.72.070    Perjury and false swearing – Irregularities no defense.

9A.72.080    Statement of what one does not know to be true.

9A.72.140    Jury tampering.

9A.72.150    Tampering with physical evidence.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 28)


9.05.220 Fire alarms – Crimes relating to.

The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9.40.040    Operating engine or boiler without spark arrester.

9.40.100    Tampering with fire alarm or fire fighting equipment – False alarm – Penalties.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 29)


9.05.230 Firearms and dangerous weapons.

The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9.41.010    Terms defined.

9.41.050    Carrying firearms.

9.41.060    Exceptions to restrictions on carrying firearms.

9.41.070    Concealed pistol license – Application – Fee – Renewal.

9.41.075    Concealed pistol license – Revocation.

9.41.080    Delivery to ineligible persons.

9.41.090    Dealer deliveries regulated – Hold on delivery.

9.41.0975    Officials and agencies – Immunity, writ of mandamus.

9.41.098    Forfeiture of firearms – Disposition – Confiscation.

9.41.100    Dealer licensing and registration required.

9.41.110    Dealer’s license, by whom granted, conditions, fees – Employees, fingerprinting and background checks – Wholesale sales excepted –Permits prohibited.

9.41.120    Firearms as loan security.

9.41.140    Alteration of identifying marks – Exceptions.

9.41.170    Alien’s license to carry firearms – Exceptions.

9.41.230    Aiming or discharging firearms, dangerous weapons.

9.41.240    Possession of pistol by person from eighteen to twenty-one.

9.41.250    Dangerous weapons – Penalty.

9.41.260    Dangerous exhibitions.

9.41.270    Weapons apparently capable of producing bodily harm – Unlawful carrying or handling – Penalty – Exceptions.

9.41.280    Possessing dangerous weapons on school facilities – Penalty – Exceptions.

9.41.300    Weapons prohibited in certain places – Local laws and ordinances – Exceptions – Penalty.

9.41.810    Penalty.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 30(1))


9.05.240 Fraud.

The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9.26A.110    Fraud in obtaining telecommunications service – Penalty.

9.45.060    Encumbered, leased, or rented personal property – Construction.

9.45.070    Mock auctions.

9.45.080    Fraudulent removal of property.

9.45.090    Knowingly receiving fraudulent conveyance.

9.45.100    Fraud in assignment for benefit of creditors.

9A.56.096    Theft of rental, leased, or lease-purchased property.

9A.60.010    Definitions.

9A.60.040    Criminal impersonation.

9A.60.050    False certification.

9A.61.010    Definitions.

9A.61.020    Defrauding a public utility.

9A.61.050    Defrauding a public utility in the third degree.

9A.61.060    Restitution and costs.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 32(1))


9.05.250 Gambling offenses.

The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9.46.190    Violations relating to fraud or deceit.

9.46.193    Cities and towns – Ordinance adopting certain sections of chapter – Jurisdiction of courts.

9.46.195    Obstruction of public servant – Penalty.

9.46.196    Cheating.

9.46.198    Working in gambling activity without license as violation – Penalty.

9.46.210    Enforcement – Commission as a law enforcement agency.

9.46.215    Ownership or interest in gambling device – Penalty – Exceptions.

9.46.217    Gambling records – Penalty – Exceptions.

9.46.222    Professional gambling in the third degree.

9.46.231    Gambling devices, real and personal property – Seizure and forfeiture.

9.46.235    Slot machines, antique – Defenses concerning – Presumption created.

9.46.240    Gambling information, transmitting or receiving.

9.46.250    Gambling property or premises – Common nuisances, abatement – Termination of interests, licenses – Enforcement.

9.46.260    Proof of possession as evidence of knowledge of its character.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 33)


9.05.260 Harassment.

The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9A.46.010    Legislative finding.

9A.46.020    Definition – Penalties.

9A.46.030    Place where committed.

9A.46.040    Court-ordered requirements upon person charged with crime – Violation.

9A.46.050    Arraignment – No-contact order.

9A.46.060    Crimes included in harassment.

9A.46.070    Enforcement of orders restricting contact.

9A.46.080    Order restricting contact – Violation.

9A.46.090    Nonliability of peace officer.

9A.46.100    “Convicted,” time when.

9A.46.110    Stalking.

9.61.230    Telephone harassment.

9.61.240    Telephone harassment – Permitting telephone to be used.

9.61.250    Telephone harassment – Offense, where deemed committed.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 34)


9.05.270 Inhaling toxic fumes.

The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9.47A.010    Definition.

9.47A.020    Unlawful inhalation – Exception.

9.47A.030    Possession of certain substances prohibited, when.

9.47A.040    Sale of certain substances prohibited, when.

9.47A.050    Penalty.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 35)


9.05.280 Juries – Crimes relating to.

The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9.51.010    Misconduct of officer drawing jury.

9.51.020    Soliciting jury duty.

9.51.030    Misconduct of officer in charge of jury.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 36)


9.05.290 Miscellaneous crimes.

The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9.91.010    Denial of civil rights – Terms defined.

9.91.020    Operating railroad, steamboat, vehicle, etc., while intoxicated.

9.91.025    Unlawful bus conduct.

9.91.060    Leaving children unattended in parked automobile.

9.91.110    Metal buyers – Records of purchases – Penalty.

9.91.130    Disposal of trash in charity donation receptacle.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 39(1))


9.05.300 Misconduct in signing a petition.

The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9.44.080    Misconduct in signing a petition.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 40)


9.05.310 Obstructing governmental operation.

The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9A.76.010    Definitions.

9A.76.020    Obstructing a law enforcement officer.

9A.76.030    Refusing to summon aid for a peace officer.

9A.76.040    Resisting arrest.

9A.76.050    Rendering criminal assistance – Definition of term.

9A.76.060    Relative defined.

9A.76.070    Rendering criminal assistance in the first degree.

9A.76.080    Rendering criminal assistance in the second degree.

9A.76.090    Rendering criminal assistance in the third degree.

9A.76.100    Compounding.

9A.76.130    Escape in the third degree.

9A.76.160    Introducing contraband in the third degree.

9A.76.170    Bail jumping.

9A.76.175    Making a false or misleading statement to a public servant.

9A.76.180    Intimidating a public servant.

9.31.090    Escaped prisoner recaptured.

9.62.010    Malicious prosecution.

9.62.020    Instituting suit in name of another.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 41)


9.05.320 Public disturbance.

The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9A.84.010    Riot.

9A.84.020    Failure to disperse.

9A.84.040    False reporting.

9.27.015    Interference, obstruction of any court, building or residence – Violations.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 43)


9.05.330 Reckless burning and malicious mischief.

The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9A.48.010    Definitions.

9A.48.050    Reckless burning in the second degree.

9A.48.060    Reckless burning – Defense.

9A.48.090    Malicious mischief in the third degree.

9A.48.100    Malicious mischief – “Physical damage” defined.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 44)


9.05.340 Sexual offenses – Unlawful acts of prostitution or pandering.

The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9A.88.010    Indecent exposure.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 46(4))


9.05.350 Special offenses relative to minors.

The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9.68A.011    Definitions.

9.68A.080    Processors of depictions of minors engaged in sexually explicit conduct – Report required.

9.68A.090    Communication with minor for immoral purposes.

9.68A.120    Seizure and forfeiture of property.

9.68A.140    Definitions.

9.68A.150    Allowing minor on premises of live erotic performance.

9.68A.160    Penalty.

9.69.100    Duty of witness of offense against child or any violent offense – Penalty.

9A.44.096    Sexual misconduct with a minor in the second degree.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 47(1))


9.05.360 Telephone credit cards.

The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9.26A.090    Telephone company credit cards – Prohibited acts.

9.26A.100    Definitions.

9.26A.110    Fraud in obtaining telecommunications service – Penalty.

9.26A.120    Fraud in operating coin-box telephone or other receptacle.

9.26A.130    Penalty for manufacture of sale of slugs to be used for coin.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 48)


9.05.370 Theft and possession of stolen property.

The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9A.56.010    Definitions.

9A.56.020    Theft – Definition, defense.

9A.56.050    Theft in the third degree.

9A.56.060    Unlawful issuance of checks or drafts.

9A.56.100    Theft and larceny equated.

9A.56.140    Possessing stolen property – Definition – Presumption.

9A.56.170    Possessing stolen property in the third degree.

9A.56.180    Obscuring the identity of a machine.

9A.56.220    Theft of subscription television services.

9A.56.230    Unlawful sale of subscription television services.

9A.56.240    Forfeiture and disposal of device used to commit violation.

9A.56.260    Connection of channel converter.

9A.56.270    Shopping cart theft.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 50)


9.05.380 Trademarks and other marks.

The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9.16.030    Counterfeiting trademark, brand, etc.

9.16.040    Displaying goods with false trademark.

9.16.050    When deemed affixed.

9.16.060    Fraudulent registration of trademark.

9.16.070    Form and similitude defined.

9.16.080    Sales of petroleum products improperly labeled or by wrong grade.

9.16.090    Sales of petroleum products improperly labeled or by wrong grade – Penalty for violations.

9.16.100    Use of the words “sterling silver,” etc.

9.16.110    Use of the words “coin silver,” etc.

9.16.120    Use of the word “sterling,” on mounting.

9.16.130    Use of the words “coin silver,” on mounting.

9.16.140    Unlawfully marking article made of gold.

9.16.150    “Marked, stamped or branded,” defined.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 52)


9.05.390 Trespass and prowling.

The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9A.52.010    Definitions.

9A.52.060    Making or having burglar tools.

9A.52.070    Criminal trespass in the first degree.

9A.52.080    Criminal trespass in the second degree.

9A.52.090    Criminal trespass – Defenses.

9A.52.100    Vehicle prowling in the second degree.

9A.52.120    Computer trespass in the second degree.

9A.52.130    Computer trespass – Commission of other crime.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 53)


9.05.400 Violating right of privacy.

The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9.73.010    Divulging telegram.

9.73.020    Opening sealed letter.

9.73.030    Intercepting, recording or divulging private communication – Consent required – Exceptions.

9.73.070    Persons and activities excepted from chapter.

9.73.090    Certain emergency response personnel exempted from RCW 9.73.030 through 9.73.080 – Standards – Court authorizations – Admissibility.

9.73.100    Recordings available to defense counsel.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 57)


9.05.410 Interference with health care facility.

The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9A.50.020    Interference with health care facility.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 59)


9.05.420 Abandonment of a dependent person in the third degree.

The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9A.42.010    Definitions.

9A.42.080    Abandonment of a dependent person in the third degree.

9A.42.090    Abandonment of a dependent person – Defense.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 60)


9.05.430 Antiharassment protection orders.

The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

10.14.020    Definitions.

10.14.030    Course of conduct.

10.14.115    Enforcement of order.

10.14.120    Disobedience of order.

10.14.170    Criminal penalty.

10.14.190    Constitutional rights.

10.14.210    Court appearance after violation.

10.14.900    Severability.

(Ord. O2013-351 § 1)


Title 10 DOMESTIC VIOLENCE

Chapters:

10.05    Domestic Violence


Chapter 10.05 DOMESTIC VIOLENCE*

Sections:

10.05.010    Domestic violence protection.

10.05.020    Sections adopted.

*For penalty and other related provisions, see SMC 9.05.010 through 9.05.070.


10.05.010 Domestic violence protection.

The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

10.99.020    Definitions.

10.99.030    Law enforcement officers – Training, powers, duties – Domestic violence reports.

10.99.040    Restrictions upon and duties of court.

10.99.045    Appearances by defendant – No-contact order.

10.99.050    Victim contact – Restriction, prohibition – Violation, penalties – Written order – Procedures.

10.99.055    Enforcement of orders.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 25)


10.05.020 Sections adopted.

The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington, and all future amendments thereto, are adopted by reference:

RCW

10.31.100    Arrest without warrant.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 38(2))


Title 11 ANIMAL CONTROL

Chapters:

11.05    Animal Control


Chapter 11.05 ANIMAL CONTROL

Sections:

11.05.010    Authority to adopt animal control regulations.

11.05.015    Exceptions to SMC 11.05.010.

11.05.020    Adoption of administrative rules.

11.05.030    Adoption of certain other laws.

11.05.040    Reference to hearing bodies.

11.05.050    Bond or bail schedule. 


11.05.010 Authority to adopt animal control regulations.

Pursuant to RCW 35.21.180, 35A.11.020, and 35A.21.160, the City adopts by reference Title 11, Animal Control, of the King County Code, as presently constituted or hereinafter amended, as the animal control regulations of the City. A copy of KCC Title 11 has been filed with the City clerk. (Ord. O99-13 § 1)


11.05.015 Exceptions to SMC 11.05.010.

(1) Except that Section 11.04.230, Nuisances defined, of the King County Code shall be adopted as it pertains to the City of Sammamish to read as follows:

11.04.230 Nuisances defined. For purposes of this chapter, nuisances are violations of this chapter and shall be defined as follows:

(A) Any public nuisance relating to animal care and control known at common law or in equity jurisprudence;

(B) A dog running at large in the City;

(C) Any domesticated animal, whether licensed or not, that runs at large in any park or enters any public beach, pond, fountain or stream or upon any public playground or school ground. However, this subsection shall not prohibit a person from walking or exercising an animal in a public park or on any public beach when the animal is on a leash, tether or chain not to exceed sixteen (16) feet in length. Also, this subsection shall not apply to any person using a trained service animal, to animal shows, exhibitions, or organized dog-training classes if at least twenty-four hours advance notice has been given to the animal care and control authority by those persons requesting to hold the animal shows, exhibitions or organized dog-training classes;

(D) Any domesticated animal that enters any place where food is stored, prepared, served or sold to the public, or any other public building or hall. However, this subsection shall not apply to any person using a trained service animal, to veterinary offices or hospitals or to animal shows, exhibitions or organized dog-training classes if at least twenty-four hours advance notice has been given to the animal care and control authority by those persons requesting to hold the animal shows, exhibitions or organized dog-training classes;

(E) Any female domesticated animal, whether licensed or not, while in heat and accessible to other animals for purposes other than controlled and planned breeding;

(F) Any domesticated animal that chases, runs after or jumps at vehicles using the public streets and alleys;

(G) Any domesticated animal that habitually snaps, growls, snarls, jumps upon or otherwise threatens persons lawfully using the public sidewalks, streets, alleys or other public ways;

(H) Any animal that has exhibited vicious propensities and constitutes a danger to the safety of persons or property off the animal’s premises or lawfully on the animal’s premises. However, in addition to other remedies and penalties, the provisions of this chapter relating to vicious animals shall apply;

(I) Any vicious animal or animal with vicious propensities that runs at large at any time is off the owner’s premises not securely leashed on a line or confined and in the control of a person of suitable age and discretion to control or restrain the animal. However, in addition to other remedies and penalties, the provisions of this chapter relating to vicious animals shall apply;

(J) Any domesticated animal that howls, yelps, whines, barks or makes other oral noises, in such a manner as to disturb any person or neighborhood to an unreasonable degree;

(K) Any domesticated animal that enters upon a person’s property without the permission of that person;

(L) Animals staked, tethered or kept on public property without prior written consent of the animal care and control authority;

(M) Animals on any public property not under the control by the owner or other competent person;

(N) Animals harbored, kept or maintained and known to have a contagious disease unless under the treatment of a licensed veterinarian; and

(O) Animals running in packs.

(2) Except that Section 11.08.020, Definitions, of the King County Code shall be adopted as it pertains to the City of Sammamish to read as follows:

11.08.020 Definitions. In construing the provisions of this chapter, except where otherwise plainly declared or clearly apparent from the context, words used in this chapter shall be given their common and ordinary meaning; in addition, the following definitions shall apply:

(A) “At large” means to be off the premises of the owner and not under control of the owner by leash; provided that an animal within an automobile or other vehicle of its owner shall be deemed to be on the owner’s premises.

(B) “Lawful training” means to be engaged in training on the premises of the owner or on land of another person by permission, or on public land that is set aside or is open to hunting or trapping; provided, that the dog is accompanied afield by the owner or trainer. A “no shooting” area shall not be interpreted to mean a “no training” area.

(C) “Leash” includes a cord, thong or chain not more than sixteen (16) feet in length by which an animal is physically controlled by the person accompanying it.

(D) “Restraint.” An animal is considered to be under restraint if it is maintained and remains within the property limits of its owner or keeper.

(Ord. O2009-255 § 2)


11.05.020 Adoption of administrative rules.

Hereby further adopted by reference are any and all implementing administrative rules now in effect regarding KCC Title 11, Animal Control, that have been adopted either pursuant to Chapter 2.98 KCC, Rules of County Agencies, KCC Title 23, Enforcement, or elsewhere in the King County Code, except that unless the context requires otherwise, any reference to the “county” or to “King County” shall refer to the City of Sammamish, and any to “county staff” shall refer to the City manager or his/her designee. (Ord. O99-13 § 2)


11.05.030 Adoption of certain other laws.

To the extent that any provision of the King County Code, or any other law, rule, or regulation referenced in the animal control regulations of KCC Title 11 is necessary or convenient to establish the validity, enforceability, or interpretation of the animal control code, then such provision of the King County Code, or other law, rule, or regulation, is hereby adopted by reference. (Ord. O99-13 § 3)


11.05.040 Reference to hearing bodies.

To the extent that the animal control regulations of KCC Title 11 refer to planning commissions, board of appeals, hearing examiner, or any other similar body, the City council may serve in all such roles, but retains the right to establish any one or more of such bodies, at any time and without regard to whether any quasi-judicial or other matter is then pending. (Ord. O99-13 § 4)


11.05.050 Bond or bail schedule. 

All infractions or offenses of SMC Titles 7 and 11 shall use the bond or bail schedule for infractions and offenses as used by the King County District Court for similar provisions of King County laws and regulations. (Ord. O2009-255 § 3)


Title 12 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS, AND WELFARE

Chapters:

12.05    Offenses


Chapter 12.05 OFFENSES*

Sections:

12.05.010    Boating regulations.

12.05.020    False alarms – Robbery and intrusion alarms.

12.05.025    False fire alarms.

12.05.030    Firearms and dangerous weapons.

12.05.040    Fraud.

12.05.050    Littering and pollution.

12.05.060    Miscellaneous crimes.

12.05.070    Roadside stands.

12.05.080    Sexual offenses – Unlawful acts of prostitution or pandering.

12.05.090    Special offenses relative to minors.

12.05.100    Violation of court ordered probation.

*For penalty and other related provisions, see SMC 9.05.010 through 9.05.070.


12.05.010 Boating regulations.

(1) The following sections of the King County Code, including all future amendments thereto, are hereby adopted by reference, except as otherwise provided herein:

KCC

12.44.020    Definitions.

12.44.030    Interpretation and application of regulations.

12.44.035    Operation of personal watercraft.

12.44.040    Negligent operation.

12.44.050    Reckless operation.

12.44.060    Required distance from power craft to swimmers and row boats.

12.44.070    Speed limit specified – Lakes – Exception.

12.44.090    Speed regulations within one hundred yards of shore on Lake Washington and Lake Sammamish.

12.44.100    Interference with navigation.

12.44.110    Sunken vessels.

12.44.120    Floating objects.

12.44.130    Intoxication.

12.44.140    Incapacity of operator.

12.44.150    Accidents.

12.44.160    Accident reports.

12.44.170    Accident reports confidential, inadmissible as evidence.

12.44.180    Overloading.

12.44.190    Testing courses.

12.44.200    Restricted areas.

12.44.210    Swimming.

12.44.220    Skin diving.

12.44.230    Water skiing.

12.44.240    Beaver Lake restrictions.

12.44.350    Whistles and lights.

12.44.360    Equipment and numbering.

12.44.370    Life preservers and running lights.

12.44.380    Races and testing.

12.44.390    Aircraft on the water.

12.44.400    Rules of the road.

12.44.410    Propellers.

12.44.420    Unsafe piers.

12.44.430    Safety devices.

12.44.440    Pier barriers. 

12.44.450    Roadway barriers.

12.44.460    Drifting debris.

12.44.470    Oil.

12.44.480    Nuisances.

12.44.490    Public health.

12.44.500    Boat rental records.

12.44.510    Liability for damages.

12.44.520    Exemption to authorized emergency vessels and watercraft.

12.44.530    Aiding and abetting violations.

12.44.540    Directing traffic, emergency powers.

12.44.560    Appeal of denial for license, permit or authority.

12.44.570    Penalty.

12.44.580    Preservation of actions.

12.44.590    Severability.

12.44.710    Authority of officers to board boats.

12.44.720    Interlocal cooperation.

12.44.730    Enforcement.

(2) Beginning January 1, 2004, it shall be unlawful to use or operate any internal combustion engine on Pine Lake; provided, that nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prevent any public official or construction company from performing authorized duties.

(3) King County Code Section 12.44.060, making it unlawful for any motor powered watercraft to be operated while the propeller is engaged within 50 feet of any swimmer with or without a floatation device or within 50 feet of any nonmotorized watercrafts, including but not limited to kayaks, canoes, paddle boats or row boats, shall apply to Lake Sammamish and all other lakes within the City of Sammamish, except as otherwise allowed for waterskiing; this section shall not apply to patrol or rescue watercraft or in the case of an emergency.

(4) It is unlawful to use or operate any engine in the waters of the City unless the engine is operated with and connected to a muffler or silencer of sufficient size and capacity to effectually muffle and prevent excessive or unusual noise from the exhaust of the engine. (Ord. O2014-369 § 1; Ord. O2003-124 §§ 1, 2; Ord. O99-31 § 1)


12.05.020 False alarms – Robbery and intrusion alarms.

(1) The following provisions of the King County Code as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

KCC

12.32    Electronic Security Devices; entire chapter;

with the exception of KCC 12.32.050, which is amended to read as follows:

12.32.050 False Alarm, Burglar/Intrusion – Civil Penalty.

A. Any person or business, through error, omission or mechanical/electrical failure that causes two or more false alarms in any consecutive six-month period commits an infraction punishable by a civil penalty. The penalty for the second false alarm within the six-month period is one hundred dollars. The penalty for the third false alarm within the six-month period is one hundred fifty dollars, and the penalty for the fourth and succeeding false alarms within the six-month period is two hundred fifty dollars. Any succeeding false alarms within the six-month period resulting from failure to take corrective action or any nonpayment of any false alarm charges, or both, may result in the Police Chief ordering the disconnection of the alarm until either the corrective action is taken or any outstanding charges are paid, or both, or ordering no response to future alarms. However, a disconnection may not be ordered as to any premises required by law to have an alarm system in operation. 

B. Any alarm system business or monitoring company, through error, omission or mechanical/electrical failure that violates K.C.C. 12.32.030 commits an infraction punishable by a civil penalty. The penalty shall be two hundred fifty dollars. 

(Ord. O2002-107 § 1; Ord. O2000-52 §§ 26, 68)


12.05.025 False fire alarms.

(1) Purpose. It is the intent of this section to reduce the number of false fire alarms occurring within the City, and the resulting drain on City resources, by providing for corrective administrative action, including penalties and potential disconnection. 

(2) Definitions. For the purposes of this section, unless a different meaning is plainly required:

(a) “False fire alarm” includes the activation of a fire alarm by any means other than an actual fire, burning food or other combustible material. All other activations including nonfire heat activation, construction incidents, and accidental or malicious pulls will be considered false.

(b) “First response” shall mean response to premises at which no other false fire alarm has occurred within the preceding six-month period. 

(c) “Person” includes any natural person, partnership, joint stock company, unincorporated association or society, or a corporation of any character whatsoever.

(3) Penalties – Corrective Action – Invalidation. For fire response to any false fire alarm, the City shall charge and collect from the person(s) having or maintaining such fire alarm on premises owned or occupied by them penalties as follows:

(a) First Response. For a first response to a false fire alarm at a premises, no penalty shall be charged. Upon such first response, notice of conditions and requirements of this section shall be given to the owner or occupant of the premises on which the false fire alarm occurred and upon which the fire alarm is located. Within 30 days after such first response, the owner shall make a written report to the fire chief or designee, on forms provided by the fire department, stating the reasons for such false fire alarm and the corrective action to be taken to prevent a reoccurrence. 

(b) Second Response. For a second response to premises within six months after the first response, a penalty of $100.00 shall be charged. The person having or maintaining such fire alarm shall, within five working days after notice to do so, make a written report to the fire chief or designee, on forms provided by the fire department, stating the reasons for such second false fire alarm, the corrective action taken, whether and when such alarm has been inspected by authorized service personnel, and such other information as the fire chief or designee may reasonably require to determine the cause of such false fire alarm, any mitigating circumstances and corrective action necessary. The fire chief or designee may direct the person having or maintaining such fire alarm to have authorized service personnel inspect the alarm at such premises and to take other corrective action as prescribed by the fire chief or designee. All costs of inspection and corrective action shall be borne by the individual having or maintaining the alarm on said premises.

(c) Third Response. For a third response to premises within six months after a second response, a penalty shall be charged in the amount of $150.00 for residential properties and $400.00 for commercial properties. 

(d) Fourth and Successive Responses. For a fourth response to premises within six months after a third response, and for all succeeding responses within six months of the last response, a penalty shall be charged in the amount of $250.00 for residential properties and $600.00 for commercial properties. 

(e) Invalidation. For a second or subsequent false fire alarms occurring at a premises within seven days of the first response, notwithstanding the aforementioned timelines and penalties, in order to reduce the amount of unnecessary fire department responses to the same address, the fire marshal, fire chief or their designees may declare the system invalid, shut down the alarm system and require the occupant of the property to post a fire watch, at the owner’s expense, until the system has been repaired by a licensed and bonded company and the repair validated by the fire marshal, fire chief or their designees. 

(4) Notice of Violation.

(a) Responsibility for Issuance. The fire chief or designee shall be responsible for the issuance of written notices of infraction to the owner following the second and each succeeding false fire alarm in any calendar month. The fire chief or designee shall notify the City finance department of the amount of the penalties to be collected. It shall be the responsibility of the finance department to collect such penalties.

(b) Waive Imposition. In the event the fire chief or designee determines that false alarm(s) occurred as a direct result of an interruption of electrical power, telephone system malfunction, an alarm equipment malfunction or other causes beyond the control of the owner, the fire chief or designee may waive imposition of the applicable false fire alarm penalty or administrative sanction. 

(5) Administrative Decision – Notice. Notice of imposition of any administrative sanction, including the imposition of a penalty, under the provisions of this section, shall be given to the person having or maintaining a fire alarm on premises owned or occupied by him; provided, that with respect to business premises, the owner, manager or chief administrative agent regularly assigned and employed on the premises at the time of the occurrence of a false fire alarm shall be presumed to be the person having or maintaining said alarm on said business premises.

(6) Appeal from Administrative Decision – Finality. Any person subject to the imposition of a penalty, order of discontinuation or other administrative sanction under the terms of this section shall have a right of appeal therefrom to the City hearing examiner. Unless notice of appeal is filed with the City clerk within 10 days of receipt of notice of imposition of an administrative sanction, said sanction is deemed final. (Ord. O2002-107 § 3)


12.05.030 Firearms and dangerous weapons.

The following provisions of the King County Code as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

KCC

12.48.010    Definitions.

12.48.020    Sale and registration.

12.48.030    Delivery following sheriff’s report.

12.48.040    Purchase unlawful for certain persons.

12.48.050    Violation.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 30(2))


12.05.040 Fraud.

The following provisions of the King County Code as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

KCC

12.08.010    Impersonating members of public safety department.

12.08.020    Selling or disposing of police badges prohibited.

12.08.030    Possessing badge with intent to impersonate officer.

12.08.040    Intent to impersonate presumed.

12.08.050    Penalty for violation.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 32(2))


12.05.050 Littering and pollution.

The following provisions of the King County Code as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

KCC

12.36.010    Dumping trash in waterways prohibited.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 37(2))


12.05.060 Miscellaneous crimes.

The following provisions of the King County Code as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

KCC

12.64.010    Unlawful – Determination (Loitering).

(Ord. O2000-64 § 1; Ord. O2000-52 § 39(2))


12.05.070 Roadside stands.

The following provisions of the King County Code as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

KCC

12.28.010    Unlawful to erect certain structures along roads.

12.28.020    Required distance from right-of-way.

12.28.030    Nuisance declared – Authority of engineer.

12.28.040    Violation – Misdemeanor.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 45)


12.05.080 Sexual offenses – Unlawful acts of prostitution or pandering.

(1) The following provisions of the King County Code as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

KCC

12.63.010    Unlawful acts.

12.63.020    Known prostitute, panderer defined.

12.63.030    Prostitution defined – Sexual activity defined.

12.63.070    Public nuisance.

12.63.080    Evidence.

12.63.090    Additional evidence.

(2) Except as otherwise required by state law, any single conviction under subsection (1) of this section within any period of 12 months shall be a misdemeanor. Any second or subsequent conviction under subsection (1) of this section within any period of 12 months from a first or prior conviction of the same or similar offense shall be a gross misdemeanor.

(3) The court may suspend all or a portion of the term of imprisonment or fine on condition that a person convicted of a crime under subsection (1) of this section never enter into, or be present in, any antiprostitution emphasis area during the term of any such suspension or deferral. The court may further require AIDS testing and counseling, as a condition of suspension or deferral pursuant to RCW 70.24.350, at the defendant’s expense; provided, that King County, as agent for the City pursuant to interlocal agreement, may require such testing and counseling as provided in RCW 70.24.360 upon imprisonment in jail of any such convicted person.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 46(1) – (3))


12.05.090 Special offenses relative to minors.

The following provisions of the King County Code as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

KCC

12.78.030    Written consent required to supply air gun and slingshot to minor.

12.78.040    Written consent to be kept as evidence.

12.78.050    Violation – Misdemeanor.

12.81.010    Responsibility of persons in charge of sale or display rooms containing paraphernalia evincing intent to violate Chapter 69.50 RCW.

12.81.020    Minors prohibited unless with guardian in places selling or displaying for sale certain paraphernalia.

12.81.030    Sale and display room requirements.

12.81.040    Violation – Penalty.

12.84.010    Definitions.

12.84.020    Dissemination of indecent material to minors unlawful.

12.84.030    Dissemination of indecent material to minors defined.

12.84.040    Presumptions.

12.84.050    Defenses.

12.84.070    Violation a misdemeanor.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 47(2))


12.05.100 Violation of court ordered probation.

The following provisions of the King County Code as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

KCC

12.150.010    Definitions.

12.150.020    Arrest without warrant.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 58)

 


Title 13 SURFACE WATER MANAGEMENT

Chapters:

13.05    Authority, Purpose, General Provisions, and Administration

13.10    Definitions

13.15    Surface Water Development Charge

13.20    Surface Water Runoff Regulations

13.25    Surface Water Management Program

13.30    Water Quality

13.35    Fertilizers


Chapter 13.05 AUTHORITY, PURPOSE, GENERAL PROVISIONS, AND ADMINISTRATION

Sections:

13.05.010    Authority.

13.05.020    General provisions.

13.05.030    Administration.


13.05.010 Authority.

Pursuant to RCW 35.21.180, 35A.11.020, and 35A.21.160, the City adopts this title. (Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.05.020 General provisions.

This title is hereby enacted to be consistent with and implement the comprehensive plan in accordance with Chapter 36.70A RCW. (Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.05.030 Administration.

Applicable departments within the City are authorized to adopt, pursuant to Chapter 2.55 SMC, such administrative rules and regulations as are necessary and appropriate to implement this title and to prepare and require the use of such forms as are necessary to its administration. (Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


Chapter 13.10 DEFINITIONS

Sections:

13.10.010    Scope of chapter.

13.10.020    Adjustment.

13.10.030    AKART.

13.10.040    Applicant.

13.10.050    Basin.

13.10.060    Basin plan.

13.10.070    Best management practices.

13.10.080    City.

13.10.090    Closed depression.

13.10.100    Clean Water Act.

13.10.110    Construct or modify.

13.10.120    Conveyance system.

13.10.125    Critical drainage area.

13.10.130    Department.

13.10.140    Development.

13.10.150    Developed parcel.

13.10.160    Director.

13.10.170    Division.

13.10.180    Discharge.

13.10.190    Drainage.

13.10.200    Drainage facility.

13.10.210    Drainage review.

13.10.220    Effective impervious surface.

13.10.225    Equivalent service unit (ESU).

13.10.230    Erosion and sediment control.

13.10.240    Farm management plan.

13.10.250    Financial guarantee.

13.10.260    Flood hazard reduction plan.

13.10.270    Flow control best management practice.

13.10.280    Flow control facility.

13.10.290    Forest practices.

13.10.300    Full drainage review.

13.10.310    Groundwater.

13.10.320    High-use site.

13.10.330    Hydraulically connected.

13.10.340    Impervious surface.

13.10.350    Improvement.

13.10.360    Land disturbing activity.

13.10.365    Landslide hazard drainage area.

13.10.370    Land use code.

13.10.380    Lake management plan.

13.10.390    Large project drainage review.

13.10.400    Licensed civil engineer.

13.10.410    Maintenance.

13.10.415    Manager.

13.10.420    Master drainage plan.

13.10.421    Municipal separate storm sewer systems.

13.10.430    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.

13.10.440    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit.

13.10.450    Native vegetated surface.

13.10.460    Natural discharge location.

13.10.470    Natural surface water drainage system.

13.10.480    New impervious surface.

13.10.490    New pervious surface.

13.10.500    Open space.

13.10.510    Parcel.

13.10.520    Person.

13.10.525    Pervious surface.

13.10.530    Pollution-generating impervious surface.

13.10.540    Pollution-generating pervious surface.

13.10.550    Project.

13.10.560    Project site.

13.10.570    Rate category.

13.10.580    Redevelopment project.

13.10.590    Replaced impervious surface.

13.10.600    Residence.

13.10.610    Residential parcel.

13.10.615    Road.

13.10.620    Runoff.

13.10.630    Salmon conservation plan.

13.10.640    Shared facility.

13.10.650    Service area.

13.10.651    Service charges.

13.10.655    Simplified drainage review.

13.10.656    Single-family residence.

13.10.660    Site.

13.10.670    Repealed.

13.10.680    Source control BMP.

13.10.690    State Waste Discharge Permit.

13.10.700    Stormwater compliance plan.

13.10.710    Stormwater plan.

13.10.720    Stormwater Pollution Prevention Manual.

13.10.730    Subbasin.

13.10.740    Surface and stormwater.

13.10.750    Surface water utility.

13.10.760    Surface and stormwater management system.

13.10.770    Surface Water Design Manual.

13.10.780    Surface water management fee protocols.

13.10.790    Treatment BMP.

13.10.800    Targeted drainage review.

13.10.810    Undeveloped parcel.

13.10.815    Unit rate.

13.10.820    Water quality facility.


13.10.010 Scope of chapter.

This chapter contains definitions of technical and procedural terms used throughout this title. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.020 Adjustment.

“Adjustment” means a department-approved variation in the application of the requirements of Chapter 13.20 SMC and the Surface Water Design Manual to a particular project in accordance with SMC 13.20.030. “Adjustment” replaces “variance,” which was used in prior editions of the Surface Water Design Manual. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.030 AKART.

“AKART” means “all known, available and reasonable methods of prevention, control and treatment.” “AKART” represents the most current methodology that can be reasonably required for preventing, controlling or abating the pollutants associated with a discharge. “AKART” applies to both point and nonpoint sources of pollution. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.040 Applicant.

“Applicant” means a property owner or a public agency or public or private utility that owns a right-of-way or other easement or has been adjudicated the right to such an easement under RCW 8.12.090, or any person or entity designated or named in writing by the property or easement owner to be the applicant, in an application for a development proposal, permit or approval. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.050 Basin.

“Basin” means a geographic area that contains and drains to a stream or river named and noted on common maps, such as the Cedar River, Sammamish River, Green River, Snoqualmie River, Skykomish River or White River, or a geographic area that drains to a nonflowing water body named and noted on common maps, such as Lake Washington or Puget Sound. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.060 Basin plan.

“Basin plan” means a plan and all implementing regulations and procedures including, but not limited to, capital projects, public education activities and land use management regulations adopted by ordinance for managing surface and stormwater within the basin. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.070 Best management practices.

“Best management practices” or “BMPs” means any schedule of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedure or structural and/or managerial practice approved by King County that, when used singly or in combination, prevents or reduces the release of pollutants and other adverse impacts to surface water, stormwater and groundwater. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.080 City.

“City” means City of Sammamish, Washington, or, as indicated by the context, may mean any official, officer, employee or agency representing the City in the discharge of his or her duties. (Ord. O2017-452 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.090 Closed depression.

“Closed depression” means an area greater than 5,000 square feet at overflow elevation that is low-lying and that has no or such a limited surface water outlet that the area acts as a stormwater retention facility. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.100 Clean Water Act.

“Clean Water Act” means 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq., as amended. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.110 Construct or modify.

“Construct or modify” means to install a new drainage pipe or ditch or make improvements to an existing drainage pipe or ditch, for purposes other than maintenance, that either serves to concentrate previously unconcentrated surface and stormwater runoff or serves to increase, decrease or redirect the conveyance of surface and stormwater runoff. “Construct or modify” does not include installation or maintenance of a driveway culvert installed as part of a single-family residential building permit. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.120 Conveyance system.

“Conveyance system” means the drainage facilities and features, both natural and constructed, that provide for the collection and transport of surface water or stormwater runoff. The natural elements of the conveyance system include swales and small drainage courses, streams, rivers, lakes and wetlands. The constructed elements of the conveyance system include gutters, ditches, pipes, catch basins, channels and most flow control and water quality treatment facilities. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.125 Critical drainage area.

“Critical drainage area” means an area that requires more restrictive regulation than City standards afford in order to mitigate water quality, flooding, severe erosion, or landslide problems that result from the cumulative impacts of development and urbanization. Critical drainage areas include areas that drain to Pine Lake and Beaver Lake and all landslide hazard drainage areas as mapped or as determined by the City. Site-specific evaluation shall be made to assess all areas. (Ord. O2019-486 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O2018-459 § 2 (Att. B); Ord. O2016-429 § 2 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10. Formerly 21A.15.255)


13.10.130 Department.

“Department” means the department of public works or its successor. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.140 Development.

“Development” means any activity that requires a permit or approval, including, but not limited to, a building permit, grading permit, shoreline substantial development permit, conditional use permit, special use permit, zoning variance or reclassification, subdivision, short subdivision, urban planned development, binding site plan, site development permit or right-of-way use permit. “Development” does not include a Class I, II, III or IV-S forest practice conducted in accordance with Chapter 76.09 RCW and WAC Title 222 or a Class IV-G nonconversion forest practice, as defined in Chapter 21A.15 SMC, conducted in accordance with Chapter 76.09 RCW and WAC Title 222 and a county-approved forest management plan. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.150 Developed parcel.

“Developed parcel” means any parcel of real property altered from the natural state by the construction, creation or addition of impervious surfaces. (Ord. O2017-452 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.160 Director.

“Director” means the director of the City of Sammamish department of public works, other department directors specified in enforcement procedures established in accordance with the Sammamish Municipal Code, or any designee of those directors. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.170 Division.

“Division” means the department of public works, engineering division, or its successor agency. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.180 Discharge.

“Discharge” means runoff, excluding off-site flows, leaving the proposed development through overland flow, built conveyance systems, or infiltration facilities. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.190 Drainage.

“Drainage” means the collection, conveyance, containment or discharge, or any combination thereof, of surface and stormwater runoff. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.200 Drainage facility.

“Drainage facility” means a constructed or engineered stream, lake, wetland, or closed depression, or a pipe, channel, ditch, gutter, flow control facility, flow control best management practice, water quality facility, erosion and sediment control facility, and any other structure and appurtenance that provide for drainage. (Ord. O2017-452 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.210 Drainage review.

“Drainage review” means an evaluation by City staff of a proposed project’s compliance with the drainage requirements in the Surface Water Design Manual. The types of drainage review include: simplified drainage review, targeted drainage review, directed drainage review, full drainage review and large project drainage review. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.220 Effective impervious surface.

“Effective impervious surface” means those impervious surfaces that are connected via sheet flow or discrete conveyance to a drainage system. Impervious surfaces are considered ineffective if: (1) the runoff is fully dispersed as described in Appendix C of the Surface Water Design Manual; (2) residential roof runoff is infiltrated in accordance with the full infiltration BMP described in the Surface Water Design Manual; or (3) approved continuous runoff modeling methods indicate that the entire runoff file is infiltrated. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.225 Equivalent service unit (ESU).

“Equivalent service unit (ESU)” means a configuration of impervious surface estimated to contribute an amount of runoff to the City’s stormwater management system which is approximately equal to that created by the average single-family residential developed parcel in the City. (Ord. O2017-452 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.230 Erosion and sediment control.

“Erosion and sediment control” means any temporary or permanent measures taken to reduce erosion, control siltation and sedimentation and ensure that sediment-laden water does not leave the site or enter into wetlands or aquatic areas. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.240 Farm management plan.

“Farm management plan” means a comprehensive site-specific plan developed by the farm owner in cooperation with the King Conservation District taking into consideration the land owners’ objectives while protecting water quality and related natural resources. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.250 Financial guarantee.

“Financial guarantee” means a form of financial security posted to do one or more of the following: ensure timely and proper completion of improvements; ensure compliance with the Sammamish Municipal Code; or provide secured warranty of materials, workmanship of improvements and design. “Financial guarantees” include assignments of funds, cash deposit, surety bonds or other forms of financial security acceptable to the director. “Performance guarantee,” “maintenance guarantee” and “defect guarantee” are considered subcategories of financial guarantee. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.260 Flood hazard reduction plan.

“Flood hazard reduction plan” means a plan and all implementing programs, regulations and procedures including, but not limited to, capital projects, public education activities and enforcement programs for reduction of flood hazards and prepared in accordance with RCW 86.12.200. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.270 Flow control best management practice.

“Flow control best management practice” means a small-scale drainage facility or feature that is part of a development site strategy to use processes such as infiltration, dispersion, storage, evaporation, transpiration, forest retention, and reduced impervious surface footprint to mimic predeveloped hydrology and minimize stormwater runoff. “Flow control best management practice” includes the methods and designs specified in the Surface Water Design Manual. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.280 Flow control facility.

“Flow control facility” means a drainage facility designed to mitigate the impacts of increased surface and stormwater runoff generated by site development in accordance with the drainage requirements in this title. A flow control facility is designed either to hold water for a considerable length of time and then release it by any combination of evaporation, plant transpiration or infiltration into the ground or to hold runoff for a short period of time and then release it to the conveyance system. (Ord. O2017-452 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.290 Forest practices.

“Forest practices” means any activity conducted on or directly pertaining to forest land and relating to growing, harvesting, or processing timber, as defined in Chapter 222-16 WAC. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.300 Full drainage review.

“Full drainage review” means the evaluation required by Chapter 13.20 SMC for any proposed project, unless the project is subject to simplified drainage review, targeted drainage review, direct drainage review or large project drainage review, that:

(1) Would result in 2,000 square feet or more of new plus replaced impervious surface; or

(2) Would result in 7,000 square feet or more of land disturbing activity. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.310 Groundwater.

“Groundwater” means all waters that exist beneath the land surface or beneath the bed of any surface water. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.320 High-use site.

“High-use site” means a commercial, industrial or road intersection site that generates a higher than average number of vehicle turnovers or has other characteristics that generate the potential for chronic oil accumulation. “High-use site” includes:

(1) A commercial or industrial site subject to:

(a) An expected daily traffic count greater than 100 vehicles per 1,000 square feet of gross building area;

(b) Petroleum storage or transfer in excess of 1,500 gallons per year, not including routine fuel oil storage or transfer; or

(c) Use, storage or maintenance of a fleet of 25 or more diesel vehicles each weighing over 10 tons; or

(2) A road intersection with average daily traffic counts of 25,000 vehicles or more on the main roadway and 15,000 or more vehicles on any intersecting roadway, excluding pedestrian or bicycle use improvement projects. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.330 Hydraulically connected.

“Hydraulically connected” means connected through surface flow or water features such as wetlands or lakes. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.340 Impervious surface.

“Impervious surface” means a hard surface area that either prevents or retards the entry of water into the soil mantle as under natural conditions before development; or that causes water to run off the surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate of flow compared to the flow present under natural conditions prior to development (see also “new impervious surface”). Common impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, roofs, walkways, patios, driveways, parking lots, or storage areas, areas that are paved, graveled or made of packed or oiled earthen materials or other surfaces that similarly impede the natural infiltration of surface water or stormwater. For the purposes of applying the impervious surface thresholds and exemptions contained in the Surface Water Design Manual, permeable pavement, vegetated roofs, and pervious surfaces with underdrains designed to collect stormwater runoff are considered impervious surfaces while an open uncovered flow control or water quality facility is not. However, for the purposes of computing runoff, uncovered flow control or water quality facilities shall be modeled as impervious surfaces as specified in Chapter 3 of the Surface Water Design Manual. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.350 Improvement.

“Improvement” means a permanent, human-made, physical change to land or real property including, but not limited to, buildings, streets, driveways, sidewalks, crosswalks, parking lots, water mains, sanitary and storm sewers, drainage facilities and landscaping. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.360 Land disturbing activity.

“Land disturbing activity” means an activity that results in a change in the existing soil cover, both vegetative and nonvegetative, or to the existing soil topography. “Land disturbing activity” includes, but is not limited to, demolition, construction, clearing, grading, filling, excavation and compaction. “Land disturbing activity” does not include tilling conducted as part of agricultural practices, landscape maintenance or gardening. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.365 Landslide hazard drainage area.

“Landslide hazard drainage areas” means critical drainage areas where overland flows pose a significant threat to health and safety because of their close proximity to a landslide hazard area as defined by SMC 21A.15.680. Landslide hazard areas are also considered landslide hazard drainage areas. Mapped landslide hazard drainage areas are approximate. Public works may determine that areas not mapped as landslide hazard drainage areas may meet this definition. (Ord. O2019-486 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O2016-429 § 2 (Att. B). Formerly 21A.15.681)


13.10.370 Land use code.

“Land use code” means restrictions on the type of development for a specific parcel of land as identified by records maintained by the City of Sammamish as modified or supplemented by information resulting from investigation by the division. Land use codes are preliminary indicators of the extent of impervious surface and are used in the initial analysis to assign an appropriate rate category for a specific parcel. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.380 Lake management plan.

“Lake management plan” means a plan describing the lake management recommendations and requirements adopted by public rule for managing water quality within individual lake basins. Adopted lake management plans are available from the department. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.390 Large project drainage review.

“Large project drainage review” means the evaluation required by Chapter 13.20 SMC for any proposed project that:

(1) Has an urban plan development land use designation in the Sammamish comprehensive plan land use map;

(2) Would, at full buildout of the project site, result in 50 acres or more of new impervious surface within a drainage subbasin or a number of subbasins hydraulically connected across subbasin boundaries; or

(3) Has a project site of 50 acres or more within a critical aquifer recharge area, as defined in SMC Title 21A. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.400 Licensed civil engineer.

“Licensed civil engineer” means a person registered with the state of Washington as a professional engineer in civil engineering. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.410 Maintenance.

“Maintenance” means those usual activities taken to prevent a decline, lapse or cessation in the use of currently serviceable structures, facilities, equipment or systems, if there is no expansion of the structure, facilities, equipment or system and there are no significant hydrologic impacts. “Maintenance” includes the repair or replacement of nonfunctional facilities or the replacement of existing structures with different types of structures, if the repair or replacement is required by one or more environmental permits or to meet current engineering standards and the functioning characteristics of the original facility or structure are not changed. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.415 Manager.

“Manager” means the City manager or designee. (Ord. O2017-452 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.420 Master drainage plan.

“Master drainage plan” means a comprehensive drainage control plan for projects subject to large project drainage review and intended to prevent significant adverse impacts to surface water and groundwater, both on and off site. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.421 Municipal separate storm sewer systems.

“Municipal separate storm sewer systems” or “MS4” is a conveyance or system of conveyances that is owned by the City of Sammamish that discharges to waters of the U.S., designed or used to collect or convey stormwater (e.g., storm drains, pipes, ditches), not a combined sewer, and not part of a sewage treatment plant, or publicly owned treatment works. (Ord. O2018-459 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.430 National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.

“National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System” or “NPDES” means the national program for controlling pollutants from point source discharges directly into waters of the United States under the Clean Water Act. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.440 National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit.

“National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit” means an authorization, license or equivalent control document issued by the Environmental Protection Agency or the Washington State Department of Ecology to implement the requirements of the NPDES program. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))




13.10.450 Native vegetated surface.

“Native vegetated surface” means a surface in which the soil conditions, ground cover and species of vegetation are like those of the original native condition for the site, as more specifically set forth in the Surface Water Design Manual. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.460 Natural discharge location.

“Natural discharge location” means the location where runoff leaves the project site under existing site conditions as defined in the Surface Water Design Manual. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.470 Natural surface water drainage system.

“Natural surface water drainage system” means such landscape features as rivers, streams, lakes and wetlands. This system circulates water in a complex hydrological cycle. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.480 New impervious surface.

“New impervious surface” means the creation of a hard or compacted surface such as roofs, pavement, gravel or dirt or the addition of a more compacted surface such as the paving of existing dirt or gravel. Permeable pavement and vegetated roofs are considered new impervious surface for purposes of determining whether the thresholds for application of minimum requirements are exceeded, as are lawns, landscaping, sports fields, golf courses, and other areas that have modified runoff characteristics resulting from the addition of underdrains designed to collect stormwater runoff. Open, uncovered retention/detention facilities shall not be considered impervious surfaces for purposes of determining whether the thresholds for application of minimum requirements are exceeded. Open, uncovered retention/detention facilities shall be considered impervious surfaces for purposes of runoff modeling. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.490 New pervious surface.

“New pervious surface” means the conversion of a native vegetated surface or other native surface to a nonnative pervious surface, including, but not limited to, pasture land, grassland, cultivated land, lawn, landscaping or bare soil or any alteration of existing nonnative pervious surface that results in increased surface and stormwater runoff as defined in the Surface Water Design Manual. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.500 Open space.

“Open space” means any parcel, property or portion thereof classified for current use taxation under Chapter 20.36 KCC and Chapter 84.34 RCW, or for which the development rights have been sold to King County under Chapter 26.04 KCC. This definition includes lands which have been classified as open space, agricultural or timber lands under criteria contained in Chapter 20.36 KCC and Chapter 84.34 RCW. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.510 Parcel.

“Parcel” means the smallest separately segregated unit or plot of land having an identified owner, boundaries and surface area which is documented for property tax purposes and given a tax lot number by the King County assessor. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.520 Person.

“Person” means an individual and his or her agent or assign, municipality, political subdivision, government agency, partnership, corporation, business or any other entity. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.525 Pervious surface.

“Pervious surface” means any surface material that allows stormwater to infiltrate into the ground. Examples include lawn, landscape, pasture, and native vegetation areas. Note: For purposes of threshold determination and runoff volume modeling for detention and treatment, vegetated roofs and permeable pavements are to be considered impervious surfaces along with lawns, landscaping, sports fields, golf courses, and other areas that have modified runoff characteristics resulting from the addition of underdrains. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B))


13.10.530 Pollution-generating impervious surface.

“Pollution-generating impervious surface” means an impervious surface considered to be a significant source of pollutants in surface and stormwater runoff. “Pollution-generating impervious surface” includes those surfaces subject to vehicular use or storage of erodible or leachable materials, wastes or chemicals and that receive direct rainfall or the run-on or blow-in of rainfall. A covered parking area would be included if runoff from uphill could regularly run through it or if rainfall could regularly blow in and wet the pavement surface. Metal roofs are also considered pollution-generating impervious surfaces unless they are treated to prevent leaching. Pollution-generating impervious surfaces include roofs that are exposed to the venting of significant amounts of dusts, mists, or fumes from manufacturing, commercial, or other indoor activities. They also include vegetated roofs exposed to pesticides, fertilizers, or loss of soil. Lawns, landscaping, sports fields, golf courses, and other areas that have modified runoff characteristics resulting from the addition of underdrains that have the pollution-generating characteristics described under the “pollution-generating pervious surface” definition are also considered PGIS. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.540 Pollution-generating pervious surface.

“Pollution-generating pervious surface” means a nonimpervious surface considered to be a significant source of pollutants in surface and stormwater runoff. “Pollution-generating pervious surfaces” include surfaces subject to the use of pesticides and fertilizers, to the use or storage of erodible or leachable materials, wastes or chemicals or to the loss of soil. “Pollution-generating pervious surface” includes, but is not limited to, the lawn and landscaped areas of a residential or commercial site, golf course, park, sports field and City-standard grassed modular grid pavement. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.550 Project.

“Project” means any proposed action to alter or develop a site that may also require drainage review. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.560 Project site.

“Project site” means the portion of a site and any off-site areas subject to proposed project activities, alterations and improvements including those required by this chapter. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.570 Rate category.

“Rate category” means the classification in this chapter given to a parcel in the service area based upon the type of land use on the parcel and the percentage of impervious surface area contained on the parcel. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.580 Redevelopment project.

“Redevelopment project” means a project that proposes to add, replace or modify impervious surface for purposes other than a residential subdivision or maintenance on a site that:

(1) Is already substantially developed in a manner that is consistent with its current zoning or with a legal nonconforming use; or

(2) Has an existing impervious surface coverage of 35 percent or more. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.590 Replaced impervious surface.

“Replaced impervious surface” means an existing impervious surface proposed to be removed and reestablished as impervious surface, excluding impervious surface removed for the sole purpose of installing utilities or performing maintenance on underground infrastructure. For structures, “removed” means the removal of buildings down to the foundation. For other impervious surfaces, “removed” means the removal down to base course or bare soil. It does not include the removal of pavement material through grinding or other surface modification unless the entire layer of PCC or AC is removed. Replaced impervious surface also includes impervious surface that is moved from one location to another on the project site where the following two conditions are met: (1) the area from which the impervious surface is moved from will be restored to the same or better runoff discharge characteristics as the area being covered by the moved impervious surface, and (2) impervious surface at the new location is either designated as non- pollution-generating or the pollution-generating characteristics remain unchanged compared to that of the original location. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.600 Residence.

“Residence” means a building or structure or portion thereof, designed for and used to provide a place of abode for human beings. The term “residence” includes the term “residential” or “residential unit” as referring to the type of or intended use of a building or structure. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.610 Residential parcel.

“Residential parcel” means any parcel which contains no more than three residences or three residential units which are within a single structure and is used primarily for residential purposes. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.615 Road.

“Road” means an urban right-of-way, paving and associated improvements which enable motor vehicles, transit vehicles, bicycles and pedestrians to travel between destinations, and afford the principal means of access to abutting property, including avenue, place, way, drive, lane, boulevard, highway, street, and other thoroughfare, except an alley. (Ord. O2017-452 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.620 Runoff.

“Runoff” means that portion of water originating from rainfall and other precipitation that flows over the surface or just below the surface from where it fell and is found in drainage facilities, rivers, streams, springs, seeps, ponds, lakes, wetlands and shallow groundwater as well as on ground surfaces. For the purpose of this definition, “groundwater” means all waters that exist beneath the land surface or beneath the bed of any stream, lake or reservoir, or other body of surface water, whatever may be the geological formation or structure in which such water stands or flows, percolates or otherwise moves. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.630 Salmon conservation plan.

“Salmon conservation plan” means a plan and all implementing regulations and procedures including, but not limited to, land use management adopted by ordinance, capital projects, public education activities and enforcement programs for conservation and recovery of salmon within a water resource inventory area designated by the state under WAC 173-500-040. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.640 Shared facility.

“Shared facility” means a drainage facility designed to meet one or more of the requirements of Chapter 13.20 SMC for two or more separate projects contained within a basin. Shared facilities usually include shared financial commitments for those drainage facilities. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.650 Service area.

“Service area” means the incorporated City of Sammamish. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.651 Service charges.

“Service charges” means the surface water utility fee in an amount to be determined by applying the appropriate rate to a particular parcel of real property based upon factors established by this title. (Ord. O2017-452 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.655 Simplified drainage review.

“Simplified drainage review” means the drainage review for a proposed single-family residential project or agricultural project that: results in less than 5,000 square feet of new plus replaced pollution-generating impervious surface, results in less than three-quarters acre of pollution-generating pervious surface, limits target impervious and pervious surface as specified in the Surface Water Design Manual, and meets the simplified drainage requirements specified in Appendix C of the Surface Water Design Manual, including flow control best management practices, erosion and sediment control measures, and drainage plan submittal requirements. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B))


13.10.656 Single-family residence.

“Single-family residence” means a residential structure accommodating one dwelling unit, including duplex units and mobile homes, as defined by the City land use codes. (Ord. O2017-452 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.660 Site.

“Site” means a single parcel, or two or more contiguous parcels that are under common ownership or documented legal control, used as a single parcel for a proposed project for purposes of applying for authority from the City of Sammamish to carry out a proposed project. For projects located primarily within dedicated rights-of-way, “site” includes the entire width of right-of-way subject to improvements proposed by the project. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.670 Small project drainage review.

Repealed by Ord. O2016-428. (Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.680 Source control BMP.

“Source control BMP” means a BMP intended to prevent contaminants from entering surface and stormwater or groundwater including the modification of processes to eliminate the production or use of contaminants. “Source control BMPs” can be either structural or nonstructural. Structural source control BMPs involve the construction of a physical structure on site, or other type of physical modification to a site. An example of a structural source control BMP is building a covered storage area. A nonstructural source control BMP involves the modification or addition of managerial or behavioral practices. An example of a nonstructural source control BMP is using less toxic alternatives to current products or sweeping parking lots. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.690 State Waste Discharge Permit.

“State Waste Discharge Permit” means an authorization, license, or equivalent control document issued by the Washington State Department of Ecology in accordance with Chapter 173-216 WAC. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.700 Stormwater compliance plan.

“Stormwater compliance plan” means a plan or study and all regulations and procedures that have been adopted by the City to implement the plan or study, including, but not limited to, capital projects, public education activities and enforcement programs for managing stormwater quantity and quality discharged from the City’s municipal separate storm sewer system in compliance with the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit program under the Clean Water Act. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.710 Stormwater plan.

“Stormwater plan” means a City of Sammamish ordinance specifying the stormwater control facilities that will be funded by a bond issue. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.720 Stormwater Pollution Prevention Manual.

“Stormwater Pollution Prevention Manual” means the manual adopted in accordance with Chapter 2.55 SMC, and supporting documentation referenced or incorporated in the manual, describing best management practices and procedures for existing facilities and existing and new activities not covered by the Surface Water Design Manual. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.730 Subbasin.

“Subbasin” means a geographic area that:

(1) Drains to a stream or water body named and noted on common maps; and

(2) Is contained within the basin of the stream or water body. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.740 Surface and stormwater.

“Surface and stormwater” means water originating from rainfall and other precipitation that is found on ground surfaces and in drainage facilities, rivers, streams, springs, seeps, ponds, lakes, wetlands, as well as shallow groundwater. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.750 Surface water utility.

“Surface water utility” means the services provided by the surface water management program, including but not limited to basin planning, facilities maintenance, regulation, financial administration, public involvement, drainage investigation and enforcement, aquatic resource restoration, surface and stormwater quality and environmental monitoring, natural surface water drainage system planning, intergovernmental relations and facility design and construction. (Ord. O2017-452 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.760 Surface and stormwater management system.

“Surface and stormwater management system” means constructed drainage facilities and any natural surface water drainage features that do any combination of collection, storing, controlling, treating or conveying surface and stormwater. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.770 Surface Water Design Manual.

“Surface Water Design Manual” means the manual, and supporting documentation referenced or incorporated in the manual, describing surface and stormwater design and analysis requirements, procedures and guidance that has been formally adopted by rule under the procedures in Chapter 2.55 SMC. The Surface Water Design Manual is available from the department of public works or its successor agency. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.780 Surface water management fee protocols.

“Surface water management fee protocols” or “SWM fee protocols” means the surface water management fee standards and procedures that have been formally adopted by rule under the procedures specified in Chapter 2.55 SMC. The SWM fee protocols are available from the department of public works or its successor agency. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.790 Treatment BMP.

“Treatment BMP” means a BMP intended to remove contaminants once they are already contained in stormwater. Examples of treatment BMPs include oil/water separators, biofiltration swales and wetponds. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.800 Targeted drainage review.

“Targeted drainage review” means an abbreviated evaluation required by Chapter 13.20 SMC for certain types of proposed projects that are not subject to full or large project drainage review. Targeted drainage review may be required for some projects in simplified drainage review. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.810 Undeveloped parcel.

“Undeveloped parcel” means any parcel of real property which has not been altered from its natural state by the construction, creation or addition of impervious surface. (Ord. O2017-452 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.815 Unit rate.

“Unit rate” means the dollar amount charged per ESU. (Ord. O2017-452 § 1 (Att. A))


13.10.820 Water quality facility.

“Water quality facility” means a drainage facility designed to mitigate the impacts of increased pollutants in stormwater runoff generated by site development. A water quality facility uses processes that include but are not limited to settling, filtration, adsorption, and absorption to decrease pollutant concentrations and loadings in stormwater runoff. (Ord. O2016-428 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


Chapter 13.15 SURFACE WATER DEVELOPMENT CHARGE

Sections:

13.15.010    Surface water system development charge authorized.


13.15.010 Surface water system development charge authorized.

(1) City Authorized to Collect Charge. The City is authorized to collect a surface water system development charge, effective January 1, 2019, as follows:

	Development	Fee

	New residential dwelling unit or commercial building with up to 2,500 square feet of impervious coverage	$2,085.00

	Each additional 250 square feet of impervious coverage over 2,500 square feet	$208.50

	Other structures or additions of up to 250 square feet of impervious coverage requiring a building permit	$208.50, plus $208.50 for each additional 250 square feet

All impervious surface areas shall be rounded to the nearest 250-square-foot increment. The fee shall not apply to rockeries or retaining walls.

(2) Charges Shall Be Liens. All charges made under this section shall constitute a lien upon the property from which such charges are due, superior to all other liens and encumbrances whatsoever, except for general taxes and local special assessments. Enforcement of such lien shall be in the manner provided by law. All properties assessed a surface water system development charge shall have a notation on their plats stating that the property may be subject to a lien for the final costs of any necessary off-site surface water drainage improvements. (Ord. O2018-478 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2012-334 § 1; Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


Chapter 13.20 SURFACE WATER RUNOFF REGULATIONS

Sections:

13.20.010    Purpose.

13.20.020    Drainage review – When required – Type.

13.20.030    Drainage review – Requirements.

13.20.040    Critical drainage areas.

13.20.050    Engineering plans for the purposes of drainage review.

13.20.060    Construction timing and final approval.

13.20.070    Liability insurance required.

13.20.080    Financial guarantees authorized.

13.20.090    Drainage facilities accepted by Sammamish for maintenance.

13.20.100    Drainage facilities not accepted by Sammamish for maintenance.

13.20.110    Hazards.

13.20.120    Administration.

13.20.130    Enforcement.

13.20.140    Implementation, review and revision.

13.20.150    Severability.


13.20.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and welfare by providing for the comprehensive management of surface and stormwaters and erosion control, especially that which preserves and utilizes the many values of the City’s natural drainage system including open space, fish and wildlife habitat, recreation, and education. By conducting programs to reduce flooding, erosion, and sedimentation; prevent and mitigate habitat loss; enhance groundwater recharge; and prevent water quality degradation through the implementation of comprehensive and thorough permit review, construction inspection, enforcement, and maintenance, the effectiveness of the requirements contained in this chapter will be promoted. (Ord. O2016-428 § 5 (Att. C); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.20.020 Drainage review – When required – Type. 

(1) Drainage review is required when any proposed project is subject to a City of Sammamish development permit or approval and:

(a) Would result in 2,000 square feet or more of new impervious surface, replaced impervious surface or new plus replaced impervious surface; or

(b) Would involve 7,000 square feet or more of land disturbing activity; or

(c) Would construct or modify a drainage pipe or ditch that is 12 inches or more in size or depth or receives surface and stormwater runoff from a drainage pipe or ditch that is 12 inches or more in size or depth; or

(d) Contains or is adjacent to a flood hazard area as defined in SMC Title 15 or 21A; or

(e) When located within a critical drainage area draining to Pine or Beaver Lake and meets any one of the following conditions:

(i) Would result in a new single-family dwelling unit, accessory dwelling unit, multifamily, or commercial facility; or

(ii) Would result in a net increase in impervious surface of 500 square feet or more; or

(iii) Would involve 2,000 square feet or more of land disturbing activity; or

(f) When located within a critical drainage area draining to a landslide hazard area and meets any one of the following conditions:

(i) Would result in a new single-family dwelling unit, accessory dwelling unit, multifamily, or commercial facility; or

(ii) Would result in a net increase in impervious surface of 200 square feet or more; or

(iii) Would involve 2,000 square feet or more of land disturbing activity; or

(g) When located within a critical drainage area in the Tamarack or Inglewood Historic Plats and would result in any net increase in impervious surface; or meets one of these conditions;

(i) In Tamarack, any land disturbing activity greater than 2,000 square feet, or greater than 20 percent of the lot or tract area (whichever is less); or

(ii) In the Inglewood Historic Plat, east of East Lake Sammamish Parkway NE, any land disturbing activity greater than 2,000 square feet, or greater than 20 percent of the lot or parcel area (whichever is less); or

(h) Is a redevelopment project proposing $100,000 or more of improvements to an existing high-use site.

(2) The drainage review for any proposed project shall be scaled to the scope of the project’s size, type of development and potential for impacts to the regional surface water system to facilitate preparation and review of project applications. If drainage review for a proposed project is required under subsection (1) of this section, the City shall determine which of the following drainage reviews apply as specified in the Surface Water Design Manual:

(a) Simplified drainage review;

(b) Targeted drainage review;

(c) Directed drainage review;

(d) Full drainage review; or

(e) Large project drainage review. (Ord. O2019-486 § 2 (Att. 1); Ord. O2016-428 § 5 (Att. C); Ord. O2015-389 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.20.030 Drainage review – Requirements. 

(1) A proposed project required to have drainage review by this chapter must meet each of the core requirements which are described in detail in the Surface Water Design Manual and as amended by the Sammamish Addendum to the Surface Water Design Manual.

(2) A proposed project required by this chapter to have drainage review shall meet each of the special requirements which apply to the site and which are described in detail in the Surface Water Design Manual. 

(3) An adjustment to the core requirements or special requirements contained in the Surface Water Design Manual may be proposed pursuant to the terms and conditions for drainage adjustment in the Surface Water Design Manual.

(4) Proposed subdivision and short plat projects shall include outreach and education materials to support the continued maintenance and operation of low impact development best management practices. Such materials shall include an on-site educational kiosk located in a high foot traffic area of the development, educational brochures and handouts, noticing on title, noticing on the final plat of maintenance and operations responsibility, and noticing in the covenants, conditions, and restrictions, when any are applicable. Educational kiosks shall only be required for subdivision plats. (Ord. O2018-459 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-428 § 5 (Att. C); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.20.040 Critical drainage areas. 

(1) Development in areas where the department has determined that the existing water quality, flooding, severe erosion, or landslide conditions present an imminent likelihood of harm to the welfare and safety of the surrounding community shall meet special drainage requirements set by the director until such time as the community hazard is alleviated.

(2) Single-family development located in landslide hazard drainage areas shall be limited to a maximum of 35 percent impervious surface on each lot until such time as the director has determined that infrastructure is on-line and operational to mitigate the risk to downslope hazards.

(3) Single-family development located in areas that drain to Pine or Beaver Lake shall be subject to minimum yard areas and maximum impervious surfaces in accordance with SMC 21A.25.030.

(4) Low impact development techniques shall be used to the maximum extent feasible for all critical drainage areas.

(5) Development proposed within a critical drainage area shall not qualify for exemption or exception from core requirements in the Surface Water Design Manual except for director approved exemptions and exceptions for Core Requirement Nos. 1, 3, and 8 as provided below:

(a) The director may approve an exemption or exception request, prepared by a Washington State licensed professional engineer using sound engineering principles and judgment, from tightline requirements in Core Requirement No. 1 (Discharge at the Natural Location) which can demonstrate the following condition:

(i) Discharge is to an acceptable location where surface and groundwater will not damage downslope properties, will not increase the risk of landslides or severe erosion on such properties, will not discharge to streams of gradient 15 percent or more, and will not be located upgradient of a septic drain field or its reserve field as measured within a 100-foot radius around the discharge location. Examples of acceptable discharge locations include, but are not limited to: ditch and culvert systems that meet capacities in accordance with Core Requirement No. 4 (Conveyance System) for full build-out conditions and/or locations where the cumulative effects of discharges will not increase the risk of landslides or severe erosion and is supported by a geotechnical engineering report prepared by a Washington State professional licensed geotechnical engineer and peer reviewed by the City engineer or his/her designee.

(ii) For projects proposing a net increase in impervious surface and located in critical drainage areas in the Tamarack or Inglewood Historic Plats, no exemption to tightline requirements shall be approved.

(iii) Where a tightline system is proposed, discharge shall be to a City owned, operated, and maintained system or where the City has or is granted an easement for the inspection, maintenance, repair, and replacement of the tightline system properly sized to convey the cumulative full build-out of flows. Basin transfers may be allowed if downstream wetland hydrology and stream flows are maintained and the risk of landslides, severe erosion, and flooding related property damage will not increase for downslope properties. Pumped systems shall only be allowed where existing structures and access will not be damaged in the event of pump failure.

(b) The director may approve an exemption or exception request from Core Requirement No. 3 (Flow Control) and/or Core Requirement No. 8 (Water Quality), prepared by a Washington State licensed professional engineer using sound engineering principles and judgment, which can demonstrate that site conditions or strict adherence to the Core Requirements would negatively affect the site’s ability to mitigate its surface water impacts. Such site conditions and adherence to the Core Requirements may include, but are not limited to, the following:

(i) Significant trees would be damaged or require removal to install such facilities; or

(ii) Siting formal flow control or water quality facilities on site would result in significant increased risk to landslide hazard areas; or

(iii) Sizing a flow control facility is not feasible where the target release rate cannot be matched with a minimum orifice size of one-quarter-inch diameter.

(c) No exemptions or exceptions to Core Requirement Nos. 1, 3, and 8 shall be granted when the director deems that granting such exemption/exception request would cause significant impact to downstream properties, natural resources, and/or public infrastructure. Minimum thresholds for core requirements as described in the Surface Water Design Manual shall be met without exemption or exception.

(6) Where application of this section will deny all reasonable use of a property and a facility or design that produces a compensating or comparable result cannot be obtained, then an adjustment criterion exception may be approved pursuant to the applicable provisions of the Surface Water Design Manual. These standards are in addition to the applicable standards of Chapter 21A.50 SMC. (Ord. O2019-486 § 2 (Att. 1); Ord. O2016-428 § 5 (Att. C); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.20.050 Engineering plans for the purposes of drainage review. 

(1) These requirements are in addition to the submittal requirements established by Chapter 20.05 SMC.

(a) All engineering plans shall be submitted to the City for review in accordance with the Surface Water Design Manual except those drainage plans developed by, or under the review of, the City of Sammamish department of public works for either surface and stormwater capital improvement, repair, maintenance or restoration projects or other linear government agency projects, such as roadways, railways, pipelines, utility lines and trails.

(b) If engineering plans are returned for any reason, they shall be returned to the applicant.

(c) All master drainage plans, if required, shall be submitted to the City for review in accordance with the specifications in the Surface Water Design Manual. The master drainage plan process should commence at the same time as the State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA) process.

(d) Drainage plans not subject to review by the City under subsection (1)(a) of this section shall be reviewed by the department of public works in accordance with this chapter. Project applicability and compliance with this chapter shall be documented in writing and available for review.

(2) The expiration time frames as specified in the Surface Water Design Manual shall apply to all permit and approval applications.

(3) All plans shall be processed in accordance with the review procedures specified in the Surface Water Design Manual.

(4) Submittal procedures, definitions and specifications for the required contents of engineering plans are presented in the Surface Water Design Manual. (Ord. O2016-428 § 5 (Att. C); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.20.060 Construction timing and final approval. 

(1) No work related to permanent or temporary storm drainage control for a permitted development may proceed without the approval of the director.

(2) Erosion and sediment control measures associated with both the interim and permanent drainage systems shall be:

(a) Constructed in accordance with the approved plan prior to any grading or land clearing other than that associated with an approved erosion and sediment control plan; and

(b) Satisfactorily sequenced and maintained until all improvements, restoration, and landscaping associated with the permit and approvals for the project are completed and the potential for on-site erosion has passed.

(3) The applicant shall have constructed and have in operation those portions of the drainage facilities necessary to accommodate the control of surface and stormwater runoff discharging from the site before the construction of any other improvements or buildings on the site, or in accordance with SMC Title 19A. (Ord. O2016-428 § 5 (Att. C); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.20.070 Liability insurance required. 

The applicant required to construct the drainage facility pursuant to this chapter shall maintain a combined single limit per occurrence liability policy in the amount established annually by the City, which shall name City as an additional insured and protect the City from liability relating to the construction or maintenance of the facility until construction approval or acceptance for maintenance, whichever is last. Proof of this required liability policy shall be provided to the director prior to commencing construction of any drainage facility. If this liability insurance is not kept in effect as required, the City may initiate enforcement action pursuant to SMC Title 23. (Ord. O2016-428 § 5 (Att. C); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.20.080 Financial guarantees authorized. 

The City is authorized to require all applicants issued permits or approvals under the provisions of this title to post financial guarantees consistent with the provisions of SMC Title 27A. (Ord. O2016-428 § 5 (Att. C); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.20.090 Drainage facilities accepted by Sammamish for maintenance. 

(1) The City is responsible for the maintenance, including performance and operation, of drainage facilities which have formally been accepted for maintenance by the director.

(2) The City may assume maintenance of privately maintained drainage facilities only if (a) the City first determines that a clear public benefit will result, greater in scope than the public cost, from the use of public resources to participate wholly or partially in the maintenance of a private storm or surface water drainage system component, and (b) all of the following conditions have been met:

(a) All necessary easements or dedications entitling the City to properly maintain the drainage facility have been conveyed to the City;

(b) The director has determined that the facility is in the dedicated public road right-of-way or that maintenance of the facility will contribute to protecting or improving the health, safety and welfare of the community based upon review of the existence of or potential for:

(i) Flooding,

(ii) Downstream erosion,

(iii) Property damage due to improper function of the facility,

(iv) Safety hazard associated with the facility,

(v) Degradation of water quality or in-stream resources, or

(vi) Degradation to the general welfare of the community; and

(c) The director has declared in writing acceptance of maintenance responsibility by the City. Copies of this document will be kept on file in the department of public works.

(3) The director may terminate the department’s assumption of maintenance responsibilities in writing after determining that continued maintenance will not significantly contribute to protecting or improving the health, safety and welfare of the community based upon review of the existence of or potential for:

(a) Flooding;

(b) Downstream erosion;

(c) Property damage due to improper function of the facility;

(d) Safety hazard associated with the facility;

(e) Degradation of water quality or in-stream resources; or

(f) Degradation to the general welfare of the community.

Copies of this document will be kept on file in the department of public works.

(4) A drainage facility which does not meet the criteria of this section shall remain the responsibility of the applicant required to construct the facility and persons holding title to the property for which the facility was required. (Ord. O2017-432 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-428 § 5 (Att. C); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.20.100 Drainage facilities not accepted by Sammamish for maintenance. 

(1) The person or persons holding title to the property and the applicant required to construct a drainage facility shall remain responsible for the facility’s continual performance, operation and maintenance in accordance with the standards and requirements of the department and remain responsible for any liability as a result of these duties. This responsibility includes maintenance of a drainage facility which is:

(a) Under a maintenance guarantee or defect guarantee;

(b) A private road conveyance system;

(c) Released from all required financial guarantees prior to July 7, 1980;

(d) Located within and serving only one single-family residential lot;

(e) Located within and serving a multifamily or commercial site unless the facility is part of an approved shared facility plan;

(f) Located within or associated with a short subdivision or subdivision which handles runoff from an area of which less than two-thirds is designated for detached or townhouse dwelling units located on individual lots unless the facility is part of an approved shared facility plan;

(g) Previously terminated for assumption of maintenance responsibilities by the department in accordance with this chapter; or

(h) Not otherwise accepted by the City for maintenance.

(2) Prior to the issuance of any of the permits for any multifamily or commercial project required to have a flow control or water quality treatment facility, the applicant shall record a declaration of covenant as specified in the Surface Water Design Manual. The restrictions set forth in such covenant shall include, but not be limited to, provisions for notice to the persons holding title to the property of a City determination that maintenance and/or repairs are necessary to the facility and a reasonable time limit in which such work is to be completed.

(a) In the event that the titleholders do not effect such maintenance and/or repairs, the City may perform such work upon due notice. The titleholders are required to reimburse the City for any such work. The restrictions set forth in such covenant shall be included in any instrument of conveyance of the subject property and shall be recorded with the records and licensing services division of King County.

(b) The City may enforce the restrictions set forth in the declaration of covenant provided in the Surface Water Design Manual.

(3) Prior to the issuance of any of the permits and/or approvals for the project or the release of financial guarantees posted to guarantee satisfactory completion, the person or persons holding title to the subject property for which a drainage facility was required shall pay a fee established by the director as set forth in the City resolution to reasonably compensate the City for costs relating to inspection of the facility to ensure that it has been constructed according to plan and applicable specifications and standards.

(4) The duties specified in this section with regard to payment of inspection fees and reimbursement of maintenance costs shall be enforced against the person or persons holding title to the property for which the drainage facility was required.

(5) Where not specifically defined in this section, the responsibility for performance, operation and maintenance of drainage facilities and conveyance systems, both natural and constructed, shall be determined on a case-by-case basis. In any such case-by-case analyses, the City shall only be responsible for the performance, operation and maintenance of drainage facilities and conveyance systems if a determination is first made pursuant to the criteria set forth in SMC 13.20.090(2) as now in effect or as may be subsequently amended. (Ord. O2017-432 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-428 § 5 (Att. C); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.20.110 Hazards. 

Whenever the director determines that any existing construction site, erosion and sedimentation problem and/or drainage facility poses a hazard to life and limb, endangers any property, and/or adversely affects the condition or capacity of other drainage facilities, the safety and operation of City right-of-way, utilities, and/or other property owned or maintained by the City, the applicant/person to whom the permit was issued pursuant to this chapter, the owner of the property within which the drainage facility is located, the applicant/person responsible for maintenance of the facility, and/or other person or agent in control of said property, upon receipt of notice in writing from the director, shall within the period specified therein repair or otherwise address the cause of the hazardous situation in conformance with the requirements of this chapter.

Should the director have reasonable cause to believe that the situation is so adverse as to preclude written notice, the director may take the measures necessary to eliminate the hazardous situation; provided, that the director shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner before acting. In such instances the applicant of whom a drainage plan was required pursuant to this chapter, the owner of the property and/or the person responsible for the maintenance of the facility shall be obligated for the payment of all costs incurred. If costs are incurred and a financial guarantee pursuant to this chapter or other City requirement has been posted, the director shall have the authority to collect against the financial guarantee to cover costs incurred. (Ord. O2016-428 § 5 (Att. C); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.20.120 Administration. 

(1) Administration.

(a) The director is authorized to promulgate and adopt administrative rules under the procedures specified in Chapter 2.55 SMC, for the purpose of implementing and enforcing the provisions of this chapter. Adopted administrative rules are available to the public from the department of public works. This includes, but is not limited to, the Surface Water Design Manual.

(b) The director is authorized to develop procedures for applying adopted rules and regulations during the review of permit applications for the development of land. These procedures may also be contained in the Surface Water Design Manual.

(2) Inspections. The director is authorized to make such inspections and take such actions as may be required to enforce the provisions of this chapter.

(3) Right of Entry. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter, monitor for proper function of drainage facilities or whenever the director has reasonable cause to believe that violations of this chapter are present or operating on a subject property or portion thereof, the director may enter such premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or perform any duty imposed upon the director by this chapter; provided, that if such premises or portion thereof is occupied, the director shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the premises or portion thereof and demand entry.

(4) Access. Proper ingress and egress shall be provided to the director to inspect, monitor or perform any duty imposed upon the director by this chapter. The director shall notify the responsible party in writing of failure to comply with this access requirement. Failing to obtain a response within seven days from the receipt of notification, the director may order the work required completed or otherwise address the cause of improper access. The obligation for the payment of all costs that may be incurred or expended by the City in causing such work to be done shall thereby be imposed on the person holding title to the subject property. (Ord. O2016-428 § 5 (Att. C); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.20.130 Enforcement. 

The City is authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter, the ordinances and resolutions codified in it, and any rules and regulations promulgated thereunder pursuant to the enforcement and penalty provisions of SMC Title 23. (Ord. O2016-428 § 5 (Att. C); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.20.140 Implementation, review and revision. 

The department may administer a training program for users of the Surface Water Design Manual. The department may also conduct an ongoing research program to evaluate the effectiveness of the requirements in meeting the purpose of this chapter. This research program may examine, but not be limited to, hydrologic and hydraulic analysis methods, stream geomorphologic analysis methods, water quality, best management practices and erosion and sediment control measures. (Ord. O2016-428 § 5 (Att. C); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.20.150 Severability.

If any provision of this chapter or its application to any person or property is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter or the application of the provision to other persons or property shall not be affected. (Ord. O2016-428 § 5 (Att. C); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


Chapter 13.25 SURFACE WATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM

Sections:

13.25.010    Authority.

13.25.020    Purpose.

13.25.030    Applicability.

13.25.040    Rate structure.

13.25.050    Rate adjustments and appeals.

13.25.060    Billing procedure.

13.25.070    Delinquencies and foreclosures.

13.25.080    Surface water management fund.

13.25.090    Administrative standards and procedures.

13.25.100    Severability.


13.25.010 Authority. 

(1) There is hereby created and established the surface water management program of Sammamish under which the provisions of this chapter shall be carried out. 

(2) The program created in this section shall be administered by the department. 

(3) Whenever necessary to examine the property characteristics of a particular parcel for the purposes of implementing this chapter, the director may enter any property or portion thereof at reasonable times in compliance with the following procedures: 

(a) If the property or portion thereof is occupied, the director shall present identification credentials, state the reason for entry and request entry; 

(b) If the property or portion thereof is unoccupied, the director shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the property or portion thereof and request entry; and 

(c) Unless entry is consented to by the owner or person in control of any property or portion thereof, the director, before entry, shall obtain a search warrant as authorized by the laws of the state of Washington. 

(4) The director is authorized to enforce this chapter, the ordinances and resolutions codified in it and any rules and regulations promulgated thereunder pursuant to the enforcement and penalty provisions of SMC Title 23. 

(5) The program may provide services related to surface and stormwater management, including but not limited to basin planning, facilities maintenance, regulation, financial administration, public involvement, drainage investigation and enforcement, aquatic resource restoration, surface and stormwater quality and environmental monitoring, natural surface water drainage system planning, intergovernmental relations, and facility design and construction. The program may contract for services with interested municipalities or special districts including but not limited to sewer and water districts, school districts, or other governmental agencies. (Ord. O2017-452 § 2 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.25.020 Purpose. 

The purpose is to promote public health, safety and welfare by establishing and operating a comprehensive approach to surface and stormwater problems which would reduce flooding, erosion and sedimentation, prevent and mitigate habitat loss, enhance groundwater recharge and prevent water quality degradation. This comprehensive approach includes the following elements: basin planning, land use regulation, construction of facilities, maintenance, public education, and provision of surface and stormwater management services. The most cost effective and beneficial approach to surface and stormwater management is through preventative actions and protection of the natural drainage system. In approaching surface and stormwater problems, the surface water management program shall give priority to methods which provide protection or enhancement of the natural surface water drainage system over means which primarily involve construction of new drainage facilities or systems. The purpose of the rates and charges established herein is to provide a method for payment of all or any part of the cost and expense of surface and stormwater management services or to pay or secure the payment of all or any portion of any issue of general obligation or revenue bonds issued for such services. These rates and charges are necessary in order to promote the public health, safety and welfare by minimizing uncontrolled surface and stormwater, erosion, and water pollution; to preserve and utilize the many values of the City’s natural drainage system including water quality, open space, fish and wildlife habitat, recreation, education, urban separation and drainage facilities; and to provide for the comprehensive management and administration of surface and stormwater. (Ord. O2017-452 § 2 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.25.030 Applicability.

(1) Developed parcels within the service area shall be billed each year for surface and stormwater management services pursuant to RCW 36.89.080. Surface and stormwater management services or service charges, or both, shall be imposed on developed parcels lying within cities and towns when the services or charges, or both, have been provided for by interlocal agreements between the City and the cities or towns. That portion of the rates or charges allocated to payment of debt service on revenue or general obligation bonds issued to finance stormwater control facilities in areas annexed or incorporated subsequent to the issuance of the bonds shall be imposed as set forth in this chapter. 

(2) The service area shall be the corporate City limits of the City of Sammamish. (Ord. O2017-452 § 2 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.25.040 Rate structure.

(1) Service charges for the surface water utility fee are hereby authorized and imposed, in amounts and on terms consistent with this chapter. 

(2) The rates and service charges shall be based on the service provided and the relative contribution of stormwater runoff from a given parcel to the stormwater control facilities. The estimated or measured impervious surface area will be used to determine the relative contribution of stormwater runoff from the parcel. 

(3) Service charges shall be determined as follows:

(a) Undeveloped Parcels. Undeveloped parcels shall not be charged.

(b) Roads. Roads shall not be charged.

(c) Single-Family Residences. The monthly service charge for each single-family residence shall be the unit rate for one equivalent service unit. 

(d) Other Developed Parcels. The monthly service charge for all other developed parcels, including publicly owned properties, shall be computed by multiplying the unit rate times the number of equivalent service units applicable to the parcel less any approved rate adjustment for the parcel as determined under SMC 13.25.050. 

(e) Minimum Charge. There shall be a minimum monthly service charge for all developed properties equal to the unit rate. 

(f) Equivalent Service Unit. For the purpose of computation of non-single-family residential service charges, the number of equivalent service units shall be rounded to the nearest tenth (0.10). (Ord. O2017-452 § 2 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.25.050 Rate adjustments and appeals.

(1) Any person billed for service charges may file a request for rate adjustment with the division within three years of the date from which the bill was sent. However, filing of such a request does not extend the period for payment of the charge. 

(2) Requests for rate adjustment may be granted or approved by the director only when one of the following conditions exists: 

(a) The parcel is owned and is the personal residence of a person or persons determined by the City as qualified for a low income senior citizen property tax exemption authorized under RCW 84.36.381. Parcels qualifying under this subsection (2)(a) shall be exempt from all charges imposed in this chapter; 

(b) The actual impervious surface coverage of the parcel charges is in error; 

(c) Non-single-family residential parcel is served by one or more flow control or water quality treatment facilities required under Chapter 13.20 SMC, or can be demonstrated by the property owner to provide flow control or water quality treatment of surface and stormwater to the standards in Chapter 13.20 SMC, and any such facility is maintained at the expense of the parcel owner to the standards required by the department. In addition to the previous requirement, any source control best management practices applicable to the facilities or activities occurring on the parcel must be implemented pursuant to the standards in Chapter 13.30 SMC to prevent contaminants from entering surface water, stormwater, or groundwater. Non-single-family residential parcels shall be eligible for a rate credit reduction. 

Credit Calculation. The amount to be credited shall be a fixed percentage reduction based on the portion of program costs which can be reduced by the on-site activities of the customer base;

(d) The parcel is owned or leased by a public school district which provides activities which directly benefit the surface water management program. The activities may include: curriculum specific to the issues and problems of surface and stormwater management, and student activities in the community to expose students to the efforts required to restore, monitor or enhance the surface and stormwater management system. Pursuant to RCW 36.89.085, the amount of the rate adjustment shall be determined by the director based upon the cost of the activities to the school district but not to exceed the value of the activity to the surface water management program. Determination of which activities qualify for the surface water management service charge reduction will be made by the division. Reductions in surface water management service charges will only be granted to school districts which provide programs that have been evaluated by the division. The rate adjustment for the school district activity may be applied to any parcel in the service area which is owned or operated by the school district;

(e) The parcel is owned by a federally recognized tribe or member of such tribe and is located within the historical boundaries of a reservation and thus is not subject to the charges provided for in this chapter; or 

(f) The service charge bill was otherwise not calculated in accordance with this chapter. 

(3) The dollar amount of debt service on revenue or general obligation bonds issued to finance stormwater control facilities shall not be reduced by the rate adjustments referred to in subsection (2)(c) or (d) of this section. 

(4) The property owner shall have the burden of proving that the rate adjustment sought should be granted. 

(5) Decisions on requests for rate adjustments shall be made by the director based on information submitted by the applicant and by the division within 30 days of the adjustment request except when additional information is needed. The applicant shall be notified in writing of the director’s decision. If an adjustment is granted which reduces the charge for the current year or two prior years, the applicant shall be refunded the amount overpaid in the current and two prior years. 

(6) If the director finds that a service charge bill has been undercharged, then either an amended bill shall be issued which reflects the increase in the service charge or the undercharged amount will be added to the next year’s bill. This amended bill shall be due and payable under this chapter. The director may include in the bill the amount undercharged for two previous billing years in addition to the current bill. 

(7) Decisions of the director on requests for rate adjustments shall be final unless, within 30 days of the date the decision was mailed, the applicant submits in writing to the director a notice of appeal setting forth a brief statement of the grounds for appeal and requesting a hearing before the City hearing examiner. The examiner’s decision shall be a final decision pursuant to Chapter 20.10 SMC. (Ord. O2017-452 § 2 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.25.060 Billing procedure.

(1) All property subject to charges of the program shall be billed based on the property characteristics existing on November 1st of the year prior to the billing year and at the rate as set forth in this chapter. Billing year is the year that the bills are sent. The service charge shall be displayed and billed on the annual property tax statement for the parcel and shall be mailed to the name and address shown on the real property tax roll at the time annual property tax bills are prepared. Parcels which are exempt from property taxes and do not receive an annual property tax statement will receive a bill only for the service charge. If a payment less than the sum of the total property tax plus service charge or less than the sum of one-half of the property tax plus one-half of the service charge is received for a combined property tax and service charge, and the parcel owner has not otherwise specified, the director of the office of finance shall first apply the payment to the annual property tax of the parcel pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 84.56 RCW and then apply any remaining amount to the service charge. 

(2) The total amount of the service charge shall be due and payable to the director of the office of finance on or before the thirtieth day of April and shall be delinquent after that date; however, if one-half of such service charge is paid on or before the said thirtieth day of April, the remainder shall be due and payable on or before the thirty-first day of October and shall be delinquent after that date. 

(3) Parcel characteristics affecting the service charge which are altered after November 1st of any year shall not be a basis for calculation of the service charge until after December 31st of the following year. (Ord. O2017-452 § 2 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.25.070 Delinquencies and foreclosures.

(1) Delinquent service charges shall bear interest as provided in RCW 36.89.090 and 36.89.092 at the rate of 12 percent per annum, or such rate as may hereafter be authorized by law, computed on a monthly basis from the date of delinquency until paid. Interest shall be calculated at the rate in effect at the time of payment of the charges regardless of when the charges were first delinquent. 

(2) Pursuant to RCW 36.89.090, the City shall have a lien for delinquent service charges, including interest thereon, against any property subject to service charges. The lien shall be superior to all other liens and encumbrances except general taxes and local and special assessments. Pursuant to RCW 36.89.090, such lien shall be effective and shall be enforced and foreclosed in the same manner as the foreclosure of real property tax liens as provided in RCW 36.94.150. The City may commence to foreclose a surface water management service charge lien after three years from the date surface water management charges become delinquent. Pursuant to RCW 36.94.150, collections shall include costs of foreclosure in addition to service charges and interest. (Ord. O2017-452 § 2 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.25.080 Surface water management fund.

All service charges shall be deposited in the surface water management fund, which fund is hereby created to be used only for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost and expense of providing surface water management services, or to pay or secure the payment of all or any portion of any issue of general obligation or revenue bonds issued for that purpose. Moneys in the fund not needed for immediate expenditure shall be invested for the benefit of the surface water management fund pursuant to the first paragraph of RCW 36.29.020 and such procedures and limitations as are contained in City ordinance, but sufficient funds shall be transferred no later than the end of the fiscal year in which they were first appropriated. The program’s funds balances and other financial resources will be invested conservatively to match strong security of principal with market rates of return. For investment purposes the City manager or designee is hereby designated the fund manager. (Ord. O2017-452 § 2 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.25.090 Administrative standards and procedures.

Pursuant to Chapters 2.55 and 13.05 SMC, the director shall develop administrative standards and procedures relating to the implementation of this chapter. This includes but is not limited to: 

(1) Procedures for the imposition and collection of service charges and/or for filing of liens and initiation of foreclosure on delinquent accounts and the collection of the debt service portion of the service charge in areas that annex or incorporate; 

(2) Lake management plans for Beaver Lake and Pine Lake;

(3) Standards and procedures for granting discounts to the surface water management fee; 

(4) Procedures for a grant program to help citizens in reducing the impact of excess storm and surface water runoff by removing impervious surfaces from their property. (Ord. O2017-452 § 2 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.25.100 Severability.

If any provision of this chapter, or its application to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the remainder of this chapter and the application of the provisions to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. (Ord. O2017-452 § 2 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


Chapter 13.30 WATER QUALITY

Sections:

13.30.010    Purpose.

13.30.020    Discharges into waters.

13.30.030    Stormwater Pollution Prevention Manual.

13.30.040    Enforcement.

13.30.050    Hazards.

13.30.060    Criminal penalty.

13.30.070    Civil penalties for water quality.

13.30.080    Construction – Intent.


13.30.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to protect the City’s surface and groundwater quality by providing minimum requirements for reducing and controlling the discharge of contaminants. The City council recognizes that water quality degradation can result either directly from one discharge or through the collective impact of many small discharges. Therefore, this chapter prohibits the discharge of contaminants into surface and stormwater and groundwater, and outlines preventive measures to restrict contaminants from entering such waters. These measures include the implementation of best management practices (BMPs) by the residents of the City of Sammamish. 

The City council finds this chapter is necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of Sammamish and the integrity of the City’s resources for the benefit of all by: minimizing or eliminating water quality degradation; preserving and enhancing the suitability of waters for recreation, fishing, and other beneficial uses; and preserving and enhancing the aesthetic quality and biotic integrity of the water. The City council recognizes that implementation of this chapter is required under the federal Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq. In meeting the intent of the Clean Water Act the City council also recognizes the importance of maintaining economic viability while providing necessary environmental protection and believes this chapter helps achieve both goals. (Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.30.020 Discharges into waters.

(1)(a) It is unlawful for any person to discharge any contaminants into surface and stormwater, groundwater or Puget Sound. Contaminants include, but are not limited to, the following: 

(i) Trash or debris; 

(ii) Construction materials; 

(iii) Petroleum products including but not limited to oil, gasoline, grease, fuel oil, heating oil; 

(iv) Antifreeze and other automotive products; 

(v) Metals in either particulate or dissolved form; 

(vi) Flammable or explosive materials; 

(vii) Radioactive material; 

(viii) Batteries; 

(ix) Acids, alkalis, or bases; 

(x) Paints, stains, resins, lacquers or varnishes; 

(xi) Degreasers and solvents; 

(xii) Drain cleaners; 

(xiii) Pesticides, herbicides or fertilizers; 

(xiv) Steam cleaning wastes; 

(xv) Soaps, detergents or ammonia; 

(xvi) Swimming pool backwash; 

(xvii) Chlorine, bromine and other disinfectants; 

(xviii) Heated water; 

(xix) Domestic animal wastes; 

(xx) Sewage; 

(xxi) Recreational vehicle waste; 

(xxii) Animal carcasses; 

(xxiii) Food wastes; 

(xxiv) Bark and other fibrous materials; 

(xxv) Collected lawn clippings, leaves or branches; 

(xxvi) Silt, sediment or gravel; 

(xxvii) Dyes, except as stated in subsection (4)(a) of this section; 

(xxviii) Chemicals not normally found in uncontaminated water; 

(xxix) Any hazardous material or waste not listed above. 

(b) Illicit Connections. Any connection identified by the director that could convey anything not composed entirely of surface and stormwater directly to surface and stormwater or groundwater is considered an illicit connection and is prohibited with the following exceptions: 

(i) Connections conveying allowable discharges; 

(ii) Connections conveying discharges pursuant to an NPDES permit, other than an NPDES stormwater permit, or a state waste discharge permit; and 

(iii) Connections conveying effluent from on-site sewage disposal systems to subsurface soils. 

(2) BMPs shall be applied to any business or residential activity that might result in prohibited discharges as specified in the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Manual or as determined necessary by the director. Activities that might result in prohibited discharges include but are not limited to the following: 

(a) Potable water line flushing; 

(b) Lawn watering with potable water; 

(c) Dust control with potable water; 

(d) Automobile and boat washing; 

(e) Pavement and building washing; 

(f) Swimming pool and hot tub maintenance; 

(g) Auto repair and maintenance; 

(h) Building repair and maintenance; 

(i) Landscape maintenance; 

(j) Hazardous waste handling; 

(k) Solid and food waste handling; and 

(l) Application of pesticides. 

(3) The following types of nonstormwater discharges shall not be considered prohibited discharges for the purpose of this chapter unless the director determines that the type of discharge, whether singly or in combination with other discharges, is causing significant contamination of surface and stormwater or groundwater: 

(a) Diverted stream flows; 

(b) Rising groundwaters;

(c) Uncontaminated groundwater that seeps into or otherwise enters stormwater conveyance systems through such means as defective pipes, pipe joints, connections, or manholes;

(d) Uncontaminated pumped groundwater;

(e) Foundation drains;

(f) Air conditioning condensation;

(g) Irrigation water from agricultural sources that is commingled with urban stormwater;

(h) Springs;

(i) Uncontaminated water from crawl space pumps;

(j) Footing drains;

(k) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;

(l) Nonstormwater discharges authorized by another NPDES or state waste discharge permit;

(m) Discharges from emergency firefighting activities in accordance with Washington State Department of Ecology NPDES permit authorized discharges;

(n) Discharges from potable water sources, including but not limited to water line flushing, hyperchlorinated water line flushing, fire hydrant system flushing, and pipeline hydrostatic test water. Planned discharges shall be dechlorinated to a total residual chlorine concentration of 0.1 ppm or less, pH-adjusted, if necessary, and volumetrically and velocity controlled to prevent resuspension of sediments in the MS4;

(o) Discharges from lawn watering and other irrigation runoff. These discharges shall be minimized through water conservation efforts;

(p) Dechlorinated swimming pool, spa and hot tub discharges. The discharges shall be dechlorinated to a total residual chlorine concentration of 0.1 ppm or less, pH-adjusted and deoxygenized if necessary, volumetrically and velocity controlled to prevent resuspension of sediments in the MS4. Discharges shall be thermally controlled to prevent an increase in temperature of the receiving water. Swimming pool cleaning wastewater and filter backwash shall not be discharged to the MS4;

(q) Street and sidewalk wash water, water used to control dust, and routine external building washdown that does not use detergents. These discharges shall minimize the amount of street wash and dust control water used;

(r) Other nonstormwater discharges. The discharges shall be in compliance with the requirements of a pollution prevention plan reviewed by the City, which addresses control of such discharges.

(4)(a) Dye testing is allowable but requires verbal notification to the City at least one day prior to the date of test. The City is exempt from this requirement. 

(b) A person does not violate subsection (1) of this section if: 

(i) That person has properly designed, constructed, implemented and is maintaining BMPs and is carrying out AKART as required by this chapter, but contaminants continue to enter surface and stormwater or groundwater; or 

(ii) That person can demonstrate that there are no additional contaminants being discharged from the site above the background conditions of the water entering the site. 

(c) A person who, under subsection (4)(b) of this section, is not in violation of subsection (1) of this section is liable for any prohibited discharges through illicit connections, dumping, spills, improper maintenance of BMPs or other discharges that allow contaminants to enter surface and stormwater or groundwater. 

(d) Emergency response activities or other actions that must be undertaken immediately or within a time too short to allow full compliance with this chapter in order to avoid an imminent threat to public health or safety shall be exempt from this section. The director by public rule may specify actions that qualify for this exception in City procedures. A person undertaking emergency response activities shall take steps to ensure that the discharges resulting from such activities are minimized. In addition, this person shall evaluate BMPs and the site plan, where applicable, to restrict recurrence. (Ord. O2018-456 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.30.030 Stormwater Pollution Prevention Manual.

(1) Compliance with this chapter shall be achieved through the use of the best management practices described in the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Manual in effect on May 24, 2011 (effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter). In applying the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Manual, the director shall first require the implementation of source control BMPs. If these are not sufficient to prevent contaminants from entering surface and stormwater or groundwater, the director may require implementation of treatment BMPs as set forth in AKART. The City will provide, upon reasonable request, available technical assistance materials and information, and information on outside financial assistance options to persons required to comply with this chapter. 

(2) In applying the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Manual to prohibited discharges from normal single-family residential activities, the director shall use public education and warnings as the primary method of gaining compliance with this chapter and shall not use citations, notice and orders, assessment of civil penalties and fines, or other compliance actions as authorized in SMC Title 23, unless the director determines: 

(a) The discharge from a normal single-family residential activity, whether singly or in combination with other discharges, is causing a significant contribution of contaminants to surface and stormwater or groundwater; or 

(b) The discharge from a normal single-family residential activity poses a hazard to the public health, safety or welfare, endangers any property or adversely affects the safety and operation of City right-of-way, utilities or other City-owned or maintained property. 

(3) Persons implementing BMPs through another federal, state or local program will not be required to implement the BMPs prescribed in the City’s Stormwater Pollution Prevention Manual, unless the director determines the alternative BMPs are ineffective at reducing the discharge of contaminants. If the other program requires the development of a stormwater pollution prevention plan or other best management practices plan, the person shall make the plan available to the City upon request. Persons who qualify for exemptions include, but are not limited to, persons: 

(a) Required to obtain a general or individual NPDES permit from the Washington State Department of Ecology; 

(b) Implementing and maintaining, as scheduled, a King Conservation District-approved farm management plan; 

(c) Implementing BMPs in compliance with the management program of the City’s municipal NPDES permit; 

(d) Engaged in forest practices, with the exception of forest practices occurring on lands platted after January 1, 1960, or on lands being converted to another use or when regulatory authority is otherwise provided to local government by RCW 76.09.240; or 

(e) Identified by the director as being exempt from this section. (Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.30.040 Enforcement.

(1) The director is authorized to carry out enforcement actions pursuant to the enforcement and penalty provisions of SMC Title 23 and other enforcement provisions adopted by rule under the procedures of Chapter 2.55 SMC. 

(2) The director shall gain compliance with this chapter by requiring the implementation of operational and/or source control BMPs. Source control BMPs are in Volume IV of the Stormwater Management Manual for Western Washington. The director may also require maintenance of stormwater facilities which discharge into the MS4 in accordance with maintenance standards established in the Surface Water Design Manual. The director shall initially rely on education and informational assistance as much as possible to gain compliance with this chapter, unless the director determines a violation is a result of a flagrant act that should be addressed through immediate penalties or poses a hazard as defined in the hazards section (SMC 13.30.050).

(3) The director, in consultation with other departments of the City government, shall develop and implement additional enforcement procedures. These procedures shall indicate how the City will investigate and respond to reports or instances of noncompliance with this chapter and shall identify by title the official(s) responsible for implementing the enforcement procedures. 

(4) The director is authorized to make such inspections and take such actions as may be required to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Such inspections shall be made in accordance with SMC Title 23. 

(a) The director may observe best management practices or examine or sample surface and stormwater or groundwater as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. Whenever an inspection of a property is made, the findings shall be recorded and a copy of the inspection findings shall be furnished to the owner or the person in charge of the property after the conclusion of the investigation and completion of the inspection findings. 

(b) When the director has made a determination under subsection (4)(a) of this section that any person is violating this chapter, the director may require the violator to sample and analyze any discharge, surface and stormwater, groundwater, and/or sediment, in accordance with sampling and analytical procedures or requirements determined by the director. If the violator is required to complete this sampling and analysis, a copy of the analysis shall be provided to the City of Sammamish department of public works. 

(5) In addition to any other penalty or method of enforcement, the prosecuting attorney may bring actions for injunctive or other relief to enforce this chapter. (Ord. O2018-456 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.30.050 Hazards.

Whenever the director determines that any violation of this chapter poses a hazard to public health, safety, or welfare; endangers any property; or adversely affects the safety and operation of City right-of-way, utilities, and/or other property owned or maintained by the City; the person holding title to the subject property, and/or other person or agent in control of said property, upon receipt of notice in writing from the director shall within the period specified therein address the cause of the hazardous situation in conformance with the requirements of this chapter. 

Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, whenever it appears to the director that conditions covered by this chapter exist requiring immediate action to protect the public health and/or safety, the director is authorized to enter at all times in or upon any such property, public or private, for the purpose of inspecting and investigating such emergency conditions. The director may without prior notice order the immediate discontinuance of any activity leading to the emergency condition. Failure to comply with such order shall constitute a misdemeanor as specified in SMC Title 23. (Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.30.060 Criminal penalty.

Any willful violation of an order issued pursuant to SMC 13.30.040 or 13.30.050 for which a criminal penalty is not prescribed by state law is a misdemeanor. (Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.30.070 Civil penalties for water quality.

The enforcement provisions for water quality are intended to encourage compliance with this chapter. To achieve this, violators will be required to take corrective action and comply with the requirements of this chapter, and may be required to pay a civil penalty for the redress of ecological, recreational, and economic values lost or damaged due to their unlawful action. 

(1) The provisions in this section are in addition to and not in lieu of any other penalty, sanction or right of action provided by law. 

(2) Any person in violation of this chapter shall be subject to civil penalties assessed as follows: 

(a) An amount reasonably determined by the director to be equivalent to the economic benefit the violator derives from the violation as measured by: the greater of the resulting increase in market value of the property or business value received by the violator, or savings of construction or retrofitting costs realized by the violator performing any act in violation of this chapter; and 

(b) An amount, not to exceed $25,000, that is reasonably based upon the nature and gravity of the violation and the cost to the City of enforcing this chapter against the violator. 

(3) Any person who, through an act of commission or omission, aids or abets in a violation shall be considered to have committed the violation for the purposes of the civil penalty. 

(4) Each violator is jointly and severally liable for a violation of this chapter. The director may take enforcement action, in whole or in part, against any violator. The decisions whether to take enforcement action, what type of action to take, and which person to take action against, are all entirely within the director’s discretion. Factors to be used in taking such enforcement actions shall be: 

(a) Awareness of the violation; 

(b) Ability to correct the violation; 

(c) Cooperation with government agencies; 

(d) Degree of impact or potential threat to water or sediment quality, human health, or the environment. 

In the event more than one person is determined to have violated the provisions of this chapter, all applicable civil penalties may be imposed against each person, and recoverable damages, costs, and expenses may be allocated among the persons on any equitable basis. Factors that may be considered in determining an equitable allocation include: 

(e) Awareness of the violation; 

(f) Ability to correct the violation; 

(g) Ability to pay damages, costs, and expenses; 

(h) Cooperation with government agencies; 

(i) Degree of impact or potential threat to water or sediment quality, human health, or the environment. 

(5) The director or the director’s designee may engage in mitigation discussions with the violator. The director or the director’s designee may reduce the penalties based upon one or more of the following mitigating factors: 

(a) The person responded to City attempts to contact the person and cooperated with efforts to correct the violation; 

(b) The person showed due diligence and/or substantial progress in correcting the violation; or 

(c) An unknown person was the primary cause of the violation. 

Payment of a monetary penalty pursuant to this chapter does not relieve the person of the duty to correct the violation. (Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.30.080 Construction – Intent.

This chapter is enacted as an exercise of the City’s power to protect and preserve the public health, safety and welfare. Its provision shall be exempted from the rule of strict construction and shall be liberally construed to give full effect to the objectives and purposes for which it was enacted. This chapter is not enacted to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited by the terms of this chapter. 

The primary obligation of compliance with this chapter is placed upon the person holding title to the property. Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to be or shall be construed to create or form a basis for liability for the City, the department, its officers, employees or agents for any injury or damage resulting from the failure of the person holding title to the property to comply with the provisions of this chapter, or by reason or in consequence of any act or omission in connection with the implementation or enforcement of this chapter by the City, department, its officers, employees or agents. (Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


Chapter 13.35 FERTILIZERS

Sections:

13.35.010    Fertilizers containing phosphorus – Application – Prohibited – Exceptions – Department of public works to adopt standards and procedures.

13.35.020    Fertilizers on impervious surfaces – Application prohibited – Containment and disposition if released.

13.35.030    Consumer education and outreach by department of public works.


13.35.010 Fertilizers containing phosphorus – Application – Prohibited – Exceptions – Department of public works to adopt standards and procedures.

(1) Except as provided in subsection (2) of this section, a person may not apply to turf a fertilizer containing the plant nutrient phosphorus. 

(2) Subsection (1) of this section does not apply when: 

(a) Soil test results or other certification by a turf specialist performed within the three years previous to the application indicate that the level of available phosphorus in the soil is insufficient to support healthy turf growth, and the test results or certification, and the application rate, are consistent with best practice standards approved by the City department of public works. In developing the best practice standards, the department shall seek input from the Washington State University turfgrass specialists; 

(b) The property owner or an agent of the property owner is first establishing turf via seed or sod procedures and only during the first calendar year; 

(c) The fertilizer containing the plant nutrient phosphorus is applied to a golf course consistent with golf course management practices intended to minimize potential for fertilizer runoff; or 

(d) Applying turf fertilizer for agricultural or horticultural uses. 

(3) The department of public works shall adopt appropriate standards and procedures for the purposes of this section. (Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.35.020 Fertilizers on impervious surfaces – Application prohibited – Containment and disposition if released.

A person may not apply a fertilizer to an impervious surface. Fertilizer released on an impervious surface must be immediately contained and either legally applied to turf or another legal site or returned to the original container or another appropriate container. (Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


13.35.030 Consumer education and outreach by department of public works.

The department of public works shall seek to identify opportunities for grant funding and partnerships to support a consumer education and outreach effort, making use of existing outreach materials produced by other entities to the extent possible. If the State Department of Agriculture produces consumer information on application restrictions of fertilizer containing the plant nutrient phosphorus or on the impacts of phosphorus on the waters of the region, and on recommended best practices for turf fertilizer and other residential landscaping uses, the department of public works shall cooperate in the distribution of the information, including making recommendations for appropriate locations or parties to receive such information, as well as accommodating electronic links on its agency website for any electronic information produced. (Ord. O2011-304 § 1 (Att. A))


Title 14 PUBLIC WORKS AND TRANSPORTATION

(Repealed by Ord. O2018-465)


Title 14A PUBLIC FACILITIES

Chapters:

14A.01    Public Works Standards Adopted

14A.05    Definitions

14A.10    Concurrency

14A.15    Street Impact Fees

14A.20    Impact Fees for Parks and Recreational Facilities

14A.25    Impact Fee Deferral

14A.30    Right-of-Way Use Permits


Chapter 14A.01 PUBLIC WORKS STANDARDS ADOPTED

Sections:

14A.01.010    Public works standards adopted.

14A.01.020    Resolution of conflicts.

14A.01.030    Appeals.


14A.01.010 Public works standards adopted.

(1) The City hereby adopts by reference the design standards and specifications set forth in the document entitled “City of Sammamish 2016 Public Works Standards” as now or hereafter amended as the public works standards for the City, which includes but is not limited to transportation standards and street standards. Pursuant to RCW 35A.13.180, a copy of the most current City of Sammamish public works standards is available on the City’s website at www.sammamish.us.

(2) The public works director is hereby authorized to administratively interpret and apply the standards in a manner consistent with their terms in order to better implement the standards or allow for changes in street design and construction technology and methods. (Ord. O2018-465 § 2 (Att. A))


14A.01.020 Resolution of conflicts.

In case of inconsistency or conflict between other provisions of the Sammamish Municipal Code and the City of Sammamish public works standards adopted in this chapter, the most restrictive provision shall apply. (Ord. O2018-465 § 2 (Att. A))


14A.01.030 Appeals.

Any person or agency aggrieved by an act or decision of the City pursuant to the public works standards may appeal said act or decision to the City of Sammamish pursuant to the appeal provisions for the underlying development permit application as contained in Chapter 20.05 SMC. (Ord. O2018-465 § 2 (Att. A))


Chapter 14A.05 DEFINITIONS

Sections:

14A.05.010    Definitions.


14A.05.010 Definitions.

The following words and terms shall have the following meanings for the purposes of this title, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. The following words, terms, and definitions shall apply to all portions of this title, except as specifically superseded by definitions set forth elsewhere in this title.

“Accessory dwelling unit” is defined for the purposes of this title the same as the term “Dwelling unit, accessory” in SMC 21A.15.350.

“Affordable housing” or “low-income housing” means residential housing that is rented or owned by a person or household whose monthly housing expenses, including utilities other than telephone, do not exceed 30 percent of the applicable median family income listed below and adjusted for household size. Based on the King County Income and Affordability Guidelines, housing affordability levels include:

(a) “Low income” means a family earning between zero and 50 percent of the King County median household income.

(b) “Moderate income” means a family earning between 51 and 80 percent of the King County median household income.

(c) “King County median household income” means the median income of the Seattle Metropolitan Statistical Area (“SMSA”), adjusted for household size, as determined by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (“HUD”). In the event that HUD no longer publishes median income figures for King County, the City may determine such other method as it may choose to determine the King County median household income, adjusted for household size.

“Applicant” means a property owner or a public agency or public or private utility that owns a right-of-way or other easement or has been adjudicated the right to such an easement pursuant to RCW 8.12.090, or any person or entity designated or named in writing by the property or easement owner to be the applicant, in an application for a development proposal, permit or approval.

“Building permit” means an official document or certification which is issued by the City and which authorizes the construction, alteration, enlargement, conversion, reconstruction, remodeling, rehabilitation, erection, demolition, moving or repair of a building or structure.

“Capital facilities plan” means the Capital Facilities Plan Element of a Comprehensive Plan adopted by the City of Sammamish pursuant to Chapter 36.70A RCW, and such plan as amended.

“Capital improvement program (CIP)” means the expenditures programmed by the City of Sammamish for capital purposes over the next six-year period in the CIP most recently adopted by the City council.

“Certificate of concurrency” means the document issued by the City indicating the location or other description of the property on which the development is proposed, the type of development permit for which the certificate is issued, the number and type of units, square footage, and/or maximum trip generation approved, the public facilities that are available and reserved for the property described in the certificate, any conditions attached to the approval, and the date of issuance.

“City” means the City of Sammamish.

“City’s traffic model a.m. peak hour” is from 7:00 to 8:00 a.m., which accommodates many schools’ peak hour.

“City’s traffic model p.m. peak hour” is from 4:45 to 5:45 p.m., which reflects the afternoon’s average system peak hour.

“Concurrency” means that a development does not cause the level of service on a locally owned transportation facility to decline below the standards adopted in the Transportation Element of the Comprehensive Plan, unless transportation improvements or strategies to accommodate the impacts of the development are made concurrent with the development. For the purposes of this title, “concurrent with the development” means that improvements or strategies are in place at the time of development, or that a financial commitment is in place to complete the improvements or strategies within six years.

“Concurrency test” means the determination of an applicant’s impact on transportation facilities by the comparison of the City’s adopted level of service standards to the projected level of service at intersections or road corridors, or road segments with the proposed development.

“Concurrency test deferral affidavit” means a document signed by an applicant which defers the application for a certificate of concurrency and the concurrency test, acknowledges that future rights to develop the property are subject to the deferred concurrency test, and acknowledges that no vested rights concerning concurrency have been granted by the City or acquired by the applicant without such a test.

“Council” means the City council of the City of Sammamish.

“Department” means the department of public works, department of community development, or, when referenced in Chapter 14A.20 SMC, means the department of parks and recreation.

“Development” means specified improvements or changes in use designed or intended to permit a use of land that will contain more dwelling units or buildings than the existing use of the land, or to otherwise change the use of the land or buildings/improvements on the land, and that require a development permit from the City of Sammamish. The rezoning of land is not development.

“Development activity” means any construction or expansion of a building, structure, or use, any change in use of a building or structure, or any changes in the use of land, that creates additional demand and need for public facilities.

“Development approval” means any written authorization from the City which authorizes the commencement of development activity.

“Development permit” means any order, permit or other official action of the City granting, or granting with conditions, an application for development, including specifically:

(a) Planned action, as that term is defined in RCW 43.21C.031(2);

(b) Subdivision, including preliminary plat, short plat, or binding site plan and revisions or alterations which increase the number of dwelling units or trip generation;

(c) Mobile home park;

(d) Unified zone development plan (UZDP);

(e) Conditional use permit;

(f) Site development permit;

(g) Building permit; or

(h) Certificate of occupancy for a change in use.

“Director,” when referenced in this title, means the director of the department of public works or the director’s designee, or the director of the department of parks and recreation or the director’s designee, or the director of the department of community development or the director’s designee, as appropriate.

“Dwelling unit” means a residential location such as a house, apartment, condominium, townhouse, mobile home, or manufactured home in which people may live.

“Encumbered” means to reserve, set aside, or otherwise earmark the impact fees in order to pay for commitments, contractual obligations, or other liabilities incurred for public facilities.

“Feepayer” means a person, corporation, partnership, incorporated association, or any other similar entity, or department or bureau of any governmental entity or municipal corporation commencing a land development activity which creates the demand for additional capital facilities, and which requires the issuance of a building permit. “Feepayer” includes an applicant for an impact fee credit.

“Financial commitment” consists of the following:

“Financial commitment” means that sources of public or private funds or combinations thereof have been identified which will be sufficient to finance public facilities necessary to support development and that there is reasonable assurance that such funds will be timely put to that end.

(a) Revenue designated in the most currently adopted CIP for transportation facilities or strategies needed in the committed network for the transportation adequacy measure to test for concurrency. The financial plan underlying the adopted CIP identifies all applicable and available revenue sources and forecasts these revenues through the six-year period that can be reasonably expected. Projects to be used in defining the committed network shall represent those projects that are anticipated to be constructed in the six years of the CIP. This commitment is reviewed annually through the budget process;

(b) Unanticipated revenue from federal or state grants for which the City has received notice of approval;

(c) Revenue that is assured by an applicant in a form approved by the City in a voluntary agreement;

(d) Grants from federal, state or private sources if the grant has been awarded for specific projects;

(e) Appropriations in state biennial budget for specific projects;

(f) Revenues that can be imposed or expended at the discretion of the City, including, but not limited to, impact fees, SEPA mitigation payments, property taxes, real estate excise taxes, user fees, charges, intergovernmental entitlements, and bonds;

(g) Revenue from special assessment districts created by the City;

(h) Irrevocable commitments from developers in a form acceptable to the City including:

(i) Performance or surety bonds from Washington State financial institutions;

(ii) Letters of credit from Washington State financial institutions; or

(iii) Assignments of assets in Washington State (i.e., interests in real property, savings certificates, bank accounts, or negotiable securities); or

(i) Payments by special districts if such payments are similar in character and reliability to those listed in subsections (a) through (e) of this definition.

“Gross floor area” means the total square footage of any building, structure, or use, including accessory uses.

“Hearing examiner” means the examiner who acts on behalf of the City in considering and applying land use regulatory codes as provided under the Sammamish Municipal Code. Where appropriate, “hearing examiner” also refers to the office of the hearing examiner.

“Impact fee” means a payment of money imposed upon development as a condition of development approval to pay for public facilities needed to serve new growth and development, and that is reasonably related to the new development that creates additional demand and need for public facilities, that is a proportionate share of the cost of the public facilities, and that is used for facilities that reasonably benefit the new development. “Impact fee” does not include a reasonable permit or application fee.

“Impact fee account” or “account” means the account(s) established for each type of public facility for which impact fees are collected. The accounts shall be established pursuant to SMC 14A.15.070, 14A.15.080, 14A.20.070 and 14A.20.080, and comply with the requirements of RCW 82.02.070.

“Independent fee calculation” means the street impact calculation or park and recreational impact fee and/or economic documentation prepared by a feepayer to support the assessment of an impact fee calculation other than by the use of the rates listed in SMC 14A.15.110 or 14A.20.110, or the calculations prepared by the director where none of the fee categories or fee amounts in SMC 14A.15.110 or 14A.20.110 accurately describe or capture the impacts of the new development on public facilities.

“ITE land use code” means the classification code number assigned to a type of land use by the Institute of Transportation Engineers in the current edition of Trip Generation Manual.

“Level of service standards” means the City’s defined performance standards for its adopted concurrency intersections, road corridors, and road segments, as defined in SMC 14A.10.050.

“Occupancy” means that a space is being lived in, rented, or used and therefore not vacant.

“Owner” means the owner of record of real property, although when real property is being purchased under a real estate contract, the purchaser shall be considered the owner of the real property if the contract is recorded.

“Peak hour” means the hour during the morning or afternoon with the highest traffic volumes for a particular roadway or intersection.

“Planned action” means a project action as that term is defined in RCW 43.21C.031(2).

“Preapplication meeting” for the purposes of this title means a meeting between the applicant for a transportation concurrency certificate or its extension and the staff of the department, according to that department’s rules and administrative procedures held for the purpose of determining the requirements to file a development permit application.

“Project improvements” mean site improvements and facilities that are planned and designed to provide service for a particular development project and that are necessary for the use and convenience of the occupants or users of the project, and are not system improvements. No improvement or facility included in a capital facilities plan approved by the City council shall be considered a project improvement.

“Proportionate share” means that portion of the cost of public facility improvements that are reasonably related to the service demands and needs of new development.

“Public facilities” means the following capital facilities owned or operated by government entities: (a) public streets and roads; (b) publicly owned parks, open space, and recreation facilities; (c) school facilities; and (d) fire protection facilities in jurisdictions that are not part of a fire district.

“Rate Study for Impact Fees for Parks and Recreational Facilities” means the rate study completed by Henderson, Young and Company, dated November 2, 2006, for the City of Sammamish.

“Reservation” and “reserve” mean development units are set aside in the City’s concurrency records in a manner that assigns the units to the applicant and prevents the same units being assigned to any other applicant.

“Residential” or “residential development” means all types of construction intended for human habitation. This shall include, but is not limited to, single-family, duplex, triplex, townhouse and other multifamily development.

“Service area” means a geographic area defined by a county, city, town, or intergovernmental agreement in which a defined set of public facilities provide service to development within the area. Service areas shall be designated on the basis of sound planning or engineering principles.

“Significant past tax payment” means taxes exceeding five percent of the amount of the impact fee, and which were paid prior to the date the impact fee is assessed and were earmarked or proratable to the same system improvements for which the impact fee is assessed.

“Square footage” means the square footage of the gross floor area of the development.

“State” means the state of Washington.

“Street” means a public thoroughfare providing pedestrian and vehicular access through neighborhoods and communities and to abutting property.

“Street Impact Fee Rate Study” means the “Rate Study for Impact Fees for Streets,” City of Sammamish, dated September 27, 2006, or the most current update.

“System improvements” mean public facilities that are included in the capital facilities plan and are designed to provide service to service areas within the community at large, in contrast to project improvements.

“Trip” is a single or one-direction person or vehicle movement. A trip has an origin and a destination at its respective ends (known as trip ends). (Ord. O2019-484 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. O2018-465 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. O2014-366 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2006-206 § 1; Ord. O2004-138 § 1)


Chapter 14A.10 CONCURRENCY

Sections:

14A.10.010    Concurrency requirement.

14A.10.020    Application for certificate of concurrency.

14A.10.030    Exemptions from concurrency test.

14A.10.040    Concurrency test.

14A.10.050    Level of service standards.

14A.10.060    Certificate of concurrency.

14A.10.070    Fees.

14A.10.080    Appeals.


14A.10.010 Concurrency requirement.

(1) In accordance with RCW 36.70A.070(6)(b), the City must adopt and enforce ordinances which prohibit development approval if the development causes the level of service on a locally owned transportation facility to decline below the standards defined in SMC 14A.10.050, unless transportation improvements or strategies to accommodate the impacts of development are made concurrent with the development. These strategies may include increased public transportation service, ride sharing programs, demand management, and other transportation systems management strategies. For the purposes of the City’s concurrency requirement, “concurrent with the development” shall mean that improvements or strategies are in place at the time of development, or that a financial commitment is in place to complete the improvements or strategies within six years.

(2) The City shall not issue a development permit until:

(a) A certificate of concurrency has been issued; or

(b) The applicant has executed a concurrency test deferral affidavit where specifically allowed; or

(c) The applicant has been determined to be exempt from the concurrency test as provided in SMC 14A.10.030(1). (Ord. O2019-484 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. O2018-465 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. O2006-208 § 1; Ord. O2004-139 § 1)


14A.10.020 Application for certificate of concurrency.

(1) Each applicant requesting a Comprehensive Plan site-specific land use map amendment or zone reclassification, except as provided in SMC 14A.10.030(1), shall elect one of the following options:

(a) Apply for a certificate of concurrency; or

(b) Execute a concurrency test deferral affidavit.

(2) Each applicant for a planned action, subdivision (including a preliminary plat, short plat, or binding site plan and revisions or alterations which increase the number of dwelling units or trip generation), mobile home park, unified zone development plan, conditional use permit, or site development permit shall apply for a certificate of concurrency, unless a certificate has been issued for the same parcel in conjunction with a Comprehensive Plan site-specific land use map amendment or zone reclassification, or except as provided in SMC 14A.10.030(1).

(3) Each applicant for a building permit or certificate of occupancy for a change in use shall apply for a certificate of concurrency, unless a certificate has been issued for the same parcel in conjunction with subsection (1) or (2) of this section, or except as provided in SMC 14A.10.030(1).

(4) Each applicant filing under subsections (1) and (2) of this section shall contact the department to schedule a preapplication conference as defined in SMC 14A.05.010 and 20.05.030, that shall be held prior to filing an application for a certificate of concurrency. The director may waive the requirement for a preapplication conference if it is determined to be unnecessary for review of an application.

(5) Applicants for a certificate of concurrency may designate the density and intensity of development to be tested for concurrency, provided such density and intensity shall not exceed the maximum allowed for the parcel. If the applicant designates the density and intensity of development, the concurrency test will be based on and applicable to only the applicant’s designated density and intensity. If the applicant does not designate density and intensity, the concurrency test will be based on the maximum allowable density and intensity. (Ord. O2019-484 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. O2018-465 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. O2006-208 § 1; Ord. O2004-139 § 1)


14A.10.030 Exemptions from concurrency test.

(1) The following developments are exempt from this chapter, and applicants may submit applications, obtain development permits and commence development without a certificate of concurrency:

(a) Any development permit for the following development because it creates insignificant and/or temporary additional impacts on any public facility:

(i) Right-of-way use;

(ii) Street improvements, including new streets constructed by the City of Sammamish;

(iii) Street use permits;

(iv) Utility facilities which do not impact public facilities, such as pump stations, transmission or collection systems, and reservoirs;

(v) Expansion of an existing nonresidential structure that results in the addition of 100 square feet or less of gross floor area and does not add residential units or accessory dwelling units as defined in SMC 21A.15.345 to 21A.15.370;

(vi) Expansion of a residential structure provided the expansion does not result in the creation of an additional dwelling unit or accessory dwelling unit as defined in SMC 21A.15.345 to 21A.15.370;

(vii) Miscellaneous non-traffic generating improvements, including, but not limited to, fences, walls, swimming pools, sheds, and signs;

(viii) Demolition or moving of a structure; or

(ix) Tenant improvements that do not generate additional trips. (Ord. O2019-484 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. O2018-465 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. O2006-208 § 1; Ord. O2004-139 § 1)


14A.10.040 Concurrency test.

(1) The City shall perform a concurrency test for each application for a certificate of concurrency. The public works director, or his/her designee, shall use the following methods to conduct the concurrency test:

(a) For individual single-family residential building permit applications on existing lots, or other land use permits that generate less than 10 trips during an individual peak hour, the City will run a concurrency test after permit applications have been received that collectively result in 10 or more trips during an individual peak hour; provided, however, that a concurrency certificate can be issued without conducting the concurrency test when fewer than 10 accumulated trips have been generated since the last concurrency test. The City may run the concurrency test when less than 10 accumulated trips have been generated since the last test when there are existing public transportation facility circumstances that necessitate the concurrency test be performed in the order received for single-family residential building permit applications on existing lots.

(b) For all other development, review of each application as received in subsection (4) of this section.

(2) If the impact of the development does not cause the level of service to decline below the standards set forth in SMC 14A.10.050, the concurrency test is passed, and the applicant shall receive a certificate of concurrency.

(3) If the impact of the development will cause the level of service to decline below the standards set forth in SMC 14A.10.050, the concurrency test is not passed, and the applicant may select one of the following options:

(a) Accept a 90-day reservation of public facilities that are available, and within the same 90-day period amend the application to meet the level of service standard set forth in SMC 14A.10.050; or

(b) Appeal the denial of the application for a certificate of concurrency, pursuant to the provisions of SMC 14A.10.080; or

(c) Arrange to provide for public facilities that are not otherwise available and that cause the level of service to rise to the standards set forth in SMC 14A.10.050.

(4) The City shall conduct the concurrency test, as needed, in the order that completed applications are received and proposed trip generation estimates are approved by the City.

(5) A concurrency test, and any resulting certificate of concurrency, shall be administrative actions of the City that are categorically exempt from the State Environmental Policy Act. (Ord. O2019-484 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. O2018-465 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. O2006-208 § 1; Ord. O2004-139 § 1)


14A.10.050 Level of service standards.

(1) In conducting the concurrency test in accord with this chapter, the intersection LOS standards adopted in the Transportation Element of the Comprehensive Plan are LOS D for intersections that include principal arterials and LOS C for intersections that include minor arterials or collector arterials. The LOS for intersections with principal arterials may be reduced to E for intersections that require more than three approach lanes in any direction. The intersection standards shall be applied to both the morning and afternoon peak hours. The LOS standard for the higher road classification shall be the standard applied.

(2) In conducting the concurrency test in accord with this chapter, the road corridor and segment LOS standards are volume to capacity ratio of up to and including 1.1 for corridors and 1.4 for segments, respectively, for the City’s principal and minor arterials. The roadway standards shall be applied per the City’s traffic model’s AM and PM peak hours in each direction. The 2016 and 2024 corridor and segment capacities and LOS standards are shown in Figure 1. The capacity was calculated by modifying the Highway Capacity Manual, 6th Edition, methodology as described in the Measuring Concurrency for Segments and Corridors: HCM 6th Edition, Modified memo, dated November 16, 2018, by Kendra Breiland and Bianca Popescu, Fehr & Peers.


[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]


(3) In conducting the concurrency test in accord with this chapter, the City shall apply the level of service standards for the concurrency intersections as designated in subsection (1) of this section and for the concurrency corridors and segments in subsection (2) of this section. If any intersection, corridor or segment operates at or better than the level of service standards, the concurrency certificate shall be granted. If any concurrency intersection, corridor or segment operates worse than the level of service standards, the concurrency certificate will be denied, or the applicant may select one of the options described in SMC 14A.10.040(3).

(4) In conducting the concurrency test, the City shall find that the impact of development occurs, and therefore the level of service standards for intersections, corridors and segments shall be achieved and maintained, no later than six years from the date of the development.

(5) In the event that the applicant is required to construct a public facility, the development cannot be occupied until the public facility is completed, or the applicant provides the City with a performance bond that is acceptable to the City.

(6) The City shall determine which additional public facilities are needed to be included in the Capital Facilities Plan Element of the Comprehensive Plan to achieve the adopted level of service standards. Such additional public facilities shall be underwritten by a financial commitment. (Ord. O2019-484 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. O2018-465 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. O2006-208 § 1; Ord. O2004-139 § 1)


14A.10.060 Certificate of concurrency.

(1) A certificate of concurrency shall be issued by the public works director or his/her designee after the concurrency test is passed.

(2) Upon issuance of a certificate of concurrency, the City shall reserve capacity on behalf of the applicant, and indicate the reservation on the certificate of concurrency.

(3) A certificate of concurrency shall expire if the development permit for which the concurrency is reserved is not applied for within 180 days of issuance of the certificate of concurrency.

(4) A certificate of concurrency shall be valid for the development permit application period and subsequently for the same period of time as the development permit for which it was issued.

(5) A certificate of concurrency may be extended according to the same terms and conditions as the underlying development permit. If a development permit is granted an extension, the certificate of concurrency, if any, shall also be extended. Certificates of concurrency shall not be extended beyond the expiration of the underlying development permit, or any extensions thereof.

(6) A certificate of concurrency is valid only for the uses and intensities authorized for the development permit for which it is issued. Any change in use or intensity that increases the impact of development on public facilities is subject to an additional concurrency test of the incremental increase in impact on public facilities. Any change in use or intensity that decreases the impact of development on public facilities is not subject to an additional concurrency test and any capacity that is not required as a result of the decrease in impact shall be available for other applications.

(7) A certificate of concurrency is valid only for the development permit with which it is issued, and for subsequent development permits for the same parcel, as long as the applicant obtains the subsequent development permit prior to the expiration of the earlier development permit. A certificate of concurrency transfers automatically to subsequent development permits for the parcel for which the certificate was issued; provided, that the use or intensity has not changed, and the previous development permit has not expired. The transfer of validity of a certificate of concurrency from one development permit to a subsequent development permit shall not extend or otherwise change the expiration of the certificate of concurrency.

(8) A certificate of concurrency runs with the land and cannot be transferred to a different parcel. A certificate of concurrency transfers automatically with ownership of the parcel for which the certificate was issued. Upon final subdivision approval of a parcel that has obtained a certificate of concurrency, the City shall replace the certificate of concurrency by issuing a separate certificate of concurrency to each subdivided parcel, assigning to each a pro rata portion of the public facility capacity or other measure that was reserved for the original certificate. The issuance of pro rata certificates of concurrency to subdivided parcels shall not extend or otherwise change the expiration of the certificates of concurrency. (Ord. O2018-465 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. O2006-208 § 1; Ord. O2004-139 § 1)


14A.10.070 Fees.

(1) The City shall charge each applicant an administrative fee and a concurrency test fee in an amount to be established by resolution by the City council. The concurrency test fee shall not be refundable after the concurrency test has been performed.

(2) The City shall charge a processing fee to any individual who requests an informal analysis of capacity if the requested analysis requires substantially the same research as a concurrency test. The processing fee shall be nonrefundable and nonassignable to a concurrency test. The amount of the processing fee shall be the same as the concurrency test fee authorized by subsection (1) of this section. (Ord. O2018-465 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. O2006-208 § 1; Ord. O2004-139 § 1)


14A.10.080 Appeals.

(1) An applicant may appeal a denial of a certificate of concurrency on the following grounds:

(a) A technical or mathematical error;

(b) The applicant provided alternative data that was rejected by the City; or

(c) Unwarranted delay in review of the application that allowed capacity to be given to another applicant.

(2) Appeal of denial of a certificate of concurrency shall be to the hearing examiner in accordance with procedures in SMC Title 20. (Ord. O2018-465 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. O2006-208 § 1; Ord. O2004-139 § 1)


Chapter 14A.15 STREET IMPACT FEES

Sections:

14A.15.010    Findings and authority.

14A.15.020    Assessment of impact fees.

14A.15.030    Exemptions.

14A.15.040    Credits.

14A.15.050    Tax adjustments.

14A.15.060    Appeals.

14A.15.070    Establishment of impact fee accounts.

14A.15.080    Refunds.

14A.15.090    Use of funds.

14A.15.100    Review.

14A.15.110    Street impact fee rates.

14A.15.120    Independent fee calculations.

14A.15.130    Administrative fees.

14A.15.140    Mitigation of adverse environmental impacts.


14A.15.010 Findings and authority.

The council hereby finds and determines that new growth and development, including but not limited to new residential, commercial, retail, and office development in the City, will create additional demand and need for public facilities in the City, and the council finds that new growth and development should pay a proportionate share of the cost of system improvements reasonably related to and that will reasonably benefit the new growth and development. The City has conducted extensive studies documenting the procedures for measuring the impact of new development on public facilities, has prepared the street impact fee analysis, and hereby incorporates this study into this title by reference. Therefore, pursuant to RCW 82.02.050 through 82.02.090, the council adopts this chapter to assess impact fees for streets (“impact fee”). The provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed in order to carry out the purposes of the council in establishing the impact fee program. (Ord. O2006-208 § 2; Ord. O2004-140 § 1; Ord. O2004-136 § 1)


14A.15.020 Assessment of impact fees.

(1) The City shall collect impact fees, based on the rates in SMC 14A.15.110, from any applicant seeking development approval from the City for any development within the City, where such development requires the issuance of a building permit. This shall include, but is not limited to, the development of residential, commercial, retail, and office uses, and includes the expansion of existing uses that creates a demand for additional public facilities, as well as a change in existing use that creates a demand for additional public facilities.

(2) An impact fee shall not be assessed for the following types of development activity because the activity either does not create additional demand as provided in RCW 82.02.050 and/or is a project improvement (as opposed to a system improvement) under RCW 82.02.090:

(a) Miscellaneous non-traffic generating improvements, including, but not limited to, fences, walls, swimming pools, sheds, and signs;

(b) Demolition or moving of a structure;

(c) Expansion of an existing nonresidential structure that results in the addition of 100 square feet or less of gross floor area;

(d) Expansion of a residential structure provided the expansion does not result in the creation of any additional dwelling units as defined in SMC 21A.15.345 through 21A.15.370;

(e) Replacement of a residential structure with a new residential structure at the same site or lot when such replacement occurs within 12 months of the demolition or destruction of the prior structure. For the terms of this requirement, “replacement” is satisfied by submitting a complete building permit application;

(f) Replacement of a nonresidential structure with a new nonresidential structure of the same size and use at the same site or lot when such replacement occurs within 12 months of the demolition or destruction of the prior structure. Replacement of a nonresidential structure with a new nonresidential structure of the same size shall be interpreted to include any structure for which the gross square footage of the building will not be increased by more than 100 square feet. For the terms of this requirement, “replacement” is satisfied by submitting a complete building permit application.

(3) For a change in use of an existing building or dwelling unit, including any alteration, expansion, replacement or new accessory building, the impact fee for the new use shall be reduced by an amount equal to the current impact fee rate for the prior use; provided, that the applicant has previously paid the required impact fee for the original use.

(4) For mixed use developments, impact fees shall be imposed for the proportionate share of each land use based on the applicable measurement in the impact fee rates set forth in SMC 14A.15.110.

(5) Applicants seeking a building permit for a change in use shall be required to pay an impact fee if the change in use increases the existing trip generation by the lesser of five percent or 10 peak hour trips.

(6) Except as provided in SMC 14A.25.030, impact fees shall be assessed and collected, at the option of the applicant, either:

(a) At the time of final plat (for platted development) or building permit application (for nonplatted development); or

(b) At the time of building permit issuance;

which option shall be declared at the time of final plat (for platted development) or building permit application (for nonplatted development) in writing on a form or forms provided by the City.

(7) Applicants that have been awarded credits prior to the submittal of the complete building permit application pursuant to SMC 14A.15.040 shall submit, along with the complete building permit application, a copy of the letter or certificate prepared by the director pursuant to SMC 14A.15.040 setting forth the dollar amount of the credit awarded. Impact fees, as determined after the application of appropriate credits, shall be collected from the feepayer at the time the building permit is issued by the City for each unit in the development.

(8) Where the impact fees imposed are determined by the square footage of the development, a deposit shall be due from the feepayer pursuant to subsection (6) of this section. Deposit and installment percentages shall be based on an estimate, submitted by the feepayer, of the size and type of structure proposed to be constructed on the property. In the absence of an estimate provided by the feepayer, the department shall calculate percentages based on the maximum allowable density/intensity permissible on the property. If the final square footage of the development is in excess of the initial estimate, any difference in the amount of the impact fee will be due prior to the issuance of a building permit, using the same impact fee rate previously assessed. The feepayer shall pay any such difference plus interest, calculated at the statutory rate. If the final square footage is less than the initial estimate, the department shall give a credit for the difference, plus interest at the statutory rate.

(9) The department shall not issue the required building permit unless and until the impact fees required by this chapter, less any permitted exemptions or credits provided pursuant to SMC 14A.15.030 or 14A.15.040, have been paid, unless a deferral has been granted pursuant to Chapter 14A.25 SMC.

(10) The service area for impact fees shall be a single City-wide service area.

(11) In accordance with RCW 82.02.050, the City shall collect and spend impact fees only for the public facilities defined in this title and RCW 82.02.090 which are addressed by the capital facilities plan element of the City’s Comprehensive Plan. The City shall base continued authorization to collect and expend impact fees on revising its Comprehensive Plan in compliance with RCW 36.70A.070 and on the capital facilities plan identifying: (a) deficiencies in public facilities serving existing development and the means by which existing deficiencies will be eliminated within a reasonable period of time; (b) additional demands placed on existing public facilities by new development; and (c) additional public facility improvements required to serve new development.

(12) In accordance with RCW 82.02.050, if the City’s capital facilities plan is complete other than for the inclusion of those elements which are the responsibility of a special district, the City may impose impact fees to address those public facility needs for which the City is responsible.

(13) Applicants for single-family attached or single-family detached residential construction may request deferral of all impact fees due under this chapter in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 14A.25 SMC. (Ord. 2016-412 § 2 (Att. B); Ord. O2012-339 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-294 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2009-263 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2006-208 § 2; Ord. O2004-140 § 1; Ord. O2004-136 § 1)


14A.15.030 Exemptions. 

(1) Pursuant to RCW 82.02.060, the City may provide exemptions for low-income housing and other development activities with broad public purposes; provided, that the impact fees from such development activity shall be paid from public funds other than impact fee accounts if the waiver is greater than 80 percent of the impact fee. The director shall be authorized to determine whether a particular development falls within an exemption identified in this chapter. Determinations of the director shall be in writing and shall be subject to the appeals procedures set forth in SMC 14A.15.060.

(2) Except as provided in subsection (3) of this section, the following development activities are exempt from the requirements of this chapter. An impact fee shall not be assessed for:

(a) Any development activity undertaken by the City of Sammamish;

(b) Public schools;

(c) Accessory dwelling units approved by the City.

(3) Except as provided above, the provision of affordable housing as defined in SMC 14A.05.010 may be exempted from some or all of the required impact fees as shown in Table 1:

Table 1: Impact Fee Reductions for Affordable Housing Units  

	Affordable Housing	Impact Fee Reduction*	Maximum Number of Affordable Housing Units per Development 

	Low-Income	Up to 100%	4 units

	50% to 80%	5 units or more (including the first 4) subject to recommendation by the community development director in consultation with the public works director

	Moderate-Income	Up to 80%	4 units

	0% to 50%	5 units or more (including the first 4) subject to recommendation by the community development director in consultation with the public works director

	*The % fee reduction is expressed as a maximum amount per unit.

(a) As a condition of receiving an exemption or percentage fee reduction under this subsection, prior to any development approval, the owner shall execute and record in the King County real property title records a City-prepared lien, covenant, or other contractual provision against the property that provides that the proposed housing unit or development will continue to be used for low- or moderate-income housing and remain affordable to those families/households for a period of not less than 30 years. The lien, covenant, or other contractual provision shall run with the land and apply to subsequent owners and assigns. In the event that the housing unit(s) no longer meets the definition of affordable housing set forth in Table 1 during the term of the life of the lien, covenant or contractual provision, then the owner(s) shall pay to the City the amount of impact fees from which the housing unit(s) was exempted into the City’s account for impact fees plus 12 percent interest per year.

(b) In determining the impact fee reductions for development(s) containing five or more affordable housing units, the community development director in consultation with the public works director should consider the following:

(i) The proposed housing units meet the provisions set forth by the City’s housing strategy plan adopted by the City council. 

(ii) The proposed housing units will assist the City in meeting Sammamish’s affordable housing targets. 

(iii) The location of the units meets the City’s comprehensive plan policies for the proposed housing type and density.

(iv) Approval of the proposed housing units and the associated impact fee reduction does not exempt the proposed housing units from meeting the City’s concurrency requirements and public works standards.

(c) The impact fee amounts waived in excess of 80 percent shall be paid from public funds from sources other than impact fees or interest on impact fees, and budgeted for this purpose.

(d) Determinations of the community development director in consultation with the public works director regarding the reduction of impact fees shall be in writing and shall be subject to the appeals procedures set forth in SMC 14A.15.060. (Ord. O2014-366 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2006-208 § 2; Ord. O2004-140 § 1; Ord. O2004-136 § 1)


14A.15.040 Credits. 

(1) A feepayer can request that a credit or credits for impact fees be awarded to him/her for the total value of dedicated land, improvements, or construction provided by the feepayer. Credits will be given only if the land, improvements, and/or the facility constructed are:

(a) For one or more of the system improvements identified in the capital facilities plan, which are included in the street impact fee analysis as the basis of the impact fee, and that are required by the City as a condition of approving the development activity; and

(b) At suitable sites and constructed at acceptable quality as determined by the City.

(2) The director shall determine if requests for credits meet the criteria in subsection (1) of this section.

(3) The value of a credit for structures, facilities or other improvements shall be established by original receipts provided by the applicant for one or more of the same system improvements for which the impact fee is being charged.

(4) The value of a credit for land, including right-of-way and easements, shall be established on a case-by-case basis by an appraiser selected by or acceptable to the director. The appraiser must be licensed in good standing by the state of Washington for the category of the property appraised. The appraiser must possess an MAI or other equivalent certification and shall not have a fiduciary or personal interest in the property being appraised. A description of the appraiser’s certification shall be included with the appraisal, and the appraiser shall certify that he/she does not have a fiduciary or personal interest in the property being appraised. The appraisal shall be in accord with the most recent version of the Uniform Standards of Professional Appraisal Practice and shall be subject to review and acceptance by the director.

(5) The feepayer shall pay for the cost of the appraisal or request that the cost of the appraisal be deducted from the credit which the City may be providing to the feepayer, in the event that a credit is awarded.

(6) If a credit is due, after receiving the appraisal the director shall provide the applicant with a letter or certificate setting forth the dollar amount of the credit, the reason for the credit, the legal description of the site donated where applicable, and the legal description or other adequate description of the project or development to which the credit may be applied. The applicant must sign and date a duplicate copy of such letter or certificate indicating his/her agreement to the terms of the letter or certificate, and return such signed document to the director before the impact fee credit will be awarded. The failure of the applicant to sign, date, and return such document within 60 calendar days shall nullify the credit.

(7) No credit shall be given for project improvements as defined in SMC 14A.05.010.

(8) A feepayer can request that a credit or credits for impact fees be awarded to him/her for significant past tax payments as defined in SMC 14A.05.010. For each request for a credit or credits for significant past tax payments, the feepayer shall submit receipts and a calculation of significant past tax payments earmarked for or proratable to the particular system improvement. The director shall determine the amount of credits, if any, for significant past tax payments.

(9) Any claim for credit must be made prior to or at the time of submission of an application for a building permit. The failure to timely file such a claim shall constitute a final bar to later request any such credit. 

(10) A feepayer shall receive a credit for all impact fee deposits paid pursuant to SMC 14A.15.020.

(11) Determinations made by the director pursuant to this section shall be subject to the appeals procedures set forth in SMC 14A.15.060. (Ord. O2006-208 § 2; Ord. O2004-140 § 1; Ord. O2004-136 § 1)


14A.15.050 Tax adjustments. 

Pursuant to and consistent with the requirements of RCW 82.02.060, the street impact fee analysis provides adjustments for past and future taxes and other sources of revenue to be paid by the new development which are earmarked or proratable to the same new public facilities which will serve the new development. The impact fee rates in SMC 14A.15.110 have been reasonably adjusted for taxes and other revenue sources which are anticipated to be available to fund these system improvements. (Ord. O2006-208 § 2; Ord. O2004-140 § 1; Ord. O2004-136 § 1)


14A.15.060 Appeals. 

(1) Any feepayer may pay the impact fees imposed by this title under protest in order to obtain a building permit or occupancy permit. No appeal shall be permitted until the impact fees at issue have been paid.

(2) Appeals regarding the impact fees imposed on any development may only be filed by the feepayer of the property where such development will occur.

(3) The feepayer must first file a request for review regarding impact fees with the director, as provided herein: 

(a) The request shall be in writing on the form provided by the City;

(b) The request for review by the director shall be filed within 21 calendar days after the feepayer’s payment of the impact fees at issue. The failure to timely file such a request shall constitute a final bar to later seek such review;

(c) No administrative fee will be imposed for the request for review by the director; and

(d) The director shall issue his/her determination in writing.

(4) The following decisions may be appealed to the hearing examiner: determinations of the director with respect to the applicability of the impact fees to a given development; the director’s determination regarding the availability or value of a credit; the director’s decision concerning the independent fee calculation which is authorized in SMC 14A.15.120; fees imposed by the director pursuant to SMC 14A.15.110; or any other determination which the director is authorized to make pursuant to this title.

(5) Appeals to the hearing examiner shall be taken within 21 calendar days of the director’s issuance of a written determination by filing with the department a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof, and depositing the necessary administrative fee, which is set forth in the existing fee schedules for appeals of such decisions. The director shall transmit to the office of the hearing examiner all papers constituting the record for the determination, including, where appropriate, the independent fee calculation.

(6) The hearing examiner shall fix a time for the hearing of the appeal, give notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same as provided in the Sammamish Municipal Code. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney.

(7) The hearing examiner is authorized to make findings of fact regarding the applicability of the impact fees to a given development, the availability or amount of the credit, or the accuracy or applicability of an independent fee calculation. The decision of the hearing examiner shall be final, except as provided in this section.

(8) The hearing examiner may, so long as such action is in conformance with the provisions of this title, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or may modify the determinations of the director with respect to the amount of the impact fees imposed or the credit awarded. (Ord. O2006-208 § 2; Ord. O2004-140 § 1; Ord. O2004-136 § 1)


14A.15.070 Establishment of impact fee accounts. 

(1) Impact fee receipts shall be earmarked specifically and deposited in a special interest-bearing impact fee account maintained by the City. 

(2) There is hereby established the street impact fee account for the fees collected pursuant to this title. Funds withdrawn from this account must be used in accordance with the provisions of SMC 14A.15.090 and applicable state law. Interest earned on the fees shall be retained in the account and expended for the purposes for which the impact fees were collected.

(3) On an annual basis, the finance department shall provide a report to the City council on the street impact fee account showing the source and amount of all moneys collected, earned, or received, and the system improvements that were financed in whole or in part by impact fees.

(4) Impact fees for system improvements shall be expended only in conformance with the capital facilities plan element of the City’s Comprehensive Plan.

(5) Impact fees shall be expended or encumbered within 10 years of receipt, unless the council identifies in written findings extraordinary and compelling reason or reasons for the City to hold the fees beyond the 10-year period. Under such circumstances, the council shall establish the period of time within which the impact fees shall be expended or encumbered. (Ord. O2013-341 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2006-208 § 2; Ord. O2004-140 § 1; Ord. O2004-136 § 1)


14A.15.080 Refunds. 

(1) If the City fails to expend or encumber the impact fees within 10 years of when the fees were paid, or where extraordinary or compelling reasons exist and the council has established other time periods pursuant to SMC 14A.15.070, the current owner of the property on which impact fees have been paid may receive a refund of such fees. In determining whether impact fees have been expended or encumbered, impact fees shall be considered expended or encumbered on a first-in, first-out basis.

(2) The City shall notify potential claimants by first class mail deposited with the United States Postal Service at the last known address of such claimants. A potential claimant or claimant must be the owner of the property for which the impact fee was paid.

(3) Owners seeking a refund of impact fees must submit a written request for a refund of the fees to the director within one year of the date the right to claim the refund arises or the date that notice is given, whichever is later.

(4) Any impact fees for which no application for a refund has been made within this one-year period shall be retained by the City and expended on the appropriate public capital facilities.

(5) Refunds of impact fees under this section shall include any interest paid at the statutory rate.

(6) When the City seeks to terminate any or all components of the impact fee program, all unexpended or unencumbered funds from any terminated component or components, including interest earned, shall be refunded pursuant to this section. Upon the finding that any or all fee requirements are to be terminated, the City shall place notice of such termination and the availability of refunds in a newspaper of general circulation at least two times and shall notify all potential claimants by first class mail at the last known address of the claimants. All funds available for refund shall be retained for a period of one year. At the end of one year, any remaining funds shall be retained by the City, but must be expended for the appropriate public facilities. This notice requirement shall not apply if there are no unexpended or unencumbered balances within the account or accounts being terminated.

(7) The City shall refund to the current owner of property for which impact fees have been paid all impact fees paid, including interest earned on the impact fees pursuant to RCW 82.02.080(3), if the development for which the impact fees were imposed did not occur; provided, that if the City has expended or encumbered the impact fees in good faith prior to the application for a refund, the director shall determine whether an impact has resulted and whether all or a portion of the impact fees paid shall be refunded. (Ord. O2013-341 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2006-208 § 2; Ord. O2004-140 § 1; Ord. O2004-136 § 1)


14A.15.090 Use of funds. 

(1) Pursuant to this title, impact fees:

(a) Shall be used for system improvements that will reasonably benefit the new growth and development; and

(b) Shall not be imposed to make up for any system improvement deficiencies serving existing developments; and

(c) Shall not be used for maintenance or operation.

(2) Impact fees may be spent for public improvements, including, but not limited to, planning, land acquisition, right-of-way acquisition, site improvements, necessary off-site improvements, construction, engineering, architectural, permitting, financing, administrative expenses, mitigation costs, and any other expenses which can be capitalized pertaining to transportation improvements.

(3) Impact fees may also be used to recoup public improvement costs previously incurred by the City to the extent that new growth and development will be served by the previously constructed improvements or incurred costs.

(4) In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments are or have been issued for the advanced provision of public improvements for which impact fees may be expended, impact fees may be used to pay debt service on such bonds or similar debt instruments to the extent that the facilities or improvements provided are consistent with the requirements of this section and are used to serve the new development. (Ord. O2006-208 § 2; Ord. O2004-140 § 1; Ord. O2004-136 § 1)


14A.15.100 Review. 

(1) The fee rates set forth in SMC 14A.15.110 may be reviewed and adjusted by the council as it deems necessary and appropriate to meet City needs, including but not limited to addressing the impact of inflation on labor, materials, and real property costs. The fee rates may be adjusted 12 months after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or 12 months after the most recent review by the council. The council may determine the amount of the adjustment and revise the fee rates set forth in SMC 14A.15.110. If the council does not determine the amount of the adjustment, the adjustment shall be administratively adjusted by the same amount that the five-year average Washington State Department of Transportation Construction Cost Index changed for the most recent 12-month period prior to the date of the adjustment. 

(2) In the last quarter of each calendar year, the community development director, together with the public works director, shall prepare a report to the planning commission for the year to date, including the following:

(a) The number of requests for impact fee exemptions pursuant to SMC 14A.15.030;

(b) The total number of residential units and dollar amounts of the exemptions approved by the community development director in consultation with the public works director;

(c) A copy of the hearing examiner decision, if any of the decisions of the community development director, in consultation with the public works director, were appealed to the hearing examiner.

Based on this annual review, the planning commission shall recommend to the City council any revision to SMC 14A.15.030 deemed appropriate. (Ord. O2006-208 § 2; Ord. O2004-140 § 1; Ord. O2004-136 § 1)


14A.15.110 Street impact fee rates. 

In accordance with RCW 82.02.060, the street impact fees are based upon a schedule of impact fees which is adopted for each type of development activity that is subject to impact fees and which specifies the amount of the impact fee to be imposed for each type of system improvement. The schedule is based upon a formula and/or method of calculating the impact fees. In determining proportionate share, the formula and/or method of calculating the fees incorporates, among other things, the following: (a) the cost of public facilities necessitated by new development; (b) an adjustment to the cost of the public facilities for past or future payments made or reasonably anticipated to be made by new development to pay for particular system improvements in the form of user fees, debt service payments, taxes, or other payments earmarked for or proratable to the particular system improvement; (c) the availability of other means of funding public facility improvements; (d) the cost of existing public facilities improvements; and (e) the methods by which public facilities improvements were financed.

The street impact fee rates in this section are generated from the formula for calculating impact fees set forth in the street impact fee analysis, which is incorporated herein by reference. Except as otherwise provided for independent fee calculations in SMC 14A.15.120, exemptions in SMC 14A.15.030, and credits in SMC 14A.15.040, all new developments in the City will be charged the impact fee applicable to the type of development:

Street Impact Fee Rates per Unit of Development  

	ITE Code1	ITE Land Use Category1	ITE Trip Rate2	Percent New Trips3	Trip Length Factor4	Net New Trips per Development Unit	Impact Fee per Unit @

	$14,063.63 	per Trip

	090	Park and Ride with Bus Service	0.75	75%	1.00	0.563	7,910.79	per Space

	110	Light Industrial	0.98	100%	1.22	1.196	16.81	per Sq. Ft.

	130	Industrial Park	0.86	100%	1.22	1.049	14.76	per Sq. Ft.

	140	Manufacturing	0.74	100%	1.22	0.903	12.70	per Sq. Ft.

	151	Mini Warehouse	0.26	75%	0.29	0.057	0.80	per Sq. Ft.

	210	Single-Family House	1.01	100%	1.00	1.010	14,204.27	per DU

	220	Apartment	0.62	100%	1.00	0.620	8,719.45	per DU

	231	Low-Rise Condo/Townhouse	0.78	100%	1.00	0.780	10,969.63	per DU

	240	Mobile Home	0.56	100%	1.00	0.560	7,875.63	per DU

	251	Sr. Housing Detached	0.26	75%	1.00	0.195	2,742.41	per DU

	252	Sr. Housing Attached	0.11	75%	1.00	0.083	1,160.25	per DU

	253	Congregate Care Facility	0.18	75%	0.29	0.039	550.59	per DU

	254	Assisted Living (limited data)	0.22	75%	0.29	0.048	672.94	per Bed

	310	Hotel	0.59	75%	0.29	0.128	1.80	per Sq. Ft.

	320	Motel	0.94	75%	0.29	0.204	2.88	per Sq. Ft.

	420	Marina (limited data)	0.19	75%	0.29	0.041	581.18	per Slip

	430	Golf Course	0.30	75%	0.29	0.065	917.65	per Acre

	441	Live Theater (limited data)	1.00	75%	0.29	0.218	3.06	per Sq. Ft.

	445	Multiplex Movie Theater	5.22	75%	0.29	1.135	15.97	per Sq. Ft.

	491	Racquet Club	0.64	50%	0.29	0.093	1.31	per Sq. Ft.

	492	Health Fitness Club	4.05	50%	0.29	0.587	8.26	per Sq. Ft.

	495	Recreational Community Center	1.64	50%	0.29	0.238	3.34	per Sq. Ft.

	520	Public Elementary School	1.19	75%	0.29	0.259	3.64	per Sq. Ft.

	522	Public Middle School	1.19	75%	0.29	0.259	3.64	per Sq. Ft.

	530	Public High School	0.97	75%	0.29	0.211	2.97	per Sq. Ft.

	534	Private School K-8 (limited data)	3.40	75%	0.29	0.740	10.40	per Sq. Ft.

	536	Private School K-12 (limited data)	2.75	75%	0.29	0.598	8.41	per Sq. Ft.

	560	Church over 20,000 Sq. Ft.	0.66	75%	0.29	0.144	2.02	per Sq. Ft.

	560	Church under 20,000 Sq. Ft.	0.66	50%	0.29	0.096	1.35	per Sq. Ft.

	565	Day Care Center	13.18	25%	0.29	0.956	13.44	per Sq. Ft.

	590	Library	7.09	40%	0.29	0.822	11.57	per Sq. Ft.

	610	Hospital	1.18	75%	0.29	0.257	3.61	per Sq. Ft.

	620	Nursing Home	0.22	75%	0.29	0.048	672.94	per Bed

	630	Clinic (limited data)	5.18	75%	0.29	1.127	15.84	per Sq. Ft.

	710	General Office	1.49	100%	1.22	1.818	25.56	per Sq. Ft.

	715	Single Tenant Office	1.73	100%	1.22	2.111	29.68	per Sq. Ft.

	720	Medical/Dental Office	3.72	75%	0.29	0.809	11.38	per Sq. Ft.

	732	U.S. Post Office	25.00	25%	0.29	1.813	25.49	per Sq. Ft.

	750	Office Park	1.50	100%	1.22	1.830	25.74	per Sq. Ft.

	813	Freestanding Discount Super Store	3.87	43%	1.00	1.664	23.40	per Sq. Ft.

	814	Specialty Retail Center	2.71	75%	0.29	0.589	8.29	per Sq. Ft.

	815	Freestanding Discount Store	5.06	54%	0.29	0.792	11.14	per Sq. Ft.

	816	Hardware/Paint Store	4.84	43%	0.29	0.604	8.49	per Sq. Ft.

	820	Shopping Center < 1 million Sq. Ft.	3.75	43%	1.00	1.613	22.68	per Sq. Ft.

	848	Tire Store	4.15	40%	0.29	0.481	6.77	per Sq. Ft.

	849	Tire Super Store	2.11	40%	0.29	0.245	3.44	per Sq. Ft.

	850	Supermarket	10.45	34%	0.29	1.030	14.49	per Sq. Ft.

	851	Convenience Market	52.41	24%	0.29	3.648	51.30	per Sq. Ft.

	853	Convenience Market w/Gas Pumps	19.22	14%	0.29	0.780	10,974.30	per VSP

	854	Discount Supermarket	8.90	54%	0.29	1.394	19.60	per Sq. Ft.

	861	Discount Club	4.24	43%	1.00	1.823	25.64	per Sq. Ft.

	862	Home Improvement Super Store	2.45	32%	1.00	0.784	11.03	per Sq. Ft.

	863	Electronics Super Store	4.50	27%	1.00	1.215	17.09	per Sq. Ft.

	867	Office Supply Super Store	3.40	32%	1.00	1.088	15.30	per Sq. Ft.

	880	Pharmacy/Drug Store	8.42	38%	0.29	0.928	13.05	per Sq. Ft.

	881	Pharmacy/Drug Store w/Drive-up	8.62	38%	0.29	0.950	13.36	per Sq. Ft.

	896	Video Rental Store	13.60	20%	0.29	0.789	11.09	per Sq. Ft.

	911	Walk-in Bank (limited data)	33.15	27%	0.29	2.596	36.50	per Sq. Ft.

	912	Drive-in Bank	45.74	27%	0.29	3.581	50.37	per Sq. Ft.

	931	Quality Restaurant	7.49	38%	0.29	0.825	11.61	per Sq. Ft.

	932	High Turnover Restaurant	10.92	37%	0.29	1.172	16.48	per Sq. Ft.

	933	Fast Food	26.15	30%	0.29	2.275	32.00	per Sq. Ft.

	934	Fast Food w/Drive-up	34.64	30%	0.29	3.014	42.38	per Sq. Ft.

	936	Drinking Place	11.34	38%	0.29	1.250	17.57	per Sq. Ft.

	941	Quick Lube	5.19	14%	0.29	0.211	2,963.40	per VSP

	942	Auto Care	3.38	30%	0.29	0.294	4.14	per Sq. Ft.

	944	Gas Station	13.86	14%	0.29	0.563	7,913.83	per VSP

	945	Gas Station w/Conven Mkt	13.38	14%	0.29	0.543	7,639.76	per VSP

	946	Gas Station w/Conven Mkt & Car Wash	13.33	14%	0.29	0.541	7,611.21	per VSP

	947	Self-Serve Car Wash	5.54	14%	0.29	0.225	3,163.25	per VSP

	1    Institute of Transportation Engineers, Trip Generation (7th Edition).

2    Trip generation rate per development unit, for p.m. peak hour of the adjacent street traffic (4:00 – 6:00 p.m.).

    Note: Sq. Ft. rate expressed per 1,000 SF.

3    Omits linked/diverted and pass-by trips, per Trip Generation Handbook: an ITE Recommended Practice, March, 2001.

4    Average trip length relative to single-family trip.

5    DU = dwelling unit, Sq. Ft. = square feet, VSP = vehicle servicing position.

If an applicant proposes a land use that is not identified above, the impact fee shall be an amount equal to $14,063.63 for each p.m. peak hour trip generated, adjusted for trip length and percentage of new trips using methods and data comparable to those in the street study. (Ord. O2014-366 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2006-208 § 2; Ord. O2004-140 § 1; Ord. O2004-136 § 1)


14A.15.120 Independent fee calculations. 

(1) If, in the judgment of the director, none of the fee categories or fee amounts set forth in SMC 14A.15.110 accurately describe or capture the impacts of a new development on streets and roads, the department may prepare independent fee calculations and the director may impose alternative fees on a specific development based on those calculations. The alternative fees and the calculations shall be set forth in writing and shall be mailed to the feepayer.

(2) If a feepayer opts not to have the impact fees determined according to SMC 14A.15.110, then the feepayer shall prepare and submit to the director an independent fee calculation for the development for which a building permit is sought. The documentation submitted shall show the basis upon which the independent fee calculation was made. 

(3) Any feepayer submitting an independent fee calculation shall be required to pay the City a fee to cover the cost of reviewing the independent fee calculation. The amount of the fee required by the City for conducting the review of the independent fee calculation shall be in accordance with the adopted fee resolution by the City council and shall be paid by the feepayer prior to initiation of review.

(4) While there is a presumption that the calculations set forth in the street impact fee analysis are valid, the director shall consider the documentation submitted by the feepayer, but is not required to accept such documentation or analysis which the director reasonably deems to be inaccurate or not reliable, and may modify or deny the request, or, in the alternative, require the feepayer to submit additional or different documentation for consideration. The director is authorized to adjust the impact fees on a case-by-case basis based on the independent fee calculation, the specific characteristics of the development, and/or principles of fairness. The director’s decision shall be set forth in writing and shall be mailed to the feepayer.

(5) Determinations made by the director pursuant to this section may be appealed to the office of the hearing examiner as set forth in SMC 14A.15.060. (Ord. O2006-208 § 2; Ord. O2004-140 § 1; Ord. O2004-136 § 1)


14A.15.130 Administrative fees. 

(1) All development permits subject to the impact fees pursuant to SMC 14A.15.110 shall pay an administrative processing fee as adopted by the City council.

(2) All development permits that require an independently determined impact fee pursuant to SMC 14A.15.120 shall pay an administrative processing fee as adopted by the City council. (Ord. O2006-208 § 2; Ord. O2004-140 § 1; Ord. O2004-136 § 1)


14A.15.140 Mitigation of adverse environmental impacts.

Nothing in this title shall preclude the City from requiring the feepayer or the proponent of a development to mitigate adverse environmental impacts of a specific development pursuant to the State Environmental Policy Act, Chapter 43.21C RCW, based on the environmental documents accompanying the underlying development approval process, and/or Chapter 58.17 RCW, governing plats and subdivisions; provided, that the exercise of this authority is consistent with the provisions of Chapters 43.21C and 82.02 RCW. (Ord. O2006-208 § 2)


Chapter 14A.20 IMPACT FEES FOR PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES

Sections:

14A.20.010    Findings and authority.

14A.20.020    Assessment of impact fees.

14A.20.030    Exemptions.

14A.20.040    Credits.

14A.20.050    Tax adjustments.

14A.20.060    Appeals.

14A.20.070    Establishment of impact fee accounts.

14A.20.080    Refunds.

14A.20.090    Use of funds.

14A.20.100    Review.

14A.20.110    Park and recreational facilities impact fee rates.

14A.20.120    Independent fee calculations.

14A.20.130    Administrative fees.

14A.20.140    Mitigation of adverse environmental impacts.


14A.20.010 Findings and authority.

The council hereby finds and determines that new growth and development, including but not limited to new residential development in the City, will create additional demand and need for public facilities in the City, and the council finds that new growth and development should pay a proportionate share of the cost of system improvements reasonably related to and that will reasonably benefit the new growth and development. The City has conducted extensive studies documenting the procedures for measuring the impact of new development on public facilities, has prepared the Rate Study for Impact Fees for Parks and Recreational Facilities, Henderson, Young and Company, dated November 2, 2006, and the Park Impact Fee Update Summary Memorandum by FCS Group dated October 14, 2015 (collectively referred to hereafter as the “rate study”), and hereby incorporates the rate study into this title by reference. Therefore, pursuant to RCW 82.02.050 through 82.02.090, the council adopts this chapter to assess impact fees for parks and recreational facilities (“impact fee”). The provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed in order to carry out the purposes of the council in establishing the impact fee program. (Ord. O2015-400 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2006-207 § 1)


14A.20.020 Assessment of impact fees.

(1) The City shall collect impact fees, based on the rates in SMC 14A.20.110, from any applicant seeking development approval from the City for any residential development within the City, where such development requires the issuance of a building permit. This shall include, but is not limited to, the expansion or change of use of existing uses that creates a demand for additional public facilities.

(2) An impact fee shall not be assessed for the following types of development activity because the activity either does not create additional demand as provided in RCW 82.02.050 and/or is a project improvement (as opposed to a system improvement) under RCW 82.02.090:

(a) Miscellaneous improvements to residential dwelling units that will not create additional park use demand, including, but not limited to, fences, signs, walls, swimming pools, sheds, and residential accessory uses as defined in SMC 21A.15.020;

(b) Demolition or moving of a residential structure;

(c) Expansion or alteration of a residential structure provided the expansion or alteration does not result in the creation of any additional dwelling units as defined in SMC 21A.15.345 through 21A.15.370;

(d) Replacement of a residential structure with a new residential structure at the same site or lot when such replacement occurs within 12 months of the demolition or destruction of the prior structure.

(3) For a change in use of an existing structure or dwelling unit, including any alteration, expansion, replacement or new accessory building, the impact fee for the new use shall be reduced by an amount equal to the current impact fee rate for the prior use; provided, that the applicant has previously paid the required impact fee for the original use.

(4) For mixed use developments, impact fees shall be imposed for the proportionate share of each residential land use based on the applicable measurement in the impact fee rates set forth in SMC 14A.20.110.

(5) Applicants seeking development approval for a change in use shall be required to pay an impact fee if the change in use increases the number of dwelling units.

(6) Except as provided in SMC 14A.25.030, impact fees shall be assessed and collected, at the option of the applicant, either:

(a) At the time of final plat (for platted development) or building permit application (for nonplatted development); or

(b) At the time of building permit issuance;

which option shall be declared at the time of final plat (for platted development) or building permit application (for nonplatted development) in writing on a form or forms provided by the City.

(7) Applicants that have been awarded credits prior to the submittal of the complete building permit application pursuant to SMC 14A.20.040 shall submit, along with the complete building permit application, a copy of the letter or certificate prepared by the director pursuant to SMC 14A.20.040 setting forth the dollar amount of the credit awarded. Impact fees, as determined after the application of appropriate credits, shall be collected from the feepayer at the time the building permit is issued by the City for each residential dwelling unit in the development.

(8) The department shall not issue the required building permit unless and until the impact fees required by this chapter, less any permitted exemptions or credits provided pursuant to SMC 14A.20.030 or 14A.20.040, have been paid, unless a deferral has been granted pursuant to Chapter 14A.25 SMC.

(9) The service area for impact fees shall be a single City-wide service area.

(10) In accordance with RCW 82.02.050, the City shall collect and spend impact fees only for the public facilities defined in this title and RCW 82.02.090 which are addressed by the capital facilities plan element of the City’s Comprehensive Plan. The City shall base continued authorization to collect and expend impact fees on revising its Comprehensive Plan in compliance with RCW 36.70A.070, and on the capital facilities plan identifying: (a) deficiencies in public facilities serving existing development and the means by which existing deficiencies will be eliminated within a reasonable period of time; (b) additional demands placed on existing public facilities by new development; and (c) additional public facility improvements required to serve new development.

(11) In accordance with RCW 82.02.050, if the City’s capital facilities plan is complete other than for the inclusion of those elements which are the responsibility of a special district, the City may impose impact fees to address those public facility needs for which the City is responsible.

(12) Applicants for single-family attached or single-family detached residential construction may request deferral of all impact fees due under this chapter in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 14A.25 SMC.

(13) If, prior to February 12, 2016, an applicant submits a copy of a fully executed purchase and sale agreement with an affidavit from the applicant attesting that the agreement was fully executed prior to November 11, 2015, the residential dwelling unit that is the subject of that agreement will be subject to the parks and recreational facilities impact fee in effect on the date of execution of that agreement, as provided in SMC 14A.20.110. (Ord. O2016-412 § 3 (Att. C); Ord. O2015-400 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2012-339 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-294 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2009-263 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2006-207 § 1)


14A.20.030 Exemptions.

(1) Pursuant to RCW 82.02.060, the City may provide exemptions for low-income housing and other development activities with broad public purposes; provided, that the impact fees from such development activity shall be paid from public funds other than impact fee accounts if the waiver is greater than 80 percent of the impact fee. The director shall be authorized to determine whether a particular development falls within an exemption identified below. Determinations of the director shall be in writing and shall be subject to the appeals procedures set forth in SMC 14A.20.060. The following development activities are exempt from the requirements of this chapter. A parks impact fee shall not be assessed for:

(a) Any development activity undertaken by the City of Sammamish;

(b) Accessory dwelling units approved by the City.

(2) Except as provided above, the provision of affordable housing as defined in SMC 14A.05.010 may be exempted from some or all of the required impact fees as shown in Table 1:

Table 1: Impact Fee Reductions for Affordable Housing Units  

	Affordable Housing	Impact Fee Reduction*	Maximum Number of Affordable Housing Units per Development 

	Low-Income	Up to 100%	4 units

	50% to 80%	5 units or more (including the first 4) subject to decision by the director of the department of community development in consultation with the director of the department of parks and recreation

	Moderate-Income	Up to 80%	4 units

	0% to 50%	5 units or more (including the first 4) subject to approval by the director of the department of community development in consultation with the director of the department of parks and recreation

	*The % fee reduction is expressed as a maximum amount per unit.

(a) As a condition of receiving an exemption or percentage fee reduction under this section, prior to any development approval, the owner shall execute and record in the King County real property title records a City-prepared lien, covenant, or other contractual provision against the property that provides that the proposed housing unit or development will continue to be used for low- or moderate-income housing and remain affordable to those families/households for a period of not less than 30 years. The lien, covenant, or other contractual provision shall run with the land and apply to subsequent owners and assigns. In the event that the housing unit(s) no longer meets the definition of affordable housing set forth in Table 1 during the term of the life of the lien, covenant or contractual provision, then the owner(s) shall pay to the City the amount of impact fees from which the housing unit(s) was exempted into the City’s account for park impact fees plus 12 percent interest per year.

(b) In determining the impact fee reductions for development(s) containing five or more affordable housing units, the community development director in consultation with the parks and recreation director should consider the following:

(i) The proposed housing units meet the provisions set forth by the City’s housing strategy plan adopted by the City council.

(ii) The proposed housing units will assist the City in meeting Sammamish’s affordable housing targets.

(iii) The location of the units meets the City’s Comprehensive Plan policies for the proposed housing type and density.

(iv) Approval of the proposed housing units and the associated impact fee reduction would not result in a significant adverse impact on the level of service provided by the parks system.

(c) The impact fee amounts waived in excess of 80 percent shall be paid from public funds from sources other than impact fees or interest on impact fees.

(d) Determinations of the community development director in consultation with the parks and recreation director regarding the exemption or reduction of impact fees shall be in writing and shall be subject to the appeals procedures set forth in SMC 14A.20.060. (Ord. O2014-367 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2006-207 § 1)


14A.20.040 Credits.

(1) A feepayer can request that a credit or credits for impact fees be awarded to him/her for the total value of dedicated land, improvements, or construction provided by the feepayer. Credits will be given only if the land, improvements, and/or the facility constructed are:

(a) For one or more of the system improvements identified in the capital facilities plan for parks and recreational facilities which are included in the rate study as the basis of the impact fee, and that are required by the City as a condition of approving the development activity; and

(b) At suitable sites and constructed at acceptable quality as determined by the City.

(2) The director shall determine if requests for credits meet the criteria in subsection (1) of this section.

(3) The value of a credit for structures, facilities or other improvements shall be established by original receipts provided by the applicant for one or more of the same system improvements for which the impact fee is being charged.

(4) The value of a credit for land, including right-of-way and easements, shall be established on a case-by-case basis by an appraiser selected by, or acceptable to, the director. The appraiser must be licensed in good standing by the state of Washington for the category of the property appraised. 



The appraiser must possess an MAI or other equivalent certification and shall not have a fiduciary or personal interest in the property being appraised. A description of the appraiser’s certification shall be included with the appraisal, and the appraiser shall certify that he/she does not have a fiduciary or personal interest in the property being appraised. The appraisal shall be in accord with the most recent version of the Uniform Standards of Professional Appraisal Practice and shall be subject to review and acceptance by the director.

(5) The feepayer shall pay for the cost of the appraisal or request that the cost of the appraisal be deducted from the credit which the City may be providing to the feepayer, in the event that a credit is awarded.

(6) If a credit is due, after receiving the appraisal the director shall provide the applicant with a letter or certificate setting forth the dollar amount of the credit, the reason for the credit, the legal description of the site donated where applicable, and the legal description or other adequate description of the project or development to which the credit may be applied. The applicant must sign and date a duplicate copy of such letter or certificate indicating his/her agreement to the terms of the letter or certificate, and return such signed document to the director before the impact fee credit will be awarded. The failure of the applicant to sign, date, and return such document within 60 calendar days shall nullify the credit.

(7) No credit shall be given for project improvements as defined in SMC 14A.05.010.

(8) A feepayer can request that a credit or credits for impact fees be awarded to him/her for significant past tax payments as defined in SMC 14A.05.010. For each request for a credit or credits for significant past tax payments, the feepayer shall submit receipts and a calculation of past tax payments earmarked for or proratable to the particular system improvement. The director shall determine the amount of credits, if any, for significant past tax payments.

(9) Any claim for credit must be made prior to or at the time of submission of an application for a building permit. The failure to timely file such a claim shall constitute a final bar to later request any such credit.

(10) Determinations made by the director pursuant to this section shall be subject to the appeals procedures set forth in SMC 14A.20.060. (Ord. O2006-207 § 1)


14A.20.050 Tax adjustments.

Pursuant to and consistent with the requirements of RCW 82.02.060, the rate study provides adjustments for past and future taxes and other sources of revenue to be paid by the new development which are earmarked or proratable to the same new public facilities which will serve the new development. The impact fee rates in SMC 14A.20.110 have been reasonably adjusted for taxes and other revenue sources which are anticipated to be available to fund these system improvements. (Ord. O2006-207 § 1)


14A.20.060 Appeals.

(1) Any feepayer may pay the impact fees imposed by this title under protest in order to obtain a building permit. No appeal shall be permitted until the impact fees at issue have been paid.

(2) Appeals regarding the impact fees imposed on any development may only be filed by the feepayer of the property where such development will occur.

(3) The feepayer must first file a request for review regarding impact fees with the director, as provided herein:

(a) The request shall be in writing on the form provided by the City;

(b) The request for review by the director shall be filed within 21 calendar days after the feepayer’s payment of the impact fees at issue. The failure to timely file such a request shall constitute a final bar to later seek such review;

(c) No administrative fee will be imposed for the request for review by the director; and

(d) The director shall issue his/her determination in writing.

(4) The following decisions may be appealed to the hearing examiner: determinations of the director with respect to the applicability of the impact fees to a given development; the director’s determination regarding the availability or value of a credit; the director’s decision concerning the independent fee calculation which is authorized in SMC 14A.20.120; fees imposed by the director pursuant to SMC 14A.20.110; or any other determination which the director is authorized to make pursuant to this title.

(5) Appeals to the hearing examiner shall be taken within 21 calendar days of the director’s issuance of a written determination by filing with the department a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof, and depositing the necessary administrative fee, which is set forth in the existing fee schedules for appeals of such decisions. The director shall transmit to the office of the hearing examiner all papers constituting the record for the determination, including, where appropriate, the independent fee calculation.

(6) The hearing examiner shall fix a time for the hearing of the appeal, give notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same as provided in the Sammamish Municipal Code. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney.

(7) The hearing examiner is authorized to make findings of fact regarding the applicability of the impact fees to a given development, the availability or amount of the credit, or the accuracy or applicability of an independent fee calculation. The decision of the hearing examiner shall be final, except as provided in this section.

(8) The hearing examiner may, so long as such action is in conformance with the provisions of this title, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or may modify the determinations of the director with respect to the amount of the impact fees imposed or the credit awarded. (Ord. O2006-207 § 1)


14A.20.070 Establishment of impact fee accounts. 

(1) Impact fee receipts shall be earmarked specifically and deposited in a special interest-bearing impact fee account maintained by the City. 

(2) There is hereby established the parks and recreational facilities impact fee account for the fees collected pursuant to this title. Funds withdrawn from this account must be used in accordance with the provisions of SMC 14A.20.090 and applicable state law. Interest earned on the fees shall be retained in the account and expended for the purposes for which the impact fees were collected.

(3) On an annual basis, the finance director shall provide a report to the City council on the parks and recreational facilities impact fee account showing the source and amount of all moneys collected, earned, or received, and the system improvements that were financed in whole or in part by impact fees.

(4) Impact fees for system improvements shall be expended only in conformance with the capital facilities plan element of the City’s Comprehensive Plan.

(5) Impact fees shall be expended or encumbered within 10 years of receipt, unless the council identifies in written findings extraordinary and compelling reason or reasons for the City to hold the fees beyond the 10-year period. Under such circumstances, the council shall establish the period of time within which the impact fees shall be expended or encumbered. (Ord. O2013-342 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2006-207 § 1)


14A.20.080 Refunds.

(1) If the City fails to expend or encumber the impact fees within 10 years of when the fees were paid, or where extraordinary or compelling reasons exist and the council has established other time periods pursuant to SMC 14A.20.070, the current owner of the property on which impact fees have been paid may receive a refund of such fees. In determining whether impact fees have been expended or encumbered, impact fees shall be considered expended or encumbered on a first-in, first-out basis.

(2) The City shall notify potential claimants by first class mail deposited with the United States Postal Service at the last known address of such claimants. A potential claimant or claimant must be the owner of the property for which the impact fee was paid.

(3) Owners seeking a refund of impact fees must submit a written request for a refund of the fees to the director within one year of the date the right to claim the refund arises or the date that notice is given, whichever is later.

(4) Any impact fees for which no application for a refund has been made within this one-year period shall be retained by the City and expended on the appropriate public capital facilities.

(5) Refunds of impact fees under this section shall include interest paid at the statutory rate.

(6) When the City seeks to terminate any or all components of the impact fee program, all unexpended or unencumbered funds from any terminated component or components, including interest earned, shall be refunded pursuant to this section. Upon the finding that any or all fee requirements are to be terminated, the City shall place notice of such termination and the availability of refunds in a newspaper of general circulation at least two times and shall notify all potential claimants by first class mail at the last known address of the claimants. All funds available for refund shall be retained for a period of one year. At the end of one year, any remaining funds shall be retained by the City, but must be expended for the appropriate public facilities. This notice requirement shall not apply if there are no unexpended or unencumbered balances within the account or accounts being terminated.

(7) The City shall refund to the current owner of property for which impact fees have been paid all impact fees paid, including interest earned on the impact fees, pursuant to RCW 82.02.080(3), if the development for which impact fees were imposed did not occur; provided, that if the City has expended or encumbered the impact fees in good faith prior to the application for a refund, the director shall determine whether an impact has resulted and whether all or a portion of the impact fees paid shall be refunded. (Ord. O2013-342 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2006-207 § 1)


14A.20.090 Use of funds.

(1) Pursuant to this title, impact fees:

(a) Shall be used for system improvements that will reasonably benefit the new growth and development; 

(b) Shall not be imposed to make up for any system improvement deficiencies serving existing developments; and

(c) Shall not be used for maintenance or operation.

(2) Impact fees may be spent for system improvements, including, but not limited to, planning, land acquisition, right-of-way acquisition, site improvements, necessary off-site improvements, construction, engineering, architectural, permitting, financing, administrative expenses, mitigation costs, and any other expenses which can be capitalized pertaining to parks and recreational facility improvements.

(3) Impact fees may also be used to recoup public improvement costs previously incurred by the City to the extent that new growth and development will be served by the previously constructed improvements or incurred costs.

(4) In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments are or have been issued for the advanced provision of public improvements for which impact fees may be expended, impact fees may be used to pay debt service on such bonds or similar debt instruments to the extent that the facilities or improvements provided are consistent with the requirements of this section and are used to serve the new development. (Ord. O2006-207 § 1)


14A.20.100 Review.

(1) The fee rates set forth in SMC 14A.20.110 may be reviewed and adjusted by the council as it deems necessary and appropriate to meet City needs, including, but not limited to, addressing the impact of inflation on labor, materials, and real property costs. The fee rates may be adjusted 12 months after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or 12 months after the most recent review by the council. The council may determine the amount of the adjustment and revise the fee rates set forth in SMC 14A.20.110. If the council does not determine the amount of the adjustment, the adjustment shall be administratively adjusted by the same amount that the five-year average Washington State Department of Transportation Construction Cost Index changed for the most recent 12-month period prior to the date of the adjustment.

(2) In the last quarter of each calendar year, the community development director together with the parks and recreation director shall prepare a report to the planning commission, for the year to date, including the following:

(a) The number of requests for impact fee exemptions or waivers pursuant to SMC 14A.20.030(2);

(b) The total number of residential units and dollar amounts of the exemptions or waivers approved by the community development director in consultation with the parks and recreation director;

(c) A copy of the hearing examiner decision, if any of the decisions of the community development director, in consultation with the parks and recreation director, were appealed to the hearing examiner.

Based on this annual review, the planning commission shall recommend to the City council any revision to SMC 14A.20.030 deemed appropriate. (Ord. O2006-207 § 1)


14A.20.110 Park and recreational facilities impact fee rates.

In accordance with RCW 82.02.060, the park and recreational facilities impact fees are based upon a schedule of impact fees which is adopted for each type of development activity that is subject to impact fees and which specifies the amount of the impact fee to be imposed for each type of system improvement.

The park and recreational facilities impact fee rates in this section are generated from the formula for calculating impact fees set forth in the rate study which is incorporated herein by reference. Except as otherwise provided for independent fee calculations in SMC 14A.20.120, exemptions in SMC 14A.20.030, and credits in SMC 14A.20.040, all new residential developments in the City will be charged the following park and recreational facilities impact fee applicable to the type of development:

	Unit Type	Fee per Dwelling Unit

	 	For qualifying residences under SMC 14A.20.020(13) only	Through January 31, 2016	February 1, 2016, and later

	Single-Family	$2,697.28	$5,526.00	 $6,739.00 per dwelling unit, or

	Multifamily	$1,558.19	$3,521.00	 $4,362.00 per dwelling unit

(Ord. O2015-400 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-342 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2006-207 § 1)


14A.20.120 Independent fee calculations.

(1) If, in the judgment of the director, none of the fee categories or fee amounts set forth in SMC 14A.20.110 accurately describe or capture the impacts of a new development on parks and recreational facilities, the department may prepare independent fee calculations and the director may impose alternative fees on a specific development based on those calculations. The alternative fees and the calculations shall be set forth in writing and shall be mailed to the feepayer.

(2) If a feepayer opts not to have the impact fees determined according to SMC 14A.20.110, then the feepayer shall prepare and submit to the director an independent fee calculation for the development for which a building permit is sought. The documentation submitted shall show the basis upon which the independent fee calculation was made.

(3) Any feepayer submitting an independent fee calculation shall be required to pay the City a fee to cover the cost of reviewing the independent fee calculation. The amount of the fee required by the City for conducting the review of the independent fee calculation shall be in accordance with the adopted fee resolution approved by the City council and shall be paid by the feepayer prior to initiation of review.

(4) While there is a presumption that the calculations set forth in the rate study are valid, the director shall consider the documentation submitted by the feepayer, but is not required to accept such documentation or analysis which the director reasonably deems to be inaccurate or not reliable, and may modify or deny the request, or, in the alternative, require the feepayer to submit additional or different documentation for consideration. The director is authorized to adjust the impact fees on a case-by-case basis based on the independent fee calculation, the specific characteristics of the development, and/or principles of fairness. The director’s decision shall be set forth in writing and shall be mailed to the feepayer.

(5) Determinations made by the director pursuant to this section may be appealed to the office of the hearing examiner subject to the procedures set forth in SMC 14A.20.060. (Ord. O2006-207 § 1)


14A.20.130 Administrative fees.

(1) All development permits subject to the park and recreational facilities impact fees pursuant to SMC 14A.20.110 shall pay an administrative processing fee as adopted by the City council.

(2) All development permits that require an independently determined park and recreational facilities impact fee pursuant to SMC 14A.20.120 shall pay an administrative processing fee as adopted by the City council. (Ord. O2006-207 § 1)


14A.20.140 Mitigation of adverse environmental impacts.

Nothing in this title shall preclude the City from requiring the feepayer or the proponent of a development to mitigate adverse environmental impacts of a specific development pursuant to the State Environmental Policy Act, Chapter 43.21C RCW, based on the environmental documents accompanying the underlying development approval process, and/or Chapter 58.17 RCW, governing plats and subdivisions; provided, that the exercise of this authority is consistent with the provisions of Chapters 43.21C and 82.02 RCW. (Ord. O2006-207 § 1)


Chapter 14A.25 IMPACT FEE DEFERRAL

Sections:

14A.25.010    Purpose.

14A.25.020    Applicability.

14A.25.030    Impact fee deferral.

14A.25.040    Deferral term.

14A.25.050    Deferred impact fee lien.

14A.25.060    Limitation on deferrals.


14A.25.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to comply with the requirements of RCW 82.02.050, as amended by ESB 5923, Chapter 241, Laws of 2015, to provide an impact fee deferral process for single-family residential construction, in order to promote economic recovery in the construction industry. (Ord. O2016-412 § 1 (Att. A))


14A.25.020 Applicability.

(1) The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all impact fees established and adopted by the City pursuant to Chapter 82.02 RCW, including street impact fees assessed under Chapter 14A.15 SMC, impact fees for parks and recreational facilities assessed under Chapter 14A.20 SMC, and school impact fees assessed under Chapter 21A.105 SMC.

(2) Subject to the limitations imposed in SMC 14A.25.060, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to all building permit applications for single-family detached and single-family attached residential construction. For the purposes of this chapter, an “applicant” includes an entity that controls the named applicant, is controlled by the named applicant, or is under common control with the named applicant. (Ord. O2016-412 § 1 (Att. A))


14A.25.030 Impact fee deferral.

(1) Deferral Request Authorized. Applicants for single-family attached or single-family detached residential building permits may request to defer payment of required impact fees until the sooner of:

(a) Final inspection; or

(b) The closing of the first sale of the property occurring after the issuance of the applicable building permit;

which request shall be granted so long as the requirements of this chapter are satisfied.

(2) Method of Request. A request for impact fee deferral shall be declared at the time of preliminary plat application (for platted development) or building permit application (for nonplatted development) in writing on a form or forms provided by the City. Any request for impact fee deferral must be accompanied by an administrative fee in an amount equal to one hour at the City’s hourly rate for planning as stated in the City’s current fee schedule.

(3) Calculation of Impact Fees. The amount of impact fees to be deferred under this chapter shall be determined as of the date the request for deferral is submitted. (Ord. O2016-412 § 1 (Att. A))


14A.25.040 Deferral term.

The term of an impact fee deferral granted under this chapter may not exceed 18 months from the date the building permit is issued (“deferral term”). If the condition triggering payment of the deferred impact fees does not occur prior to the expiration of the deferral term, then full payment of the impact fees shall be due on the last date of the deferral term. (Ord. O2016-412 § 1 (Att. A))


14A.25.050 Deferred impact fee lien.

(1) Applicant’s Duty to Record Lien. An applicant requesting a deferral under this chapter must grant and record a deferred impact fee lien, in an amount equal to the deferred impact fees as determined under SMC 14A.25.030(3), against the property in favor of the City in accordance with the requirements of RCW 82.02.050(3)(c).

(2) Satisfaction of Lien. Upon receipt of final payment of all deferred impact fees for the property, the City shall execute a release of deferred impact fee lien for the property. The property owner at the time of the release is responsible, at his or her own expense, for recording the lien release. (Ord. O2016-412 § 1 (Att. A))


14A.25.060 Limitation on deferrals.

The deferral entitlements allowed under this chapter shall be limited to the first 20 single-family residential construction building permits per applicant, as identified by contractor registration number or other unique identification number, per year. (Ord. O2016-412 § 1 (Att. A))


Chapter 14A.30 RIGHT-OF-WAY USE PERMITS

Sections:

14A.30.010    Purpose – Permit required.

14A.30.015    Definitions.

14A.30.020    Right-of-way use permit application process and fee.

14A.30.025    Right-of-way use permit types.

14A.30.030    Type A right-of-way special use permit.

14A.30.040    Type B right-of-way construction permit.

14A.30.050    Type C right-of-way utility permit.

14A.30.060    Type D right-of-way lease permit.

14A.30.070    Revocation or suspension of permit.

14A.30.080    Enforcement.


14A.30.010 Purpose – Permit required.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum rules and regulations for controlling and enforcing right-of-way uses to assure that proposed uses are consistent with the public health, safety, and welfare of the community, and that harm or nuisance which may result from a proposed right-of-way use is prevented.

It shall be unlawful for anyone to make private use of any public right-of-way without a right-of-way use permit issued by the City, or to use any public right-of-way without complying with all provisions of a permit issued by the City. (Ord. O2018-465 § 2 (Att. A))


14A.30.015 Definitions.

The following words and phrases, wherever used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section except where otherwise defined or unless the context shall clearly indicate to the contrary.

(1) “Abutting property” means and includes property bordering upon and contiguous to a public right-of-way as defined herein.

(2) “Applicant” means any person, company, corporation, enterprise, or entity applying for the issuance or renewal of a right-of-way use permit or any person, company, corporation, enterprise, or entity that has been issued a right-of-way use permit.

(3) “Application” means, for the purposes of this chapter, the collection of papers or electronic data necessary to initiate a right-of-way use permit request and shall include an application in the form approved by the City, and other submittals consistent with the purposes of this chapter.

(4) “Private use” means use of the public right-of-way for the benefit of a person, partnership, group, organization, company, corporation, entity or outside jurisdiction other than as a public thoroughfare for any type of vehicle, pedestrian, bicycle or equestrian travel.

(5) “Right-of-way” or “ROW” means and includes streets, avenues, ways, boulevards, drives, places, alleys, sidewalks, landscape (parking) strips, squares, triangles, easements and other rights-of-way open to the use of the public, including the space above or beneath the surface of same. This definition specifically does not include streets, alleys, ways, landscape strips, sidewalks, easements, etc., which have not been deeded, dedicated, or otherwise permanently appropriated to the City for public use.

(6) “Special event” means an event which will generate or invite public participation, and/or spectators, for a particular and limited purpose and time including, but not limited to, fun runs/walks, roadway foot races, fundraising walks, bike-a-thons, parades, block parties, carnivals, shows, exhibitions and fairs. (Ord. O2018-465 § 2 (Att. A))


14A.30.020 Right-of-way use permit application process and fee.

(1) The City engineer or designee, herein referred to as “the City,” shall establish policies and procedures to administer the permit program.

(2) Applicants may be required to submit, in addition to the application form, any documents the City deems necessary for the City to perform an accurate evaluation of the right-of-way use permit application.

(3) Decisions regarding issuance, renewal, denial, or termination of any such permits shall be subject to insurance requirements, bond requirements, indemnification and hold harmless agreements, the capacity of the rights-of-way to accommodate the applicant’s proposed facilities or use, evaluation of competing public interests, and any other administrative requirements applicable to the permit.

(4) As part of a complete right-of-way use permit application, the applicant shall submit to the City, at the time of application, right-of-way use permit fees, including a nonrefundable application fee, as set forth in the most current City of Sammamish fee schedule.

(5) If insurance is required, the insurance guidelines in City policy shall apply unless otherwise established by the City.

(6) Conditions of approval will be identified during the City’s review of the application and may include a certificate of insurance, indemnification and hold harmless agreement, traffic control plan, performance bond, time and use restrictions, video data, status reports, restoration of disturbed right-of-way features, or any other requirements the City deems necessary to protect the right-of-way and public health, safety, and welfare. (Ord. O2018-465 § 2 (Att. A))


14A.30.025 Right-of-way use permit types.

(1) Type A, ROW special use permit, is a short-term permit and allows the use of the right-of-way for nonconstruction activities as described in SMC 14A.30.030.

(2) Type B, ROW construction permit, is a permit that allows the use of the right-of-way for construction activities as described in SMC 14A.30.040.

(3) Type C, ROW utility permit, is a permit that allows for the use of the right-of-way to construct or maintain utilities as described in SMC 14A.30.050.

(4) Type D, ROW lease permit, is a permit that allows long-term usage of public right-of-way for nonconstruction activities as described in SMC 14A.30.060. (Ord. O2018-465 § 2 (Att. A))


14A.30.030 Type A right-of-way special use permit.

(1) Type A ROW special use permit is required for any special event that is held within the public right-of-way or creates significant traffic impacts within the public right-of-way.

(2) Type A ROW special use permit may be required for uses that are nonconstruction uses but not defined as a special event by this chapter.

(3) Proof of insurance may be required with the City listed as an additional insured to protect the public and the City against liability for injury to persons or property. (Ord. O2018-465 § 2 (Att. A))


14A.30.040 Type B right-of-way construction permit.

(1) Type B ROW construction permits are required before any person, firm, corporation, company, enterprise or entity shall commence or permit any other person, firm, corporation, company, enterprise or entity to commence any work within the public right-of-way. Types of activities that would fall under a Type B ROW construction permit include but are not limited to driveways, curbs, stormwater infrastructure, sidewalks, retaining walls, cutting or maintaining trees and haul routes. Construction work associated with a franchised utility provider or a telecommunications provider shall obtain a Type C ROW utility permit as described in SMC 14A.30.050.

(2) Proof of insurance shall be required, with the City listed as an additional insured, on all work within the right-of-way to address liability for injury to persons or property. Insurance amounts shall be those identified in Section 1-07.18 (Public Liability and Property Damage Insurance) of the Standard Specifications for Road, Bridge and Municipal Construction (current version) published by the Washington State Department of Transportation, and City amendments thereto. These insurance requirements may be modified at the discretion of the City.

(3) A current City business license is required for any person performing work in the City right-of-way.

(4) It is unlawful for any person to perform any work in City right-of-way unless operating under a valid state of Washington general contractor’s license, or a valid state of Washington specialty contractor’s license applicable to the type of work being performed.

(5) Contractors are responsible for traffic control, work area protection/security and street maintenance to protect the life, health and safety of the public during any permitted work within the right-of-way, and all methods and equipment used will be subject to the approval of the City.

(6) All streets, sidewalks, alleys, parkways, and other public rights-of-way disturbed in the course of work performed under any permit shall be restored in accordance with the City of Sammamish public works standards or as required and approved by the City engineer.

(7) All work within City right-of-way must be pursued to completion with due diligence, and if work is not completed within a reasonable length of time, as determined by the City engineer, the City shall cause the work to be completed at the applicant’s expense.

(8) Any costs incurred by the City for right-of-way restoration will be charged to the property owner and/or developer employing the contractor. (Ord. O2018-465 § 2 (Att. A))


14A.30.050 Type C right-of-way utility permit.

(1) Type C ROW utility permits are required before any person, firm, corporation, company, enterprise or entity shall commence or permit any other person, firm, or corporation to commence any work within the public right-of-way associated with providing or maintaining franchised utilities or telecommunication facilities within the City right-of-way.

(2) Proof of insurance shall be required, with the City listed as an additional insured, on all work within the right-of-way to address liability for injury to persons or property. Insurance amounts shall be those identified in Section 1-07.18 (Public Liability and Property Damage Insurance) of the Standard Specifications for Road, Bridge and Municipal Construction (current version) published by the Washington State Department of Transportation, and City amendments thereto. These insurance requirements may be modified at the discretion of the City.

(3) A current City business license is required for any person performing work in the City right-of-way.

(4) It is unlawful for any person to perform any work in City right-of-way unless operating under a valid state of Washington general contractor’s license, or a valid state of Washington specialty contractor’s license applicable to the type of work being performed.

(5) Contractors are responsible for traffic control, work area protection/security and street maintenance to protect the life, health and safety of the public during any permitted work within the right-of-way, and all methods and equipment used will be subject to the approval of the City.

(6) All streets, sidewalks, alleys, parkways, and other public rights-of-way disturbed in the course of work performed under any permit shall be restored in accordance with the City of Sammamish public works standards or as required and approved by the City engineer.

(7) All work within City right-of-way must be pursued to completion with due diligence, and if work is not completed within a reasonable length of time, as determined by the City engineer, the City shall cause the work to be completed at the applicant’s expense.

(8) Any costs incurred by the City for right-of-way restoration will be charged to the property owner and/or developer employing the contractor. (Ord. O2018-465 § 2 (Att. A))


14A.30.060 Type D right-of-way lease permit.

(1) Type D ROW lease permits are required before any person, firm, corporation, company, enterprise or entity shall commence or permit any other person, firm, or corporation to commence any work within the ROW or utilize the unopened or unused public ROW for long-term private benefit or use. Types of activities that fall under a Type D ROW lease permit include, but are not limited to, construction of fences, landscaping, private irrigation, sheds, private nonfranchised utilities, and garages. Infrastructure associated with a franchised utility provider or a telecommunications provider shall obtain a Type C ROW utility permit as described in SMC 14A.30.050.

(2) Proof of insurance may be required with the City listed as an additional insured to protect the public and the City against liability for injury to persons or property.

(3) At any time the City deems the area being leased is necessary for public benefit, the ROW lease permit may be terminated and the applicant will be required, at their expense, to move their facilities from the public ROW. (Ord. O2018-465 § 2 (Att. A))


14A.30.070 Revocation or suspension of permit.

All permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be temporary, shall vest no permanent rights in the applicant, and may be revoked by the City as follows:

(1) The permit may be immediately revoked by the City in the event of a violation of any of the terms or conditions of the permit; or

(2) The permit may be immediately revoked by the City in the event the permitted special event or street use shall become dangerous to persons or property, or if any structure, site condition or obstruction permitted becomes insecure or unsafe; or

(3) The permit may be revoked by the City upon 30 days’ notice if the permit was not for a specified period of time and is not covered by either of the preceding subsections.

(4) If any event, use or occupancy for which the permit has been revoked is not immediately discontinued, the City may remove any structure, site condition or obstruction, or cause to be made such repairs upon the structure, site condition or obstruction as may be necessary to render the same secure and safe, or to adjourn any special event. The cost and expense of such removal, repair or adjournment shall be assessed against the permittee, including all fees and costs associated with enforcement of the collection of same, including attorney’s fees. (Ord. O2018-465 § 2 (Att. A))


14A.30.080 Enforcement.

The City engineer is authorized to enforce or seek enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, and ordinances and resolutions codified in it, and any rules and regulations promulgated thereunder pursuant to the enforcement and penalty provisions of SMC Title 23. (Ord. O2018-465 § 2 (Att. A))


Title 15 ENVIRONMENT

Chapters:

15.05    Repealed

15.10    Flood Damage Prevention


Chapter 15.05 SURFACE WATER MANAGEMENT

(Repealed by Ord. O2011-304)


Chapter 15.10 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION

Sections:

15.10.010    Findings of fact.

15.10.020    Statement of purpose.

15.10.030    Methods of reducing flood losses.

15.10.040    Definitions.

15.10.050    Lands to which this chapter applies.

15.10.060    Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.

15.10.065    Compliance.

15.10.070    Penalties for noncompliance.

15.10.080    Abrogation and greater restrictions.

15.10.090    Interpretation.

15.10.100    Warnings and disclaimer of liability.

15.10.110    Establishment of development permit.

15.10.120    Designation of the City manager.

15.10.130    Duties and responsibilities of the City manager.

15.10.135    Changes to special flood hazard area.

15.10.140    Variance procedure.

15.10.150    Provisions for flood hazard reduction – General standards.

15.10.160    Specific standards.

15.10.170    Floodways.

15.10.180    Encroachments.

15.10.190    Standards for shallow flooding areas (AO zones).

15.10.200    Repealed.

15.10.210    Critical facility.


15.10.010 Findings of fact. 

(1) The flood hazard areas of Sammamish are subject to periodic inundation that may result in the loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.

(2) These flood losses may be caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards that increase flood heights and velocities, and when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated, or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss. (Ord. O2020-504 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2000-54 § 1)


15.10.020 Statement of purpose. 

It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare; reduce the annual cost of flood insurance; and minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:

(1) To protect human life and health;

(2) To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;

(3) To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

(4) To minimize prolonged business interruptions;

(5) To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;

(6) To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas;

(7) To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard;

(8) To notify those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard that they assume responsibility for their actions; and

(9) To participate in and maintain eligibility for flood insurance and disaster relief. (Ord. O2020-504 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2000-54 § 2)


15.10.030 Methods of reducing flood losses.

In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions for:

(1) Restricting or prohibiting development that is dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or that result in damage increases in erosion or in flood heights and velocities;

(2) Requiring that development vulnerable to floods be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;

(3) Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters;

(4) Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development that may increase flood damage; and

(5) Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers that unnaturally divert floodwaters or may increase flood hazards in other areas. (Ord. O2020-504 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2000-54 § 3)


15.10.040 Definitions.

Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.

“Alteration of watercourse” means any action that will change the location of the channel occupied by water within the banks of any portion of a riverine water body.

“Appeal” means a request for a review of the interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.

“Area of shallow flooding” means a designated Zone AO, AH, AR/ZO or AR/AH (or VO) on community’s flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet, where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.

“Area of special flood hazard” means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR (V, VO, V1-30, VE). “Special flood hazard area” is synonymous in meaning with the phrase “area of special flood hazard.”

“ASCE 24” means the most recently published version of ASCE 24, Flood Resistant Design and Construction, published by the American Society of Civil Engineers.

“Base flood” means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Also referred to as the “100-year flood.” Designation on maps always includes the letter A or V.

“Base flood elevation (BFE)” means the elevation to which floodwater is anticipated to rise during the base flood.

“Basement” means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.

“Breakaway wall” means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.

“Coastal high hazard area” means an area of special flood hazard extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or seismic sources. The area is designated on the FIRM as zone V1-V30, VE or V.

“Critical facility” means a facility for which even a slight chance of flooding might be too great. Critical facilities include, but are not limited to, schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire and emergency response installations, and installations that produce, use, or store hazardous materials or hazardous waste.

“Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood hazard.

“Elevated building” means, for insurance purposes, a nonbasement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.

“Existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the adopted floodplain management regulations.

“Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).

“Flood” or “flooding” means:

(1) A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:

(a) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.

(b) The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.

(c) Mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused by flooding as defined in subsection (1)(b) of this definition and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current.

(2) The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in subsection (1)(a) of this definition.

“Flood elevation study” means an examination, evaluation, and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation, and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards.

“Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)” means the official map of a community, on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. A FIRM that has been made available digitally is called a digital flood insurance rate map (DFIRM).

Flood Insurance Study. See “flood elevation study.”

“Floodplain” or “flood-prone area” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. See “flood” or “flooding.”

“Floodplain administrator” means the community official designated by title to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations.

“Floodplain management regulations” means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance, and erosion control ordinance) and other application of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.

“Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate risk of flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents.

“Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height (not more than one foot). Also referred to as “regulatory floodway.”

“Functionally dependent use” means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, and does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.

“Highest adjacent grade” means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.

“Historic structure” means any structure that is:

(1) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;

(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;

(3) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or

(4) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:

(a) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or

(b) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.

“Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter found at SMC 15.10.160(1)(b).

“Manufactured home” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle.”

“Manufactured home park or subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.

“Mean sea level” means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the vertical datum to which base flood elevations shown on the community’s flood insurance rate map are referenced.

“New construction” means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of an initial flood insurance rate map or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, “new construction” means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.

“New manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of adopted floodplain management regulations.

“Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:

(1) Built on a single chassis;

(2) Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;

(3) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and

(4) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

“Start of construction” includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, foundations, or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

“Structure” means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.

“Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

“Substantial improvement” means any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either:

(1) Before the improvement or repair is started; or

(2) If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, “substantial improvement” is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.

The term does not, however, include either:

(1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications that have been identified by the local code enforcement official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

(2) Any alteration of a historic structure; provided, that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a “historic structure.”

“Variance” means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter that permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.

“Water dependent” means a structure for commerce or industry that cannot exist in any other location and is dependent on the water by reason of the intrinsic nature of its operations. (Ord. O2020-504 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2000-54 § 4)


15.10.050 Lands to which this chapter applies. 

This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the City of Sammamish. (Ord. O2020-504 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2000-54 § 5)


15.10.060 Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.

The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administrator in a scientific and engineering report entitled “The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for King County, Washington, and Incorporated Areas” dated August 19, 2020, and any revisions thereto, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) dated August 19, 2020, and any revisions thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The FIS and the FIRM are on file at Sammamish City Hall. The best available information for flood hazard area identification as outlined in SMC 15.10.130(2) shall be the basis for regulation until a new FIRM is issued that incorporates the data utilized under SMC 15.10.130(2). (Ord. O2020-504 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2000-54 § 6)


15.10.065 Compliance.

All development within special flood hazard areas is subject to the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. (Ord. O2020-504 § 1 (Att. A))


15.10.070 Penalties for noncompliance. 

No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violations of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than $1,000 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both, for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Sammamish from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. O2020-504 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2000-54 § 7)


15.10.080 Abrogation and greater restrictions. 

This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. O2020-504 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2000-54 § 8)


15.10.090 Interpretation.

In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:

(1) Considered as minimum requirements;

(2) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and

(3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. (Ord. O2020-504 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2000-54 § 9)


15.10.100 Warnings and disclaimer of liability. 

The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of Sammamish, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. O2020-504 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2000-54 § 10)


15.10.110 Establishment of development permit. 

(1) Development Permit Required. A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in SMC 15.10.060. The permit shall be for all structures including manufactured homes, as set forth in SMC 15.10.040, Definitions, and for all development including fill and other activities, also as set forth in SMC 15.10.040, Definitions.

(2) Application for Development Permit. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the City and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:

(a) Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures;

(b) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been floodproofed;

(c) Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the floodproofing criteria in SMC 15.10.160(2);

(d) Description of the extent to which a watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; and

(e) Any other such information that is required by the floodplain administrator in order to review the application. (Ord. O2020-504 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2000-54 § 11)


15.10.120 Designation of the City manager.

The City manager or designee is hereby appointed to administer, implement, and enforce this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions. (Ord. O2020-504 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2000-54 § 12)


15.10.130 Duties and responsibilities of the City manager.

Duties of the City manager or designee shall include, but not be limited to:

(1) Permit Review.

(a) Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;

(b) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state, or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required;

(c) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway, assure that the encroachment provisions of SMC 15.10.170(1) are met;

(d) Review all development permits to determine that the site is reasonably safe from flooding; and

(e) Notify FEMA when annexations occur in the special flood hazard area.

(2) Use of Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with SMC 15.10.060, Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard, the City manager or designee shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer SMC 15.10.160, Specific standards, and SMC 15.10.170, Floodways.

(3) Information to Be Obtained and Maintained.

(a) Where base flood elevation data is provided through the flood insurance study, FIRM, or required as in subsection (2) of this section, obtain and maintain a record of the actual (as-built) elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure contains a basement.

(b) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed nonresidential structures where base flood elevation data is provided through the FIS, FIRM, or as required in subsection (2) of this section:

(i) Obtain and maintain a record of the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure was floodproofed; and

(ii) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in SMC 15.10.110(2)(c).

(c) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter.

(d) Records of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance.

(e) Improvement and damage calculations.

(4) Alteration of Watercourses.

(a) Notify adjacent communities and the Department of Ecology prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administrator through the appropriate notification means.

(b) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished.

(5) Interpretation of FIRM Boundaries. Make interpretations where needed, as to exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in SMC 15.10.140. Such appeals shall be granted consistent with the standards of Section 60.6 of the Rules and Regulations of the NFIP. (Ord. O2020-504 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 2; Ord. O2000-54 § 13)


15.10.135 Changes to special flood hazard area.

If a project will alter the BFE or boundaries of the SFHA, then the project proponent shall provide the community with engineering documentation and analysis regarding the proposed change. If the change to the BFE or boundaries of the SFHA would normally require a letter of map change, then the project proponent shall initiate, and receive approval of, a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) prior to approval of the development permit. The project shall be constructed in a manner consistent with the approved CLOMR.

If a CLOMR application is made, then the project proponent shall also supply the full CLOMR documentation package to the floodplain administrator to be attached to the floodplain development permit, including all required property owner notifications. (Ord. O2020-504 § 1 (Att. A))


15.10.140 Variance procedure. 

(1) Hearing Examiner.

(a) The City’s hearing examiner shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.

(b) The hearing examiner shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the City’s administrative staff in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.

(c) Those aggrieved by an administrative decision of the City may appeal such decision to the hearing examiner, as provided herein.

(d) In passing upon such applications, the hearing examiner shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and:

(i) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

(ii) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

(iii) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;

(iv) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;

(v) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;

(vi) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use that are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;

(vii) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

(viii) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;

(ix) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

(x) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and

(xi) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including the maintenance and repair of public utilities, facilities, and systems such as sewer, gas, electrical, water, streets, and bridges.

(e) Upon consideration of the factors of subsection (1)(d) of this section and the purposes of this chapter, the hearing examiner may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.

(f) The hearing examiner or his/her designee shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.

(2) Conditions for Variances.

(a) Generally, the only condition under which a variance from the elevation standard may be issued is for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level; provided, that subsections (1)(d)(i) through (xi) of this section have been fully considered. As the lot size increases, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.

(b) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places without regard to the procedures set forth in this section.

(c) Variances shall not be issued within a designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.

(d) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.

(e) Variances shall only be issued upon:

(i) A showing of good and sufficient cause;

(ii) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and

(iii) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.

(f) Variances as interpreted in the National Flood Insurance Program are based on the general zoning law principle that they pertain to a physical piece of property; they are not personal in nature and do not pertain to the structure, its inhabitants, or economic or financial circumstances. They primarily address small lots in densely populated residential neighborhoods. As such, variances from the flood elevations should be quite rare.

(g) Variances may be issued for nonresidential buildings in very limited circumstances to allow a lesser degree of floodproofing than watertight or dry-floodproofing where it can be determined that such action will have low damage potential, complies with all other variance criteria except subsection (2)(a) of this section, and otherwise complies with SMC 15.10.150(1) and (2).

(h) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. (Ord. O2020-504 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2000-54 § 14)


15.10.150 Provisions for flood hazard reduction – General standards.

In all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards are required:

(1) Anchoring.

(a) All new construction and substantial improvements, including those related to manufactured homes, shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads including the effects of buoyancy; and

(b) All manufactured homes must likewise be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement, and shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. Anchoring methods may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors (reference FEMA’s “Manufactured Home Installation in Flood Hazard Areas” guidebook for additional techniques).

(2) Construction Materials and Methods.

(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;

(b) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage; and

(c) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or otherwise elevated or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.

(3) Utilities.

(a) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;

(b) The proposed water well shall be located on high ground that is not in the floodway (WAC 173-160-171);

(c) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and

(d) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.

(4) Storage of Materials and Equipment. The storage or processing of materials that could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life if released due to damage from flooding is prohibited in special flood hazard areas.

Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not subject to damage by floods and if firmly anchored to prevent flotation, or if readily removable from the area within the time available after flood warning.

(5) Subdivision Proposals. All subdivisions, as well as new development, shall:

(a) Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;

(b) Have public utilities, facilities, and systems such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage;

(c) Have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage; and

(d) Where subdivision proposals and other proposed developments contain at least 50 lots or five acres (whichever is less), base flood elevation data shall be included as part of the application.

(6) Review of Building Permits. Where elevation data is not available either through the flood insurance study, FIRM, or from another authoritative source (SMC 15.10.130(2)), applications for floodplain development shall be reviewed to assure that proposed construction will be reasonably safe from flooding. The test of reasonableness is a local judgment and includes use of historical data, high water marks, photographs of past flooding, etc., where available. Failure to elevate at least two feet above grade in these zones may result in higher insurance rates. (Ord. O2020-504 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2000-54 § 15)


15.10.160 Specific standards.

In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in SMC 15.10.060, Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard, or SMC 15.10.130(2), Use of Other Base Flood Data, the following provisions are required:

(1) Residential Construction.

(a) In AE and A1-30 zones or other A zoned areas where the BFE has been determined or can be reasonably obtained, new construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated one foot or more above the base flood elevation. Mechanical equipment and utilities shall be waterproof or elevated at least one foot above the BFE. Exception: crawlspaces may be allowed if they meet the below criteria:

(i) The interior grade of a crawlspace below the base flood elevation must not be more than two feet below the lowest adjacent exterior grade.

(ii) The height of the below-grade crawlspace, measured from the interior grade of the crawlspace to the top of the crawlspace foundation wall, must not exceed four feet at any point.

(iii) There must be an adequate drainage system that removes floodwaters from the interior area of the crawlspace. The enclosed area should be drained within a reasonable time after a flood event. The type of drainage system will vary because of the site gradient and other drainage characteristics, such as soil types. Possible options include natural drainage through porous, well-drained soils and drainage systems, such as perforated pipes, drainage tiles, or gravel or crushed stone drainage by gravity or mechanical means.

(b) Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding are prohibited, or shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:

(i) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided;

(ii) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade;

(iii) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters; and

(iv) A garage attached to a residential structure, constructed with the garage floor slab below the BFE, must be designed to allow for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.

(c) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure in an AO zone shall meet the requirements in SMC 15.10.190.

(d) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure in an unnumbered A zone for which a BFE is not available and cannot be reasonably obtained shall be reasonably safe from flooding, but in all cases the lowest floor shall be at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade.

(2) Nonresidential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structure shall meet the requirements of subsection (2)(a) or (b) of this section.

(a) New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structure shall meet all of the following requirements:

(i) In AE and A1-30 zones or other A zoned areas where the BFE has been determined or can be reasonably obtained: New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated one foot or more above the base flood elevation, or elevated as required by ASCE 24, whichever is greater. Mechanical equipment and utilities shall be waterproofed or elevated at least one foot above the BFE, or as required by ASCE 24, whichever is greater.

(ii) If located in an AO zone, the structure shall meet the requirements in SMC 15.10.190.

(iii) If located in an unnumbered A zone for which a BFE is not available and cannot be reasonably obtained, the structure shall be reasonably safe from flooding, but in all cases the lowest floor shall be at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade.

(iv) Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding are prohibited, or shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:

(A) Have a minimum of two openings with a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding.

(B) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.

(C) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater.

(D) A garage attached to a structure, constructed with the garage floor slab below the BFE, must be designed to allow for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.

(b) If the requirements of subsection (2)(a) of this section are not met, then new construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structure shall meet all of the following requirements:

(i) Be dry floodproofed so that below one foot or more above the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water or dry floodproofed to the elevation required by ASCE 24, whichever is greater;

(ii) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy;

(iii) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this subsection based on the engineer’s or architect’s development and/or review of the structural design, specifications and plans. Such certifications shall be provided to the official as set forth in SMC 15.10.130(3)(b);

(iv) Nonresidential structures that are elevated and not floodproofed must meet the same standards for space below the lowest floor as described in subsection (1)(b) of this section; and

(v) Applicants floodproofing nonresidential buildings shall be notified that flood insurance premiums will be based on rates that are one foot below the floodproofed level (e.g., a building floodproofed to the base flood level will be rated as one foot below). Floodproofing the building an additional foot will reduce insurance premiums.

(3) Manufactured Homes.

(a) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites:

(i) Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision;

(ii) In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;

(iii) In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or

(iv) In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as the result of a flood; shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated one foot or more above the base flood elevation and shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.

(b) Manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision that are not subject to the above manufactured home provisions shall be elevated so that either:

(i) The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated one foot or more above the base flood elevation; or

(ii) The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.

(4) Recreational Vehicles. Recreational vehicles placed on sites are required to either:

(a) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;

(b) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on their wheels or jacking systems, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and have no permanently attached additions; or

(c) Meet the requirements of subsection (3) of this section and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes.

(5) Enclosed Area below the Lowest Floor. If buildings or manufactured homes are constructed or substantially improved with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor, the areas shall be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage.

(6) Appurtenant Structures (Detached Garages and Small Storage Structures).

(a) For A Zones (A, AE, A1-30, AH, AO).

(i) Appurtenant structures used solely for parking of vehicles or limited storage may be constructed such that the floor is below the BFE, provided the structure is designed and constructed in accordance with the following requirements:

(A) Use of the appurtenant structure must be limited to parking of vehicles or limited storage;

(B) The portions of the appurtenant structure located below the BFE must be built using flood resistant materials;

(C) The appurtenant structure must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement;

(D) Any machinery or equipment servicing the appurtenant structure must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the BFE;

(E) The appurtenant structure must comply with floodway encroachment provisions in SMC 15.10.170(1);

(F) The appurtenant structure must be designed to allow for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters in accordance with subsection (1)(b) of this section;

(G) The structure shall have low damage potential;

(H) If the structure is converted to another use, it must be brought into full compliance with the standards governing such use; and

(I) The structure shall not be used for human habitation.

(ii) Detached garages, storage structures, and other appurtenant structures not meeting the above standards must be constructed in accordance with all applicable standards in subsection (1) of this section.

(iii) Upon completion of the structure, certification that the requirements of this section have been satisfied shall be provided to the floodplain administrator for verification.

(b) AE and A1-30 Zones with Base Flood Elevations but No Floodways. In areas with BFEs (but a regulatory floodway has not been designated), no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community’s FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. (Ord. O2020-504 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 2; Ord. O2000-54 § 16)


15.10.170 Floodways.

Located within areas of special flood hazard established in SMC 15.10.060 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters that carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:

(1) Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.

(2) Construction or reconstruction of residential structures is prohibited within designated floodways, except for:

(a) Repairs, reconstruction, or improvements to a structure that do not increase the ground floor area; and

(b) Repairs, reconstruction or improvements to a structure, the cost of which does not exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure either:

(i) Before the repair or reconstruction is started; or

(ii) If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, the market value before the damage occurred.

Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications that have been identified by the local code enforcement official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions or to structures identified as historic places may be excluded in the 50 percent.

(3) If subsection (1) of this section is satisfied or construction is allowed pursuant to subsection (2) of this section, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of SMC 15.10.150 through 15.10.210.

(4) General Requirements for Other Development. All development, including manmade changes to improved or unimproved real estate for which specific provisions are not specified in this chapter or the state building codes with adopted amendments and any City of Sammamish amendments, shall:

(a) Be located and constructed to minimize flood damage;

(b) Meet the encroachment limitations of this chapter if located in a regulatory floodway;

(c) Be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement resulting from hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood;

(d) Be constructed of flood damage-resistant materials;

(e) Meet the flood opening requirements of SMC 15.10.160(1)(b); and

(f) Have mechanical, plumbing, and electrical systems above the design flood elevation or meet the requirements of ASCE 24, except that minimum electric service required to address life safety and electric code requirements is permitted below the design flood elevation provided it conforms to the provisions of the electrical part of building code for wet locations. (Ord. O2020-504 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 2; Ord. O2000-54 § 17)


15.10.180 Encroachments.

The cumulative effect of any proposed development, where combined with all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point. (Ord. O2020-504 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2000-54 § 18)


15.10.190 Standards for shallow flooding areas (AO zones).

Shallow flooding areas appear on FIRMs as AO zones with depth designations. The base flood depths in these zones range from one to three feet above ground where a clearly defined channel does not exist, or where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is usually characterized as sheet flow. In these areas, the following provisions apply:

(1) New construction and substantial improvements of residential structures and manufactured homes within AO zones shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest grade adjacent to the building, one foot or more above the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified).

(2) New construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures within AO zones shall either:

(a) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade of the building site, one foot or more above the depth number specified on the FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified); or

(b) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be completely floodproofed to or above that level so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. If this method is used, compliance shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect as in SMC 15.10.160(2)(c).

(3) Adequate drainage paths shall be required around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 

(4) Recreational vehicles placed on sites within AO zones on the community’s FIRM shall either:

(a) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;

(b) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on their wheels or jacking systems, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and have no permanently attached additions; or

(c) Meet the requirements of this section and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes. (Ord. O2020-504 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2000-54 § 19)


15.10.200 Coastal high hazard areas.

Repealed by Ord. 2020-504. (Ord. O2000-54 § 20)


15.10.210 Critical facility.

Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent possible, located outside the limits of the special flood hazard area (SFHA) (100-year floodplain). Construction of new critical facilities shall be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the lowest floor elevated three feet or more above the level of the base flood elevation (100-year) at the site or to the height of the 500-year flood, whichever is higher. Access to and from the critical facility should also be protected to the height utilized above. Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to all critical facilities to the extent possible. (Ord. O2020-504 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2000-54 § 21)


Title 16 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION

Chapters:

16.05    Construction Codes

16.10    Moving Buildings

16.15    Clearing and Grading

16.20    Construction Administrative Code

16.25    Sammamish Building and Property Maintenance Code


Chapter 16.05 CONSTRUCTION CODES

Sections:

16.05.010    Short title.

16.05.020    Purpose.

16.05.030    Hours of construction.

16.05.040    Referenced codes.

16.05.070    International Building Code adopted.

16.05.080    International Residential Code adopted.

16.05.090    Mechanical code adopted.

16.05.100    National Fuel Gas Code (NFPA 54) adopted.

16.05.110    Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code (NFPA 58) adopted.

16.05.120    International Fuel Gas Code adopted.

16.05.130    International Fire Code adopted.

16.05.140    Uniform Plumbing Code adopted.

16.05.150    Washington State Energy Code adopted.

16.05.153    Washington Cities Electrical Code adopted.

16.05.155    International Existing Building Code adopted.

16.05.157    International Swimming Pool and Spa Code adopted.

16.05.160    Documents to be filed and available for public inspection.

16.05.170    Violation.

16.05.180    Adoption of additional state codes.

16.05.190    Code conflicts resolution.

16.05.200    Liability.


16.05.010 Short title.

This chapter shall constitute the City building code and may be cited as such. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 2) 


16.05.020 Purpose.

The purpose of the codes and regulations adopted by this title is to regulate building and construction within the City and to protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the general public, and not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected by the terms of these codes and regulations. More specifically, this chapter is designed to effectuate the following purposes, objectives and standards:

(1) To set forth minimum performance standards and requirements for construction and construction materials, consistent with nationally accepted standards of engineering and fire and life safety.

(2) To permit the use of current technical methods, devices and improvements.

(3) To eliminate restrictive, obsolete, conflicting, duplicative and unnecessary regulations and requirements which could unnecessarily increase construction costs or retard the use of new materials and methods of installation or provide unwarranted preferential treatment to types or classes of materials or products or methods of construction.

(4) To provide standards and specifications for making buildings and facilities accessible to and usable by physically challenged persons.

(5) To consolidate the administration and enforcement of building and construction codes. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 2) 


16.05.030 Hours of construction.

Except as approved by the City manager, or designee, to minimize overall public impact and/or inconvenience or otherwise provided in this chapter, the activities and construction noise regulated by this chapter shall be limited to the following hours:

(1) Monday through Friday: 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.

(2) Saturdays: 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.

(3) Sundays: no construction.

(4) Holidays: No construction will be allowed on the following holidays – New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.

When an exception is granted by the City manager, or manager’s designee, a notice that an exception has been granted shall be provided to affected property owners/residents and to the police department. Notice may be provided by one or more of the following methods: verbal, written, or by posted signage. The method or methods used shall depend upon the scope and duration of the exception. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-353 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2008-247; Ord. O2004-148 § 2) 


16.05.040 Referenced codes.

The codes adopted in this title are collectively referred to as the State Building Code. The State Building Code Act, Chapter 19.27 RCW, delegates to the Washington State Building Code Council the power to adopt and maintain the State Building Code. The State Building Code Act also requires that the City of Sammamish enforce the State Building Code within its jurisdiction, as adopted and amended by the Washington State Building Code Council and the State Legislature. Accordingly, all amendments to the State Building Code adopted by the Washington State Building Council from time to time are hereby, upon the effective date of such amendments, incorporated in this title as though fully set forth herein. In the event that any provisions of the State Building Code are renumbered, any reference in this title to such provision shall refer to such provision as renumbered.

Specific codes referenced in the general codes adopted by this chapter shall be as follows:

(1) Any and all reference to the International Plumbing Code shall be replaced with the Uniform Plumbing Code as adopted in SMC 16.05.140.

(2) Any and all reference to the International Property Maintenance Code shall be replaced with the Sammamish Building and Property Maintenance Code as adopted in Chapter 16.25 SMC.

(3) Any and all reference to the International Electrical Code shall be replaced with the National Electrical Code. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 2) 


16.05.070 International Building Code adopted.

The 2015 Edition of the International Building Code, as adopted by the State Building Code Council in Chapter 51-50 WAC, as published by the International Code Council, including Appendix Chapter E (Accessibility), ICC A117.1-2003 (Accessible Standards), and Appendix Chapter H (Signs), excluding Chapter 1, Administration, is hereby adopted by the City of Sammamish, together with the following amendments and additions:

Exceptions. (1) The provisions of this code shall not apply to temporary growing structures used solely for the commercial production of horticultural plants including ornamental plants, flowers, vegetables and fruits. “Temporary growing structure” means a structure that has the sides and roof covered with polyethylene, polyvinyl, or similar flexible synthetic material and is used to provide plants with frost protection or increased heat retention. A temporary growing structure is not considered a building for purposes of this code.

(2) The provisions of this code shall not apply to the construction, alteration, or repair of temporary worker housing except as provided by rule adopted under Chapter 70.114A RCW. “Temporary worker housing” means a place, area, or piece of land where sleeping places or housing sites are provided by an employer for his or her employees or by another person, including a temporary worker housing operator, who is providing such accommodations for employees, for temporary, seasonal occupancy, and includes “labor camps” as defined and regulated by state law (RCW) and Washington Administrative Code.

(3) Recyclable materials, compost, and solid waste storage. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:

COMPOST means biodegradable solid wastes that are separated for composting such as food waste, food soiled paper and yard waste.

RECYCLED MATERIALS means those solid wastes that are separated for recycling or reuse, such as papers, metals and glass.

All local jurisdictions shall require that space be provided for the storage of recycled materials, compost, and solid waste for all new buildings.

EXCEPTION: Group R-3 and Group U Occupancies.

The storage area shall be designed to meet the needs of the occupancy, efficiency of pickup, and shall be available to occupants and haulers.

(4) Amend Design Criteria as follows:

GROUND AND ROOF SNOW LOAD: 25 PSF

SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORY: D

WIND SPEED: Risk category I: 100 mph; Risk category II: 110 mph; Risk category III and IV: 115 MPH

WIND EXPOSURE: Site Specific. See IBC Section 1609.4

SOIL BEARING: Site specific. See IBC Chapter 18

WEATHERING: Moderate

FROST LINE DEPTH: 12 inches

TERMITE: Slight to moderate

DECAY: Slight to moderate

WINTER DESIGN TEMPERATURE: 26˚F

ICE SHIELD UNDERLAYMENT REQUIRED: No

FLOOD HAZARDS: See SMC 15.10

AIR FREEZING INDEX: 145˚F- days

MEAN ANNUAL TEMPERATURE: 50 ˚F.

(5) Section 107.2.5.1, Design Flood Elevations.

Where design flood elevations are not specified, they shall be established in accordance with Section 1612.3.1.

(6) Table 508.4, Required Separation of Occupancies (Hours), is amended to read as follows:

Add footnote reference superscript “ef” to R and group I-1 Occupancy Classification row and column headings. Add footnote “ef” to read:

See Section 419 for Live/Work Unit separations.

(7) Amend Section 1608.1, General, to read as follows:

Design snow loads shall not be less than 25 PSF uniform roof snow load, nor less than that determined by IBC Section 1607.

(8) Amend IBC Section 2701.1, Scope, to read as follows:

2701.1 Scope. This chapter governs the electrical components, equipment and systems used in buildings and structures covered by this code. Electrical components, equipment and systems shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions of the Sammamish Electrical Code as adopted in SMC 16.05.153.

(9) Add new Section 2702.1.6, Location, to read as follows:

2702.1.6 Location. Location of stationary generators, fuel piping and storage tanks are subject to the approval of the Building Official and/or Fire Code Official.

(Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 2) 


16.05.080 International Residential Code adopted.

The 2015 Edition of the International Residential Code, as adopted by the State Building Code Council in Chapter 51-51 WAC, as published by the International Code Council, including Appendix Q, Dwelling Unit Fire Sprinkler Systems, and excluding Chapters 1, 11 and 25 through 43, is hereby adopted by the City of Sammamish, together with the following amendments:

(1) Amend Design Criteria for R 301.2(1) as follows:

GROUND AND ROOF SNOW LOAD: 25 PSF

WIND SPEED: 110 mph

TOPOGRAPHIC EFFECTS: No

SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORY: D2

WEATHERING: Moderate

FROST LINE DEPTH: 12 inches

TERMITE: Slight to moderate

DECAY: Slight to moderate

WINTER DESIGN TEMPERATURE: 26˚F.

ICE SHIELD UNDERLAYMENT REQUIRED: No

FLOOD HAZARDS: See SMC 15.10

AIR FREEZING INDEX: 145˚F - days

MEAN ANNUAL TEMPERATURE: 50 ˚F

SOIL BEARING (Assumed): 1500 PSF

(Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 2) 


16.05.090 Mechanical code adopted.

The 2015 Edition of the International Mechanical Code, as adopted by the State Building Code Council in Chapter 51-52 WAC, as published by the International Code Council, excluding Chapter 1, Administration, is hereby adopted by the City of Sammamish. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 2) 


16.05.100 National Fuel Gas Code (NFPA 54) adopted.

The 2015 Edition of ANSI Z223.1/NFPA 54, National Fuel Gas Code, as adopted by the State Building Code Council in Chapter 51-52 WAC, as published by NFPA, is hereby adopted by the City of Sammamish. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 2) 


16.05.110 Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code (NFPA 58) adopted.

The 2014 Edition of NFPA 58, Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code, as adopted by the State Building Code Council in Chapter 51-52 WAC, as published by NFPA, is hereby adopted by the City of Sammamish. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 2) 


16.05.120 International Fuel Gas Code adopted.

The 2015 Edition of the International Fuel Gas Code, as adopted by the State Building Code Council in Chapter 51-52 WAC, as published by the International Code Council, excluding Chapter 1, Administration, is hereby adopted by the City of Sammamish. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 2) 


16.05.130 International Fire Code adopted.

The 2015 Edition of the International Fire Code, as adopted by the State Building Code Council in Chapter 51-54 WAC, as published by the International Code Council, including Appendix Chapters B, Fire-flow requirements for buildings; C, Fire hydrant locations and distribution; and D, Section 106 as amended, is hereby adopted by the City of Sammamish, together with the following amendments:

(1) Amend Section 102.7 to read as follows:

Section 102.7 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those that are listed in Chapter 45. Such codes and standards shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference as determined or modified by the fire code official.

Where differences occur between the provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall apply.

When allowed by the Fire Code official, editions of standards not herein referenced may be utilized provided the entire standard is utilized.

(2) Section 104.10.1 to read as follows:

Section 104.10.1 Assistance from other agencies. Police and other enforcement agencies shall have authority to render necessary assistance in the investigation of fires or the enforcement of this code as requested by the fire code official.

(3) Amend Section 104.11.2 to read as follows:

Obstructing operations. No person shall obstruct the operations of the fire department in connection with extinguishment, or control or investigation of any fire, or actions relative to other emergencies, or disobey any lawful command of the fire chief or officer of the fire department in charge of the emergency, or any part thereof, or any lawful order of a police officer assisting the fire department.

(4) Section 105.2 to read as follows:

Section 105.2 Application for Permit. Application for permits shall be made to the City of Sammamish in such form and detail as required by the fire department. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by such plans as required by the Bureau of Fire Prevention. All applications for fire department permits shall be forwarded to the Bureau of Fire Prevention for consideration of approval.

(5) Section 105.2.5, Permit Fees, to read as follows:

105.2.5 Permit Fees. Any fees for fire code permits, plan check or any other fire service shall be as listed in the City of Sammamish Fee resolution.

(6) Section 107.6, Overcrowding. Amend to read as follows:

Overcrowding or admittance of any person beyond the approved capacity of a building or a portion thereof shall not be allowed. The fire code official, upon finding any overcrowding conditions or obstructions in aisles, passageways or other means of egress, or upon finding any condition which constitutes a life safety hazard, shall be authorized to direct actions be taken to reduce the overcrowding or to cause the event to be stopped until such condition or obstruction is corrected.

(7) Delete Section 108 and replace with the following:

Section 108.1 General. Appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretations of this code shall be heard and decided by the Hearing Examiner following an open record hearing. Following review of the evidence, the Examiner shall issue final decisions, including findings and conclusions, based on the issues and evidence in the record.

The Hearing Examiner’s final decision shall be the final decision of the City Council on the appeal and shall be conclusive unless proceedings for review of the decision are properly commenced in superior court within the time period specified by state law.

Section 108.2 Limitations on authority. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed. The hearing examiner shall have no authority relative to interpretation of the administrative provisions of this code nor shall the Hearing Examiner be empowered to waive requirements of either this code or the technical codes which are the codes, appendices and referenced code standards adopted by the City of Sammamish.

(8) Section 307.1 to read as follows:

Section 307.1 Open Burning and Recreational fires – General.

Exception: Barbecue and other fires in accordance with the Puget Sound Clean Air Agency.

(9) Section 307.6 to read as follows:

307.6 Sky Lanterns. Sky Lanterns are airborne paper lanterns similar to a mini hot air balloon, also known as Kongming Lanterns (wish lanterns), which are also referred to as Chinese lanterns, sky candles or fire balloons. As such Sky Lanterns are considered open burning, and are not controlled once they are airborne. The use of Sky Lanterns is prohibited.

(10) Exception to Section 308.3 to read as follows:

Section 308.3 Group A Occupancies.

Exception 4: Where approved by the Fire Code Official.

(11) Sections 503.1 through 503.4 to read as follows:

Sections 503.1 through 503.4 – Fire apparatus access roads. Fire apparatus access roads in the International Fire Code section 503.1 through 503.4 shall be retained by the City of Sammamish.

(12) Amend Section 503.2.1 to read as follows:

503.2.1 Dimensions. Fire apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed width of not less than 20 feet (6096 mm), except for approved security gates in accordance with Section 503.6, and an unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than 13 feet 6 inches (4115 mm).

Emergency Vehicle access roads shall be constructed in accordance with City of Sammamish Public works standards.

(13) Section 503.2.7 to read as follows:

503.2.7 Grade. The grade of the fire apparatus access road shall be no more than 15% slope. Access roads may be permitted to exceed 15% with approval of the fire official, where all buildings are provided with an approved fire sprinkler system.

(14) Section 503.3 to read as follows:

Section 503.3. Markings. When required by the Fire Chief, approved signs or other approved notices shall be provided and maintained for fire apparatus roads to identify such roads and prohibit the obstruction thereof or both.

1. All designated fire lanes shall be clearly marked by the property owner in the following manner: Vertical curbs shall be painted six (6") inches in height and shall be painted red on the top and side, extending the length of the designated fire lane with four inch (4") white block lettering stenciled on the face “NO PARKING – FIRE LANE.” The stenciling shall be spaced every fifty feet (50'). Rolled curbs or surfaces without curbs shall have a six inch (6") wide red stripe painted extending the length of the designated fire lane with four inch (4") white block lettering stenciled on the stripe “NO PARKING – FIRE LANE.” The stenciling shall be spaced every fifty feet (50').

2. Signs may be substituted for curb painting when approved in writing by the fire marshal.

3. Signs shall be not less than eighteen inches (18") in height by twelve inches (12") in width, with block lettering of not less than three inches (3") high brush stroke, reading: “NO PARKING – FIRE LANE.” Such signs shall be reflective in nature, with red lettering on a white background, and spaced at intervals of not less than fifty feet (50') apart. The top of such signs shall not be less than four feet (4'), or more than six feet (6') from the ground. Signs may be placed on buildings when approved in writing by the fire marshal. When posts are required, they shall be constructed of either two inch (2") or greater galvanized steel, or four inch by four inch (4" x 4") or greater pressure treated wood.

4. The fire marshal may approve deviations from any of the specifications in writing.

5. Existing signs may be allowed to remain until the fire marshal determines that a need for replacement exists based on the legibility or other deterioration of the existing signs. Such replacement shall occur within 30 days of receiving written notification of the deficiency.

6. Fire lanes shall be established and maintained as often as required by the fire marshal to clearly identify the designated area as a fire lane, at the sole expense of the property owner. The property owner shall have completed the required establishment or maintenance of fire lanes within 30 days of receiving written notification that such is necessary.

7. At the entrance to the property where fire lanes have been designated, signs shall be posted in a clearly conspicuous location, and shall clearly state that vehicles parked in fire lanes may be impounded, and the name, telephone number, and address of the towing firm where the vehicle may be redeemed.

8. The owner, manager, or person in charge of any property upon which any designated fire lane has been established shall be responsible to prevent the parking of vehicles in such fire lanes by informing the appropriate towing company of the violation. If the lane is blocked by any other obstructions, the owner, manager, or person in charge of the property shall attempt to remove the obstruction, and if unable, shall inform the fire department that the obstruction exists.

9. All criminal violations of the International Fire Code and obstruction of a fire apparatus road may be enforced by any regular or reserve police officer of the Police Department.

10. The Police Department, Fire Chief, Fire Marshal, and other such personnel of the Fire Department as designated by the Fire Chief and approved by the City Manager shall have the authority to issue infractions for violations of the International Fire Code on forms provided by the Chief of Police for such purposes.

11. Any violation of this Section shall be punishable in accordance with the provisions of SMC 46.30.090.

(15) Section 510 Amended – Emergency Responder Radio Coverage in New Buildings. Section 510.1 of the International Fire Code is amended to read as follows:

510.1 Emergency responder radio coverage in new buildings. Approved radio coverage for emergency responders shall be provided with buildings meeting any of the following conditions:

1. There are more than five stories above grade plane (as defined by the International Building Code, Section 202);

2. The total building is 50,000 square feet or more;

3. The total basement area is 10,000 square feet or more;

Or

4. There are floors used for human occupancy more than 30 feet below the finish floor of the lowest level of exit discharge.

Radio coverage is based upon the existing coverage levels of the public safety communication systems of the jurisdictions at the exterior of the building. This section shall not require improvements of the existing public safety communication system.

510.2 Emergency responder radio coverage in existing buildings. Existing buildings shall be provided with approved radio coverage for emergency responders as required in IFC 1103.2.

510.3 Operational permit. An operational permit is required to operate an in building radio system.

510.4.2.4 Signal Booster Requirements. If used, signal boosters shall meet the following requirements:

1. All active signal booster components shall be contained in a NEMA4, IP66-type waterproof cabinet or equivalent.

2. The battery system shall be contained in a NEMA4, IP66-type waterproof cabinet or equivalent.

3. The system shall include automatic alarming of malfunctions of the signal booster and battery system. Any resulting trouble alarm shall be automatically transmitted to an approved central station.

4. Equipment shall have FCC certification prior to installation.

510.5.3 Acceptance Test procedure. Acceptance testing for Emergency responder radio amplification system is required, upon completion of installation. It is the building owner’s responsibility to have the radio system tested by qualified personnel to ensure a minimum of 95% two-way coverage on each floor of the building.

A report shall be submitted to the Fire Department at the conclusion of acceptance testing containing a floor plan and the signal strengths at each location tested and other relevant information. A representative of the Fire Department may oversee the acceptance test. Acceptance testing is also required whenever changes occur to the building that would materially change the original field performance test. The test procedure shall be conducted as follows:

1. Each floor of the building shall be divided into a grid of approximately forty (40) equal areas.

2. Testing shall use a two (2) watt, portable transceiver with speaker/microphone and flexible antenna (or any calibrated device which will produce signal levels useable by the prescribed portable radio). Field strength testing instruments must have been calibrated within one (1) year of the date of the acceptance test. Field strength testing instruments must be of the frequency selective type incorporating a flexible antenna similar to the ones used on the hand held transceivers. City Radio System Manager may designate alternate methods of measuring the signal level, which satisfy appropriate levels of public safety coverage.

3. A maximum of two (2) nonadjacent areas will be allowed to fail the test.

4. In the event that three (3) of the areas fail the test, the floor may be divided into eighty (80) equal areas in order to be more statistically accurate. In such event, a maximum of four (4) nonadjacent areas will be allowed to fail the test. After the eighty (80) area tests, if the system continues to fail, the building owner shall have the system altered to meet the 95% coverage requirement.

5. A spot located approximately in the center of a grid area will be selected for the test, then the radio will be keyed to verify two-way communication to and from the outside of the building through the Regional 800 MHz Radio System. Once the spot has been selected, prospecting for a better spot within the grid area is not permitted. The gain values of all amplifiers shall be measured and the results kept on file with the building owner so that the measurements can be verified each year during the annual tests. In the event that the measurement results become lost, the building owner will be required to rerun the acceptance test to reestablish the gain values.

6. The gain values of all amplifiers shall be measured and the test measurement results shall be kept on file with the building owner so that the measurements can be verified during annual tests. In the event that the measurement results become lost, the building owner shall be required to rerun the acceptance test to reestablish the gain values.

7. As part of the installation a spectrum analyzer or other suitable test equipment shall be utilized to ensure spurious oscillations are not being generated by the subject signal booster. This test shall be conducted at time of installation and subsequent annual inspections.

510.5.5 Approval Prior to Occupancy. A Certificate of Occupancy will not be issued to any structure if the building fails to comply with Section 510.

510.6 Maintenance. The emergency responder radio coverage system shall be maintained operational at all times in accordance with Sections 510.6.1 through 510.6.3.

510.6.1 Testing and proof of Compliance. The emergency responder radio coverage system shall be inspected and tested annually, or whenever structural changes occur to the building that would materially change the original field performance tests by a consultant approved by the Fire Code Official. The performance test shall include at minimum a floor plan and the signal strength in various locations of the building.

Testing shall consist of the following:

1. In-building coverage test as described in Section 510.5.3.

Exception: Group R Occupancy annual testing is not required within dwelling units.

2. Signal boosters shall be tested to ensure that the gain is the same as it was upon initial installation and acceptance.

3. Backup batteries and power supplies shall be tested under load of a period of one hour to verify that they will properly operate during an actual power outage. If within the 1-hour test period the battery exhibits symptoms of failure, the test shall be extended for additional 1-hour periods until the integrity of the battery can be determined.

4. All other active components shall be checked to verify operation within the manufacturer’s specifications.

5. At the conclusion of the testing, a report, which shall verify compliance with Section 510.5.3, shall be submitted to the fire code official.

510.6.2 Identification. Radio Coverage system shall be identified by a sign located on or near the Fire Alarm Control Panel stating “This building is equipped with an Emergency Responder Radio Coverage System.”

510.6.3 Field Testing. Police and Fire Personnel shall at any time have the right to enter onto the property to conduct its own field-testing to be certain that the required level of radio coverage is present.

(16) Amend Section 903.2, Where required, as follows:

903.2 Where required. Delete the exception.

903.2.a Automatic sprinkler systems required.

(1) All newly constructed buildings with a gross square footage of 5,000 square feet, regardless of type or use, as well as zero lot line townhouses with an aggregate area of 5,000 square feet or greater must be sprinklered.

(2) Additions to existing buildings that are 50 percent or more of the assessed building valuation which is based off of current information from the King County Assessor’s office, and would result in a gross floor area greater than 5,000 square feet must be retrofitted with an automatic sprinkler system. Subject to the approval of the fire chief, a phasing plan of up to five years is permitted.

(3) Floor Area, Gross. For the purpose of this section, “gross floor area” shall be defined as the floor area whether above or below grade within the inside perimeter of the exterior walls of the building under consideration, exclusive of vent shafts, attics, crawl spaces and courts, without deduction for corridors, stairways, closets, the thickness of the interior walls, columns or other features. The floor area of a building, or portion thereof, not provided with surrounding exterior walls shall be the usable area under the horizontal projection of the roof or floor above. The gross floor area shall not include shafts with no openings or interior courts.

(4) For the purposes of this section, fire barriers, walls or partitions of any type do not constitute separate buildings.

(17) Section 903.4.2, Alarms, to read as follows:

903.4.2 Alarms. Approved audible and visible alarm notification devices to meet the Americans with Disabilities Act, shall be provided for every automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 907 and throughout areas designated by the Fire Code Official. Such sprinkler water-flow alarm devices shall be activated by water flow equivalent to the flow of a single sprinkler of the smallest orifice size installed in the system. Alarm devices shall be provided on the exterior of the building in an approved location. Where a fire alarm system is installed, actuation of the automatic sprinkler system shall actuate the building fire alarm system. Exception: With approval of the Fire Code Official, audible and visible alarm notification appliances may be omitted for approved residential sprinkler systems in 1 or 2 family dwelling units if not otherwise specifically required.

(18) Section 903.4.3 to read as follows:

903.4.3 Floor control valves. Approved supervised indicating control valves shall be provided at the point of connection to the riser on each floor. Exception: When approved by the Fire Code Official in NFPA 13D and NFPA13R systems.

(19) Section 905.3.9 to read as follows:

905.3.9 High Rise Building Standpipes. Standpipe risers shall be combination standpipe/sprinkler risers using a minimum pipe size of 6 inches. Two 2-1/2 inch hose connections shall be provided on every intermediate floor level landing in every required stairway. Where pressure reduction valves (PRV) are required, each hose connection shall be provided with its own PRV. The system shall be designed to provide a minimum flow of 300 gpm at a minimum pressure of 150 psi (maximum 200 psi) at each standpipe connection, in addition to the flow and pressure requirements contained in NFPA 14.

(20) Section 905.8 to read as follows:

905.8 Dry Standpipes. Dry standpipes, may be installed in other than high rise buildings when approved by the fire code official.

(21) Section 906.1, Where required, as follows:

906.1 Where required. Portable fire extinguishers shall be installed in all Group A, B, E, F, H, I, M, R1, R-2, R-4, and S occupancies.

Amend Exception:

R-2 occupancies are not required to provide portable fire extinguishers within each dwelling unit. Fire extinguishers are required in common areas and corridors.

(22) Section 907.7.5.2 to read as follows:

907.7.5.2. Monitoring. When required by the Fire Code Official, all new and existing fire detection systems shall be monitored.

(23) New 2703.9 General Safety Precautions.

General precautions for the safe storage, handling or care of hazardous materials shall be in accordance with Sections 2703.9.1 through 2703.9.11.

(24) New 2703.9.11, Manufacturer’s Limitations.

The storage and use of hazardous materials shall not exceed the manufacturer’s limitations on shelf life and any other restrictions on use.

(25) New 5307.5.2, Emergency Alarm System.

1. Activation of the emergency alarm system shall initiate a local alarm at the entrance to room(s) and inside a room where CO2 systems are installed.

2. Require a warning sign at the entrance:

“Carbon Dioxide Alarm. Do not enter. Call 911”

(26) Amend Section 5604.1 to read as follows:

Section 5604.1 Explosive Materials Storage and Handling – General. The storage of explosive materials is prohibited within the City Limits.

Exceptions:

1. Materials listed and stored in accordance with IFC 5601.1 “Exceptions 1-5, and 7-9.”

2. Model rocket motors, as defined by 2013 NFPA 1122, stored in accordance with 2013 NFPA 1122 Sections 4.20.1 and 4.20.2. Quantities of more than one pound shall be stored in accordance with 2013 NFPA 1127 Sections 4.19.1 through 4.19.2.4.

3. When approved by the Fire Marshal, high power rocket motors as defined by NFPA 1127 and rocket motor reloading kits, stored in accordance with NFPA 1127 Sections 4.19.1 through 4.19.2.4, 4.19.4 and 4.19.5.

(27) Amend Section 5605.1 to read as follows:

Section 5605.1 Manufacturing, assembly and testing of explosives, explosive materials, ammunition, blasting agents, and fireworks – General. The manufacturing of explosives, explosive materials, ammunition, blasting agents, and fireworks is prohibited within the City limits.

(28) Amend Section 5704.2.9.6 to read as follows:

5704.2.9.6.1 Locations where above-ground tanks are prohibited.

Locations where Class I and Class II liquids are stored in above-ground tanks outside of buildings shall be regulated in accordance with SMC 21A.50.280: “Critical aquifer recharge areas.”

(29) Amend Section 5704.2.11.2, Location, to add new item No. 4 as follows:

5704.2.11.2 Location. Flammable and combustible liquid storage tanks located underground, either outside or under buildings, shall be in accordance with all of the following:

1. Tanks shall be located with respect to existing foundations and supports such that the loads carried by the latter cannot be transmitted to the tank.

2. The distance from any part of a tank storing liquids to the nearest wall of a basement, pit, cellar, or lot line shall not be less than 3 feet (914 mm).

3. A minimum distance of 1 foot (305 mm), shell to shell, shall be maintained between underground tanks.

4. Tank location shall be in accordance with the limitations of SMC 21A.50.280: “Critical aquifer recharge areas.”

(30) Amend Section 5706.2 as follows:

5706.2 Storage and dispensing of flammable and combustible liquids. Permanent and temporary storage and dispensing of Class I and II liquids for private use on farms and at Public Maintenance facilities owned by the City of Sammamish or other Public agencies shall be in accordance with Sections 5706.2.1 through 5706.2.8.1.

Exception: Storage and use of fuel oil and containers connected with oil-burning equipment regulated by Section 603 and the International Mechanical Code.

(31) Amend Section 5706.2.4.4 to read as follows:

Section 5706.2.4.4 Locations where above-ground tanks are prohibited. Locations where Class I and II liquids are stored in above-ground tanks shall be regulated in accordance with SMC 21A.50.280: “Critical Aquifer Recharge Areas.”

(32) Amend Section 6104.2 to read as follows:

Section 6104.2 Maximum capacity within established limits. The aggregate capacity for the storage of Liquid Petroleum Gas (LPG) of any one installation shall not exceed 2,000 gallons water capacity, except that in particular installations this capacity limit may be altered at the discretion of the chief after consideration of special features such as topographical conditions, nature of the occupancy and proximity to buildings, capacity of proposed tanks, degree of private fire protection to be provided, and facilities of the fire department.

(33) Amend Appendix D, Section D106, to read as follows:

SECTION D106 SINGLE FAMILY AND MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS

D106.1 Projects having more than 100 dwelling units. Single family and Multiple-family residential projects having more than 100 dwelling units shall be equipped throughout with two separate and approved fire apparatus access roads.

Exception: Projects having more than 100 dwelling units may have a single approved fire apparatus access road when all buildings, including nonresidential occupancies, are equipped throughout with approved automatic sprinkler systems installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, or 903.3.1.2, or 903.3.1.3 of the International Fire Code.

D106.2 Projects having more than 200 dwelling units. Multiple-family residential projects having more than 200 dwelling units shall be provided with two separate and approved fire apparatus access roads regardless of whether they are equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system.

(Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-165 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 2)


16.05.140 Uniform Plumbing Code adopted.

The 2015 Edition of the Uniform Plumbing Code, as adopted by the State Building Code Council in Chapter 51-56 WAC, as published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, excluding Chapter 1, Administration, is hereby adopted by the City of Sammamish, together with the following amendments:

(1) Amend UPC Section 311.0, Independent Systems, as follows:

311.0 Independent Systems.

The drainage system of each new building and of new work installed in any existing building shall be separate and independent from that of any other building, and, when available, every building shall have an independent connection with a public or private sewer.

Swimming pools shall be provided with a separate and independent drainage system, which shall connect with a public or private sewer. The drainage pipe for the pool, floor drain, and similar fixtures shall be connected either to the side sewer downstream of the main building or structure or to the building sewer downstream of the last plumbing fixture. The main building drain shall be equipped with an accessible backwater valve outside of the building or structure and upstream of the pool drain connection.

(2) Amend UPC Chapter 6, Table 610.3, deleting “Lawn Sprinkler, each head” from the table.

(3) Amend UPC Section 708.0, Grade of Horizontal Drainage Piping, as follows:

Horizontal drainage piping shall be run in practical alignment and a uniform slope of not less than one fourth (1/4) inch per foot (20.9 mm/m) or two (2) percent toward the point of disposal provided that, where it is impractical due to the depth of the street sewer or to the structural features or to the arrangement of any building or structure to obtain a slope of one-fourth (1/4) of an inch per foot (20.9 mm/m) or two (2) percent. Any such pipe or piping four (4) inches (100 mm) or larger in diameter may have a slope of not less than one-eighth (1/8) of an inch per foot (10.5 mm/m) or one (1) percent, only when first approved by the Code Official. Horizontal drainage piping connected to any dual flush gravity tank water closet shall slope a minimum of one-fourth (1/4) inch per foot.

(4) Adopt and amend UPC Section 713.1, Sewers Required, as follows:

713.1 Every building in which plumbing fixtures are installed and every premises having drainage piping thereon shall have a connection to a public or private sewer, except as provided in Section 713.2, and Section 713.4.

Exceptions:

1. When no public sewer intended to serve any lot or premises is available in any thoroughfare or right of way abutting such lot or premises, or as otherwise approved under SMC 21A.60.030, drainage piping from any building or works shall be connected to an approved private sewage disposal system. The public sewer may be considered as not being available when such public sewer or any building or any exterior drainage facility connected thereto is located more than two hundred (200) feet (60.8 m) from any proposed building or exterior drainage facility on any lot or premises that abuts and is served by such public sewer.

2. No change shall be required in any portion of a plumbing drainage system in or on an existing building or lot when such work was installed and is maintained in accordance with law in effect prior to the effective date of this code, except when any such plumbing or drainage system or other work regulated by this code is determined by the Authority Having Jurisdiction to be in fact dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary, or a nuisance and a menace to life, health, or property.

(5) Adopt UPC Sections 713.3, 713.6, 714.2 and 722 pertaining to building sewers to read as follows:

Section 713.3, 713.6, 714.2 and 722 pertaining to building sewers shall be retained by the City of Sammamish.

(6) Amend UPC Section 713.3 as follows:

713.3 Within the limits prescribed by UPC Section 713.4 hereof, the rearrangement or subdivision into smaller parcels of a lot that abuts and is served by a public sewer shall not be deemed cause to permit the construction of a private sewage disposal system, and all plumbing or drainage systems on any such smaller parcel or parcels shall connect to the public sewer.

(7) Amend UPC Section 1101.12.2.2.2 to read as follows:

Combined System. The secondary roof drains shall connect to the vertical piping of the primary storm drainage conductor downstream of any horizontal offset below the roof. The primary storm drainage system shall connect to the building storm water that connects to an underground public storm sewer. The combined secondary and primary roof drain systems shall be sized in accordance with Section 1103.0 based on double the rainfall for the local area. A relief drain shall be connected to the vertical drain piping using a wye type fitting piped to daylight on the exterior of the building. The piping shall be sized as required for a secondary drain with a 4" minimum.

(8) Adopt Appendix Chapter A, “Recommended Rules for Sizing the Water Supply System.”

(9) Adopt Appendix Chapter B, “Explanatory Notes on Combination Waste and Vent Systems.”

(10) Adopt Appendix Chapter C, “Alternate Plumbing Systems,” excluding Sections C5 through C7. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 2)


16.05.150 Washington State Energy Code adopted.

The 2015 Washington State Energy Code, Commercial and Residential, as adopted by the State Building Code Council in Chapters 51-11C and 51-11R WAC, is hereby adopted by the City of Sammamish. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 2)


16.05.153 Washington Cities Electrical Code adopted.

(1) The most current edition of the Washington Cities Electrical Code (WCEC), Part One (Adoption) and Part Three (National Electrical Code amendments), as published by the Washington Association of Building Officials, is hereby adopted by reference and shall be known as the Sammamish Electrical Code. This includes Annexes A, B and C of the National Electrical Code; Commercial Building Telecommunications Cabling Standard (ANSI/TIA-568-C series, February 2009); Commercial Building Standard for Telecommunications Pathway and Spaces (TIA-569-B, October 2004); Commercial Building Grounding and Bonding Requirements for Telecommunications (ANSI/TIA-607-B, August 2011); Residential Telecommunications Cable Standard (ANSI/TIA/EIA 570-B-2004); and the National Electrical Safety Code (NESC C2-2012 excluding Appendices A and B).

(2) The “Construction Administrative Code” as set forth in Chapter 16.20 SMC shall be used for the administration of the Sammamish Electrical Code.

(3) Conflicts.

(a) The requirements of Washington Cities Electrical Code will be observed where there is any conflict between this chapter and the National Electrical Code (NFPA 70), Centrifugal Fire Pumps (NFPA 20), the Emergency and Standby Power Systems (NFPA 110), ANSI/TIA/EIA 568-B, ANSI/TIA/EIA 569-A, ANSI/TIA/EIA 607, or ANSI/TIA/EIA 570.

(b) The National Electrical Code will be followed when there is any conflict between standard for Installation of Stationary Pumps for Fire Protection (NFPA 20), standard for Emergency and Standby Power Systems (NFPA 110), ANSI/TIA/EIA 568-B, ANSI/TIA/EIA 569-A, ANSI/TIA/EIA 607, ANSI/TIA/EIA 570-B, and the National Electrical Code (NFPA 70).

(c) In accordance with RCW 19.28.010(3), when the State of Washington Department of Labor and Industries adopts a more current edition of the National Electrical Code (NFPA 70), the more current edition shall be enforced. Provisions in the annex chapters of the National Electrical Code shall not apply unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A)) 


16.05.155 International Existing Building Code adopted.

The 2015 International Existing Building Code (IEBC), as adopted by the State Building Code Council in Chapter 51-50 WAC, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., including Appendix A, Guidelines for the Seismic Retrofit of Existing Buildings, Appendix N, Solar Readiness, and excluding Chapter 1, Administration, is hereby adopted by the City of Sammamish by reference, together with the amendments set forth in this section. The Construction Administrative Code, as set forth in Chapter 16.20 SMC, shall be used in place of IEBC Chapter 1, Administration.

(1) Amend Section 409.1 to include state amendments and City requirements relocated from SMC 16.20.107 to read as follows:

409.1 Conformance. Buildings or structures moved into or within the jurisdiction shall comply with the provisions of this code, the International Residential Code (chapter 51-51 WAC), the International Mechanical Code (chapter 51-52 WAC), the International Fire Code (chapter 51-54A WAC), the Uniform Plumbing Code and Standards (chapters 51-56 and 51-57 WAC), the Washington State Energy Code (chapter 51-11 WAC) and the Washington State Ventilation and Indoor Air Quality Code (chapter 51-13 WAC) for new buildings or structures.

EXCEPTION: Group R-3 buildings or structures are not required to comply if:

1. The original occupancy classification is not changed; and

2. The original building is not substantially remodeled or rehabilitated.

For the purposes of this section, a building shall be considered to be substantially remodeled when the costs of remodeling exceed 60 percent of the value of the building exclusive of the costs relating to preparation, construction, demolition or renovation of foundations.

Prior to relocation, a feasibility inspection shall be performed on the building or structure by a registered design professional to document any known structural deficiencies, examine existing plumbing and mechanical systems, inspect insulated areas of the structure and check for life safety deficiencies. A copy of the inspection reports shall be submitted along with a building permit application for relocation.

Structures which do not conform to minimum requirements at the time of initial construction, or current life safety regulations, or are found substantially deficient in structural integrity, shall be subject to correction.

(2) Add new Section 409.1, Moved building – Electrical conformance, for the purpose of relocating the content of SMC 16.20.107 as follows:

409.1 Moved buildings – Electrical requirements.

(1) Nonresidential buildings or structures moved into or within the jurisdiction must be inspected to ensure compliance with current requirements of this chapter.

(2) Residential buildings or structures wired in the U.S. to NEC requirements and moved into the jurisdiction must be inspected to ensure compliance with the NEC requirements in effect at the time and place the original wiring was made. The building or structure must be inspected to ensure compliance with all current requirements of Chapter 19.28 RCW and the rules developed by the building department if:

(a) The original occupancy classification of the building or structure is changed as a result of the move; or

(b) The building or structure has been substantially remodeled or rehabilitated as a result of the move.

(3) Residential buildings or structures wired in Canada to Canadian Electrical Code (CEC) standards and moved into the jurisdiction must be inspected to ensure compliance with the following minimum safety requirements:

(a) Service, service grounding, and service bonding must comply with the Sammamish Electrical Code.

(b) Canadian Standards Association (CSA) listed Type NMD cable is allowed with the following qualifications:

(i) CSA listed Type NMD cable, American Wire Gauge No. 10 and smaller installed after 1964, utilizing an equipment grounding conductor smaller than the phase conductors, must be:

(A) Replaced with a cable utilizing a full-size equipment grounding conductor; or

(B) Protected by a ground fault circuit interrupter protection device.

(ii) CSA listed Type NMD cable, No. 8 AWG and larger, must:

(A) Utilize an equipment grounding conductor sized according to the requirements of the NEC in effect at the time of the installation;

(B) Be protected by a ground fault circuit interrupter protection device; or

(C) Be replaced.

(c) Other types of wiring and cable must be:

(i) Replaced with wiring listed or field evaluated in accordance with U.S. standards by a laboratory approved by the department; or

(ii) Protected by a ground fault circuit interrupter protection device and arc fault circuit protection device.

(d) Equipment, other than wiring or panelboards, manufactured and installed prior to 1997, must be listed and identified by laboratory labels approved by the department or CSA labels.

(e) All panelboards must be listed and identified by testing laboratory labels approved by the department with the following qualifications:

(i) CSA listed panelboards labeled “Suitable for Use as Service Equipment” will be considered to be approved as “Suitable for Use only as Service Equipment.”

(ii) CSA listed panelboards must be limited to a maximum of 42 circuits.

(iii) CSA listed panelboards used as lighting and appliance panelboards, as described in the NEC, must meet all current requirements of the NEC and this chapter.

(f) Any wiring or panelboards replaced or changed as a result of the move must meet current requirements of Chapter 19.28 RCW and this chapter.

(g) The location, type, and ground fault circuit interrupter protection of receptacles and equipment in a bathroom, kitchen, basement, garage, or outdoor area must meet the Washington requirements in effect at the time the wiring was installed.

(h) Four 15-ampere, kitchen small appliance circuits will be accepted in lieu of two 20-ampere, kitchen small appliance circuits. Receptacles will not be required to be added on kitchen peninsular or island counters.

(i) Spacing requirements for all other receptacles must meet the Washington requirements in effect at the time the wiring was installed.

(j) Receptacles installed above baseboard or fixed wall space heaters must be removed and the outlet box covered with a blank cover. The receptacle is required to be relocated as closely as possible to the existing location.

(k) Lighting outlet and switch locations must meet the Washington requirements in effect at the time the wiring was installed.

(l) Dedicated 20-ampere small appliance circuits are not required in dining rooms.

(m) Electric water heater branch circuits must be adequate for the load.

(n) The location, type, and circuit protection of feeders must meet the Washington State requirements in effect at the time the wiring was installed.

(Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. A))


16.05.157 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code adopted.

The 2015 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, as adopted by the State Building Code Council at Chapters 51-50 and 51-51 WAC, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted. The provisions of this code shall apply to the construction, alteration, movement, renovation, replacement, repair and maintenance of aquatic recreation facilities, pools and spas. The pools and spas covered by this code are either permanent or temporary, and shall be only those that are designed and manufactured to be connected to a circulation system and that are intended for swimming, bathing or wading. Swimming pools, spas and other aquatic recreation facilities shall comply with the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, where the facility is one of the following:

(1) For the sole use of residents and invited guests at a single-family dwelling;

(2) For the sole use of residents and invited guests of a duplex owned by the residents; or

(3) Operated exclusively for physical therapy or rehabilitation and under the supervision of a licensed medical practitioner.

All other “water recreation facilities” as defined in RCW 70.90.110 are regulated under Chapters 246-260 and 246-262 WAC. Public swimming pool barriers are regulated by WAC 246-260-031(4). (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. A))


16.05.160 Documents to be filed and available for public inspection.

At least one copy of the codes, regulations, and standards adopted by reference in this chapter, in the form in which they were adopted, shall be filed in the office of the City clerk and shall be available for use and examination by the public pursuant to RCW 35A.12.140. The City clerk may elect to have these copies kept in the permit center office for use by the public. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 2. Formerly § 16.05.170) 


16.05.170 Violation.

Any person, firm, corporation or organization violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the provisions of SMC Title 23, code enforcement. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 2. Formerly § 16.05.180) 


16.05.180 Adoption of additional state codes.

The following chapter of the Washington Administrative Code, as presently existing and as may be subsequently amended, is adopted by reference: Chapter 51-19 WAC, Washington State Historic Building Code. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 2. Formerly § 16.05.190) 


16.05.190 Code conflicts resolution.

(1) In case of conflict among the codes enumerated in this title, the first named code shall govern over those following.

(2) In case of conflict between other codes and provisions adopted by this chapter, the code or provision that is the most restrictive, as determined by the building official, shall apply. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 2. Formerly § 16.05.200) 


16.05.200 Liability.

This chapter shall not be construed to relieve or lessen the responsibility of any person, partnership, firm, association, or corporation owning, building, altering, constructing, or moving any building or structure as defined in the building code, nor shall the City or any officer, employee, or agent of the City assume such liability by reason of any inspection authorized in this chapter or certificate of inspection issued by the City or any of its officers, employees or agents. This chapter shall not create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be specially protected by the terms of this chapter. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 2. Formerly § 16.05.210)


Chapter 16.10 MOVING BUILDINGS

Sections:

16.10.010    Purpose – Scope.

16.10.020    Definitions.

16.10.030    Permit required.

16.10.040    Permit – Application information.

16.10.050    Permit – Application – Deposits and fees.

16.10.060    Permit – Conditions for granting.

16.10.070    Special requirements.

16.10.080    Permit refused – When.

16.10.090    Violation – Penalty.


16.10.010 Purpose – Scope.

It is the purpose of this chapter to establish standards, including minimum requirements for the moving of all buildings and other structures within the corporate limits of the City, and to provide for the issuance of a permit, collection of various fees, and inspectional services for all such movements. (Ord. O99-41 § 1)


16.10.020 Definitions.

Definitions as used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates, shall be as follows:

(1) “Building” means and includes every building, house, structure, or other like object;

(2) “Housemover” means any person, firm, or corporation engaged in the business of moving houses, buildings, structures, or other like object;

(3) “Person” means and includes any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind. (Ord. O99-41 § 2)


16.10.030 Permit required.

No person shall move any building over, upon, along, or across any public street without a written permit therefor issued by the City building official. (Ord. O99-41 § 3)


16.10.040 Permit – Application information.

The City shall furnish application for a permit. The application for permit shall contain or have attached thereto the following information:

(1) Name and address of applicant;

(2) Location of building to be moved (present address if assigned);

(3) Location of proposed site to which building is to be moved;

(4) Date and time requested for movement;

(5) Map or description of requested route to be taken; and

(6) Height, width, and length of building to be moved and truck or equipment to be used for moving the building. (Ord. O99-41 § 4)


16.10.050 Permit – Application – Deposits and fees.

(1) Every applicant before being granted a permit shall pay an application filing fee in the amount as set forth by resolution in addition to any other required review fees.

(2) An application hereunder shall be accompanied by the following:

(a) A cash deposit or corporate surety bond in the sum of $10,000 or such greater amount as the building official determines necessary as indemnity for any damage that the City may sustain by reason of damage or injury to any highway, street or alley, sidewalk, or other property of the City, which may be caused by or be incidental to the removal of any building over, along, or across any street in the City and to indemnify the City against any claim of damages to persons or private property; and

(b) A public liability insurance policy providing $250,000 or such greater amount as the building official determines necessary to satisfy any claim by private individuals, firms, or corporations arising out of, caused by, or incidental to the moving of any building over, along, or across any street in the City. (Ord. O99-41 § 5)


16.10.060 Permit – Conditions for granting.

As a condition of securing a permit for a relocation within the City the permittee shall furnish the City with a set of plans and specifications for the completed building to include a plot plan prepared by a registered engineer or land surveyor from the state of Washington showing in detail the placement of the proposed structure upon the lot within the City. (Ord. O99-41 § 6)


16.10.070 Special requirements.

(1) Escort. The housemover shall provide at least two escorts for the purpose of regulating traffic along the route such building is being moved; provided, that any such escorts shall be at the expense of the housemover. The building official shall approve the route selected.

(2) Time. The City shall designate the time of the movement. Every such permit shall become and be void unless such removal shall be completed and the building removed from the public right-of-way within the time specified in the application for such permit; provided, however, that the City may extend such time when the moving of any building is rendered impractical by reason of inclemency of the weather or other causes not within the control of the housemover. If more than one day will be required to move the building, the building official shall designate where the building shall be located when not being moved.

(3) Lights. No person moving any building over, upon, along, or across any public street shall fail, neglect, or refuse to keep a red light (or such other devices as the City may require) at all times at each corner of such building and at the end of any projection thereon while the same is located in or upon any public street.

(4) Notice to Utilities. Before any building shall be moved the housemover shall give written notice to the public utilities or agencies designated in the application not less than three days in advance of the proposed move.

(5)  Condition of Lot. After the completion of any move the area or lot upon which the structure was formerly located shall be left in a safe and sanitary condition, including, but not limited to, the following: the sanitary sewer connection, if one exists, shall be plugged and marked; the water meter shall be removed and the line satisfactorily capped and marked; the electrical and telephone lines removed; all wells shall be capped or filled; and all trash shall be removed therefrom to the satisfaction of the building official. (Ord. O99-41 § 7)


16.10.080 Permit refused – When.

The building official shall not issue a permit if it is found that:

(1) Any application requirement or any fee or deposit requirement has not been complied with;

(2) The building is too large to move without endangering persons or property in the City;

(3) The building is in such a state of deterioration or disrepair or is otherwise so structurally unsafe that it could not be moved without endangering persons and property in the City;

(4) The building is structurally unsafe or unfit for the purpose for which moved, if the removal location is in the City;

(5) The applicant’s equipment is unsafe and that persons and property would be endangered by its use;

(6) Zoning or other ordinances would be violated by the building in its new location;

(7) The applicant has not furnished proof that all affected public and private utilities, including those with electricity, gas, telephone, water, and sewer have been notified of the time of the move and the route to be followed; and

(8) For any other reason persons or property in the City would be endangered by the moving of the building.

Approval of the application by the police department and community development department shall be a condition precedent to issuance of the permit. (Ord. O99-41 § 8)


16.10.090 Violation – Penalty.

Every person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not to exceed $500.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days or by both fine and imprisonment. Each separate day or any portion thereof during which any violation of this chapter occurs or continues shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in this section. (Ord. O99-41 § 9)


Chapter 16.15 CLEARING AND GRADING

Sections:

16.15.010    Purpose.

16.15.020    Definitions.

16.15.030    Administration.

16.15.040    Hazards.

16.15.050    Clearing and grading permit required – Exceptions.

16.15.060    Applications – Complete applications.

16.15.070    Permit requirements.

16.15.080    Liability insurance required – Exception.

16.15.090    Operating conditions and standards of performance.

16.15.100    Shorelines.

16.15.110    Enforcement.

16.15.120    Clearing standards.


16.15.010 Purpose.

(1) This chapter is intended to regulate clearing and removal of vegetation, excavation, grading, and earthwork construction including cuts and fills, gravel pits, and dumping operations within the City of Sammamish in order to protect public health, safety, and welfare by:

(a) Minimizing adverse stormwater impacts generated by the removal of vegetation and alteration of landforms;

(b) Protecting water quality from the adverse impacts associated with erosion and sedimentation;

(c) Minimizing aquatic and terrestrial wildlife habitat loss caused by the removal of vegetation;

(d) Protecting sensitive areas from adverse clearing and grading activities;

(e) Preventing damage to property and harm to persons caused by excavations and fills;

(f) Establishing administrative procedures for the issuance of permits, approval of plans, and inspection of clearing and grading operations; and

(g) Providing penalties for the violation of this chapter.

(2) This chapter establishes the administrative procedure for issuance of permits, provides for approval of plans and inspection of clearing and grading operations, and provides for penalties for the violation of this chapter. (Ord. O2003-132 § 2)


16.15.020 Definitions.

Certain words and phrases used in this chapter, unless otherwise clearly indicated by their context, mean as follows:

(1) “Applicant” is a property owner or a public agency or public or private utility that owns a right-of-way or other easement or has been adjudicated the right to such an easement pursuant to RCW 8.12.090, or any person or entity designated or named in writing by the property or easement owner to be the applicant, in an application for a development proposal, permit, or approval.

(2) “Bench” is a relatively level step excavated or constructed on the face of a graded slope surface for drainage and maintenance purposes.

(3) “Berm” is a mound or raised area used for the purpose of screening a site or operation.

(4) “Civil engineer” means a professional engineer registered in the state of Washington to practice in the field of civil works.

(5) “Clearing” means the cutting or removal of vegetation or other organic plant material by physical, mechanical, chemical, or any other means.

(6) “Compaction” is the densification, settlement or packing of soil in such a way that permeability of the soil is reduced. Compaction may also refer to the densification of a fill by mechanical means.

(7) “Cutting” is the severing of the main trunk or stems from close to or at the soil surface or at a point up to 25 percent of the total vegetation height.

(8) “Director” means the director of the department of community development.

(9) “DBH” means the diameter of a tree as measured from breast height (54 inches above the ground).

(10) “Earth material” is any rock, natural soil, or any combination thereof.

(11) “Erosion” is the wearing away of the ground surface as the result of the movement of wind, water and/or ice.

(12) “Excavation” is the removal of earth material.

(13) “Fill” is a deposit of earth material placed by mechanical means.

(14) “Grade” means the elevation of the ground surface.

(a) “Existing grade” is the grade prior to grading.

(b) “Rough grade” is the stage at which the grade approximately conforms to the approved plan as required in SMC 16.15.070.

(c) “Finish grade” is the final grade of the site that conforms to the approved plan as required in SMC 16.15.070.

(15) “Grading” is any excavating, filling, removing of the duff layer, or combination thereof.

(16) “Grading and clearing permit” means the permit required by this chapter for grading and clearing activities, including temporary permits.

(17) “Pruning” means cutting or removal of branches and leaving at least two-thirds of the existing tree branch structure. Topping and removal of more than one-third of the existing limbs shall only be permitted under the supervision of a certified arborist.

(18) “Reclamation” means the final grading and land restoration of a site.

(19) “Shorelines” means those lands defined as shorelines in the State Shorelines Management Act of 1971.

(20) “Site” is any lot or parcel of land or contiguous combination thereof where projects covered by this chapter are performed or permitted where a public street or way may intervene.

(21) “Slope” is an inclined ground surface, the inclination of which is expressed as a ratio of vertical distance to horizontal distance.

(22) “Soil engineer” means a person who has earned a degree in geology from an accredited college or university, or a person who has equivalent educational training and has experience as a practicing geologist.

(23) “Structure” is that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts jointed together in some definite manner.

(24) “Terrace” is a relatively level step excavated or constructed on the face of a graded slope surface for drainage and maintenance purposes.

(25) “Tidelands” means that portion of the land that is covered and uncovered by the ebb and flood tide.

(26) “Tree” is a large woody perennial plant usually with a single main stem or trunk and generally over 25 feet tall at maturity.

(27) “Understory” is the vegetation layer of a forest that includes shrubs, herbs, grasses, and grass like plants, but excludes native trees.

(28) “Vegetation” means any and all organic plant life growing at, below, or above the soil surface. (Ord. O2016-429 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 2, 2005; Ord. O2004-149 § 1; Ord. O2003-132 § 2)


16.15.030 Administration.

The director is authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter.

(1) Inspections. The director is authorized to make such inspections and take such actions as may be required to enforce the provisions of this chapter.

(2) Right of Entry. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter, or whenever the director has reasonable cause to believe that any land, building, structure, premises, or portion thereof is being used in violation of this chapter, the director may enter such land, building, structure, premises, or portion thereof at all reasonable times to inspect the same or perform any duty imposed upon the director by this chapter; provided, that if such building, land, structure, premises or portion thereof is occupied, he or she shall first present proper credentials and demand entry; and if such land, building, structure, premises, or portion thereof be unoccupied, he or she shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the land, building, structure, premises, or portion thereof and demand entry.

No owner or occupant or any other person having charge, care, or control of any building, land, structure, premises, or portion thereof shall fail or neglect, after proper demand, to promptly permit entry thereon by the director for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this chapter. Any person violating this subsection is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. O2003-132 § 2)


16.15.040 Hazards. 

Whenever the director determines that an existing site, as a result of clearing or grading, excavation, embankment, or fill has become a hazard to life and limb, or endangers property, or adversely affects the safety, use, or stability of a public way or drainage channel, the owner of the property upon which the clearing, grading, excavation, or fill is located, or other person or agent in control of said property, upon receipt of notice in writing from the director, shall within the period specified therein restore the site affected by such clearing or grading or repair or eliminate such excavation or embankment or fill so as to eliminate the hazard and be in conformance with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. O2003-132 § 2)


16.15.050 Clearing and grading permit required – Exceptions.

For development or clearing and grading activity located within critical areas and associated regulatory buffers as defined by Chapter 21A.50 SMC, no person shall do any clearing or grading without first having obtained a clearing and grading permit. For development or clearing and grading activity located outside of critical areas and associated regulatory buffers as defined by Chapter 21A.50 SMC, no person shall do any clearing or grading without first having obtained a clearing and grading permit except for the following:

(1) An on-site excavation or fill for basements and footings of a building, retaining wall, parking lot, or other structure authorized by a valid building permit. This shall not exempt any fill made with the material from such excavation nor exempt any excavation having an unsupported height greater than four feet after the completion of such structure;

(2) Maintenance of existing driveways or private access roads within their existing road prisms; provided, that the performance and restoration requirements of this chapter are met and best management practices are utilized to protect water quality;

(3) Any grading within a publicly owned road right-of-way;

(4) Clearing or grading by a public agency for the following routine maintenance activities:

(a) Roadside ditch cleaning, provided the ditch does not contain salmonids;

(b) Pavement maintenance;

(c) Normal grading of gravel shoulders;

(d) Maintenance of culverts;

(e) Maintenance of flood control or other approved surface water management facilities;

(f) Routine clearing within road right-of-way;

(5) Cemetery graves;

(6) Any clearing or grading that has been approved by the director as part of a commercial site development permit and for which a financial guarantee has been posted;

(7) The following activities are exempt from the clearing requirements of this chapter and no permit shall be required:

(a) Normal and routine maintenance of existing lawns and landscaping, including up to 50 cubic yards of top soil, mulch, or bark materials added to existing landscaped areas;

(b) Normal and routine horticultural activities associated with commercial orchards, nurseries, or Christmas tree farms subject to the limitations on the use of pesticides in critical areas as set out in Chapter 21A.50 SMC. This does not include clearing or grading in order to develop or expand such activities;

(c) Normal and routine maintenance of existing public park properties and private and public golf courses;

(d) Pruning and limbing of vegetation for maintenance of above-ground electrical and telecommunication facilities;

(8) The cutting and removal of any coniferous tree of less than eight inches DBH or any deciduous tree of less than 12 inches DBH;

(9) The pruning, limbing, and general maintenance of trees outside of environmentally critical areas and buffers, consistent with the requirements of Chapter 21A.37 SMC;

(10) An excavation that is less than two feet in depth or does not create a cut slope greater than four feet in height and steeper than one unit vertical in two units horizontal (66.7 percent slope), that does not exceed 50 cubic yards on any one lot and does not obstruct a drainage course;

(11) A fill less than one foot in depth and placed on natural terrain with a slope flatter than one unit vertical in five units horizontal (20 percent slope), or less than three feet in depth, not intended to support structures, that does not exceed 50 cubic yards on any one lot and does not obstruct a drainage course;

(12) Normal routine maintenance of existing single-family drainage systems, including but not limited to excavation to replace existing pipes, catch basins and infiltration trenches, that does not exceed 50 cubic yards on any one lot and does not obstruct a drainage course; and

(13) Installation of sanitary septic systems with King County health district approval and inspection. (Ord. O2019-482 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2009-249 § 1; Ord. O2005-193 § 2, 2005; Ord. O2005-175 § 1; Ord. O2004-149 § 2; Ord. O2003-132 § 2)


16.15.060 Applications – Complete applications.

(1) For the purposes of determining the application of time periods and procedures adopted by this chapter, applications for permits authorized by this chapter shall be considered complete as of the date of submittal upon determination by the department that the materials submitted contain the following:

(a) For clearing and grading permits:

(i) A legal description of the property;

(ii) A 1:1,000 scale vicinity map with a north arrow; 

(iii) Grading plans including:

(A) Horizontal and vertical scale; 

(B) Size and location of existing improvements within 50 feet of the project, indicating which improvements will remain and which improvements will be removed;

(C) Existing and proposed contours at maximum five-foot intervals, and extending for 100 feet beyond the project edge;

(D) At least two cross-sections, one in each direction, showing existing and proposed contours and horizontal and vertical scales; and

(E) Temporary and permanent erosion-sediment control facilities; 

(iv) The following plans must be stamped and signed by a registered civil engineer, licensed to practice in the state of Washington:

(A) Permanent drainage facilities;

(B) Structures to be built or construction proposed in landslide hazard areas; and

(C) Proposed construction or placement of a structure.

(b) A completed environmental checklist, if required by Chapter 20.15 SMC, State Environmental Policy Act Procedures.

(c) Satisfaction of all requirements for grading permits under SMC 16.15.070.

(2) Applications found to contain material errors shall not be deemed complete until such material errors are corrected.

(3) The director may waive specific submittal requirements determined to be unnecessary for review of an application. (Ord. O2003-132 § 2)


16.15.070 Permit requirements.

Except as exempted in SMC 16.15.050, no person shall do any clearing or grading without first obtaining a clearing and grading permit from the director. A separate permit shall be required for each site and may cover both excavations and fills.

(1) Application. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an application therefor in writing on a form furnished for that purpose. The director shall prescribe the form by which application is made. No application shall be accepted unless it is completed consistent with the requirements of this chapter and the permit process and procedures chapter of SMC Title 20. In addition to the requirements of SMC 20.05.040 every application shall:

(a) Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which application is made;

(b) Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done, by lot, block, tract, and house and street address, or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed site;

(c) Identify and describe those critical areas as defined in Chapter 21A.50 SMC on or adjacent to the site;

(d) Indicate the estimated quantities of work involved;

(e) Identify any clearing restrictions contained in SMC 16.15.120, wildlife habitat corridors pursuant to Chapter 21A.30 SMC, critical drainage areas established by administrative rule or property-specific development standards pursuant to SMC 21A.50.225;

(f) Be accompanied by plans and specifications as required in subsections (2) and (3) of this section;

(g) Designate who the applicant is, on a form prescribed by the department, except that the application may be accepted and reviewed without meeting this requirement when a public agency or public or private utility is applying for a permit for property on which the agency or utility does not own an easement or right-of-way and the following three requirements are met:

(i) The name of the agency or public or private utility is shown on the application as the applicant;

(ii) The agency or public or private utility includes in the complete application an affidavit declaring that notice of the pending application has been given to all owners of property to which the application applies, on a form provided by the department; and

(iii) The form designating the applicant is submitted to the department prior to permit issuance; and

(h) Give such other information as may be required by the director.

(2) Plans and Specifications. When required by the director, each application for a grading permit shall be accompanied by six sets of plans and specifications and other supporting data as may be required. The plans and specifications shall be prepared and signed by a civil engineer or landscape architect registered to practice in the state of Washington when required by the director; provided, the director may require additional studies prepared by a qualified soils specialist. If the plans and specifications are returned as a result of permit denial or any other reason, they shall be returned to the applicant.

(3) Information on Plans and in Specifications. Plans shall be drawn to an engineer’s scale upon substantial paper or cloth and shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that the plans will conform to the provisions of this chapter and all other relevant laws, rules, regulations, and standards. The first sheet of each set of plans shall give the location of the work and the name and address of the owner and the name of the person by whom the plans were prepared. The plans shall include the following minimum information:

(a) General vicinity of the proposed site;

(b) Property limits and accurate contours of existing ground and details of terrain and area drainage;

(c) Limiting dimensions, elevations, or finished contours to be achieved by the grading, proposed drainage channels, and related construction;

(d) Location of all proposed cleared areas; 

(e) Location of any open space tracts or conservation easements if required pursuant to:

(i) SMC 16.15.120; 

(ii) Chapter 21A.30 SMC;

(iii) Critical drainage area; or 

(iv) Property-specific development standards pursuant to Chapter 21A.85 SMC; 

(f) Calculations of the total proposed area cleared on site as a percentage of the total site area;

(g) Detailed plans of all surface and subsurface drainage devices, walls, cribbing, dams, berms, settling ponds, and other protective devices to be constructed with or as a part of the proposed work, together with the maps showing the drainage area and the estimated runoff of the area served by any drains;

(h) A determination of whether drainage review applies to the project pursuant to Chapter 9.04 KCC as adopted by SMC Title 13, and, if applicable, all drainage plans and documentation consistent with King County surface water design manual requirements;

(i) Location of any buildings or structures on the property where the work is to be performed and the location of any buildings or structures on land of adjacent owners that are within 50 feet of the property or that may be affected by the proposed grading operations;

(j) Other information as may be required by the director; and

(k) If the clearing or grading is proposed to take place in or adjacent to a sensitive area as regulated in Chapter 21A.50 SMC, provide information as required by that chapter.

(4) Granting of Permits.

(a) The director shall determine if the proposed grading will adversely affect the character of the site for present lawful uses or with the future development of the site and adjacent properties for building or other purposes as indicated by the interim comprehensive plan, the shoreline master program, and the development code. 

(b) After an application has been filed and reviewed, the director shall also ascertain whether such grading work complies with the other provisions of this chapter. If the application and plans so comply, or if they are corrected or amended so as to comply, the director may issue to the applicant a grading permit. A grading permit shall be valid for the number of days stated in the permit but in no case shall the period be more than two years; provided, that when operating conditions have been met, the permit may be renewed every two years, or less if a shorter approval and/or renewal period is specified by the director.

(c) No grading permit shall be issued until approved by federal, state, and local agencies having jurisdiction by laws or regulations.

(d) Upon approval of the application and issuance of the grading permit, no work shall be done that is not provided for in the permit. The director is authorized to inspect the premises at any reasonable time to determine if the work is in accordance with the permit application and plans.

(e) The permits from the director shall be required regardless of any permits issued by any other department of City government or any other governmental agency who may be interested in certain aspects of the proposed work. Where work for which a permit is required by this chapter is started or proceeded with prior to obtaining the permit, the violator shall be subject to such civil penalties as provided in Chapter 23.40 SMC. However, the payment of such civil penalties shall not relieve any persons from fully complying with the requirements of this chapter in the execution of the work nor from any other penalties prescribed thereon. (Ord. O2009-249 § 1; Ord. O2003-132 § 2)


16.15.080 Liability insurance required – Exception.

The permittee shall maintain a liability policy in the amount of $100,000 per individual, $300,000 per occurrence, and $50,000 property damage, and shall name the City of Sammamish as an additional insured. 

Exception: Liability insurance requirements may be waived for projects involving less than 10,000 cubic yards. Liability insurance shall not be required of other public agencies. (Ord. O2003-132 § 2)


16.15.090 Operating conditions and standards of performance. 

(1) Any activity that will clear, grade, or otherwise disturb the site, whether requiring a clearing or grading permit or not, shall provide erosion and sediment control (ESC) that prevents, to the maximum extent possible, the transport of sediment from the site to drainage facilities, water resources, and adjacent properties. Erosion and sediment controls shall be applied as specified by the temporary ESC measures and performance criteria and implementation requirements in the City’s erosion and sediment control standards.

(2) Cuts and fills shall conform to the following provisions unless otherwise approved by the director:

(a) Grading.

(i) Excavation. Excavation shall not exceed 10 feet.

(ii) Fill. Fill shall not exceed five feet.

(iii) Deviations. Deviation from excavation and fill limits shall be allowed as part of the review of a Type 1, Type 2 or Type 3 permit application to accommodate instances where driveway access would exceed 15 percent slope if additional fill is not permitted; where the five-foot fill maximum generally is observed but limited additional fill is necessary to accommodate localized undulations or variations in existing topography; where necessary to achieve a balance of excavation and fill associated with a project; or where a building foundation, access grade, drainage, or other necessary component of a proposed structure or infrastructure is determined infeasible. Deviations from the excavation and fill limits shall be subject to the following limitations:

(A) The proposed deviation is the minimum necessary to resolve the design conflict or allow a balance of excavation and fill as demonstrated through written engineering analysis prepared by a qualified consultant and verified by the City;

(B) The proposed deviation will not result in impact to the root zone and tree protection areas required for retained significant trees under SMC 21A.37.270;

(C) All excavation or fill deviations shall be located outside of required structure setbacks; and

(D) All fill in excess of four feet shall be engineered.

(iv) Exceptions. The excavation and fill limitations of this subsection shall not apply to road construction, necessary underground infrastructure, and structures that do not change the surface elevation (e.g., vaults, utility trenches, foundations, basements, etc.).

(b) Permit Approval. On sites where development is proposed or anticipated, land clearing shall not take place until a construction permit is approved, addressing all land use requirements and presenting final engineering design consistent with applicable development standards and adopted Public Works Standards.

(c) Slope. No slope of cut and fill surfaces shall be steeper than is safe for the intended use and shall not exceed two horizontal to one vertical, unless otherwise approved by the director.

(d) Erosion Control. All disturbed areas including faces of cuts and fill slopes shall be prepared and maintained to control erosion in compliance with subsection (1) of this section.

(e) Preparation of Ground. The ground surface shall be prepared to receive fill by removing unsuitable material such as concrete slabs, tree stumps, brush, and car bodies.

(f) Fill Material. Except in an approved sanitary landfill, only earth materials that have no rock or similar irreducible material with a maximum dimension greater than 18 inches shall be used.

(g) Drainage. Provisions shall be made to:

(i) Prevent any surface water or seepage from damaging the cut face of any excavations or the sloping face of a fill;

(ii) Carry any surface waters that are or might be concentrated as a result of a fill or excavation to a natural watercourse, or by other means approved by the City engineer.

(h) Bench/Terrace. Benches, if required, at least 10 feet in width shall be back-sloped and shall be established at not more than 25 feet vertical intervals to control surface drainage and debris. Swales or ditches on benches shall have a maximum gradient of five percent.

(i) Access Roads – Maintenance. Access roads to grading sites shall be maintained and located to the satisfaction of the City engineer to minimize problems of dust, mud, and traffic circulation.

(j) Access Roads – Gate. Access roads to grading sites shall be controlled by a gate when required by the director.

(k) Warning Signs. Signs warning of hazardous conditions, if such exist, shall be affixed at locations as required by the director.

(l) Fencing. Fencing, where required by the director, to protect life, limb, and property, shall be installed with lockable gates that must be closed and locked when not working the site. The fence must be no less than five feet in height and the fence material shall have no horizontal opening larger than two inches.

(m) Setbacks. The tops and the toes of cut and fill slopes shall be set back from property boundaries as far as necessary for safety of the adjacent properties and to prevent damage resulting from water runoff or erosion of the slopes.

The tops and the toes of cut and fill slopes shall be set back from structures as far as is necessary for adequacy of foundation support and to prevent damage as a result of water runoff or erosion of the slopes.

Slopes and setbacks shall be determined by the director.

(n) Excavations to Water-Producing Depth. All excavations must either be made to a water-producing depth or grade to permit natural drainage. The excavations made to a water-producing depth shall be reclaimed in the following manner:

(i) The depth of the excavations must not be less than two feet measured below the low water mark.

(ii) All banks shall be sloped to the water line no steeper than three feet horizontal to one foot vertical.

(iii) All banks shall be sloped from the low-water line into the pond or lake with a minimum slope of three feet horizontal to one foot vertical to a distance of at least 25 feet.

(iv) In no event shall the term “water-producing depth” as herein used be construed to allow stagnant or standing water to collect or remain in the excavation.

(v) The intent of this provision is to allow reclamation of the land that will result in the establishment of a lake of sufficient area and depth of water to be useful for residential or recreational purposes.

(o) Hours of Operation. Hours of operation, unless otherwise authorized by the director, shall be between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. (Ord. O2019-482 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 2)


16.15.100 Shorelines.

(1) Any fill placed upon land adjacent to or beneath any stream or water body shall be contained and placed so as to prevent adverse effect upon other lands.

(2) No permit required by this chapter shall be issued for grading upon the shorelines until approved by the appropriate federal, state, and local authority.

(3) For grading that requires a shoreline management substantial development permit, the conditions of the shoreline management substantial development permit shall be incorporated into the conditions of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter and shall be subject to the inspection and enforcement procedures authorized by this chapter. (Ord. O2003-132 § 2)


16.15.110 Enforcement. 

(1) The director of community development is authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter, the ordinances and resolutions codified in it, and any rules and regulations promulgated thereunder pursuant to the enforcement and penalty provisions of SMC Title 23. 

(2) If clearing inconsistent with the purposes and requirements of this chapter has occurred on a site, the City shall not accept or grant any development permits or approvals for the site unless the applicant adequately restores the site. The director shall require appropriate restoration of the site under an approved restoration plan that shall include a time schedule for compliance if significant resource damage has or may occur. If restoration has not been completed within the time established by the department, the director shall order restoration using funds authorized by the City council for this purpose and seek restitution from the property owner through liens or other available legal methods. (Ord. O2003-132 § 2)


16.15.120 Clearing standards.

(1) For clearing and grading permits issued under this chapter, the current clearing standards contained in this section and in the following regulations shall apply:

(a) The sensitive areas code, Chapter 21A.50 SMC, and its adopted administrative rules;

(b) Property-specific development standards pursuant to Chapter 21A.85 SMC;

(c) Critical drainage area designations identified by adopted administrative rule;

(d) Wildlife habitat corridors pursuant to Chapter 21A.30 SMC;

(e) Shoreline Management Plan, SMC Title 25; and

(f) Development Standards – Landscaping and Irrigation, Chapter 21A.35 SMC.

(2) Within sensitive areas designated pursuant to Chapter 21A.50 SMC, permitted alterations, development standards, mitigation requirements, activities and uses shall be limited to those specified in that chapter or elsewhere in the SMC. 

(3) In addition to the uses otherwise allowed in areas subject to the native vegetation retention requirements in subsections (1)(b) through (f) of this section, the following activities or permitted alterations are allowed under a clearing permit:

(a) Passive recreation uses and related facilities, including pedestrian and bicycle trails, nature viewing areas, fishing and camping areas, and other similar uses. Cleared areas shall be the minimum necessary, and all other applicable standards shall be required consistent with the standards and requirements in Chapters 21A.30 and 21A.85 SMC and any other requirements in the SMC. Within wildlife habitat corridors, trails shall be designed and constructed according to the trail design standards in Chapter 21A.30 SMC and no other recreation uses shall be permitted in the 150-foot minimum width of the corridor;

(b) Utilities and utility easements, including surface water facilities; provided, that such uses are within or adjacent to existing road or utility easements whenever possible. Within wildlife habitat corridors, existing or multiple utility uses within established easements shall be allowed within the 150-foot minimum width of the corridor. Development of new utility corridors shall be allowed within wildlife habitat corridors only when multiple uses of existing easements are not feasible and the utility corridors are sited and developed using City-approved best management practices to minimize disturbance; and

(c) Removal of dangerous and/or damaged trees.

(4) Construction projects can be a significant contributor of pollution to streams and wetlands. Therefore, from October 1st through March 31st:

(a) Clearing and grading shall only be permitted if shown to the satisfaction of the director that silt-laden runoff exceeding standards in the applicable City-adopted stormwater requirements will be prevented from leaving the construction site through a combination of the following:

(i) Site conditions including vegetative coverage, slope, soil type and proximity to receiving waters; 

(ii) Limitations on activities and the extent of disturbed areas; and

(iii) Proposed erosion and sedimentation control measures.

(b) The director shall set forth in writing the basis for approval or denial of clearing or grading during this period.

(c) Clearing and grading will be allowed only if there is installation and maintenance of an erosion and sedimentation control plan approved by the department that shall define any limits on clearing and grading or specific erosion and sediment control measures required during this period. Alternate best management practices may be approved or required on-site by the inspector.

(d) If, during the course of construction, silt-laden runoff exceeding standards in the applicable City-adopted stormwater requirements leaves the construction site, or if clearing and grading limits or erosion and sediment control measures shown in the approved plan are not maintained, a notice of violation shall be issued.

(e) If the erosion and sediment control problem defined in the violation is not adequately repaired within 24 hours of the notice of violation, then a notice and order may be issued by the inspector to install adequate erosion and sediment control measures to stop silt-laden runoff from leaving the site. The notice and order may also require the contractor to discontinue any further clearing or grading, except for erosion and sediment control maintenance and repair, until the following March 31st.

(f) The following activities are exempt from the seasonal clearing and grading requirements of this subsection:

(i) Routine maintenance and necessary repair of erosion and sediment control facilities;

(ii) Routine maintenance of public facilities or existing utility structures as provided by SMC 21A.50.050;

(iii) Activities where there is 100 percent infiltration of surface water runoff within the site in approved and installed erosion and sedimentation control facilities;

(iv) Typical landscaping activities of existing single-family residences that do not require a permit; and 

(v) Public agency response to emergencies that threaten the public health, safety, and welfare. (Ord. O2005-175 §1; Ord. O2005-172 § 1; Ord. O2003-132 § 2)


Chapter 16.20 CONSTRUCTION ADMINISTRATIVE CODE

Sections: 

16.20.010    Short title.

16.20.015    Purpose.

16.20.020    Scope.

16.20.025    Definitions.

16.20.030    Appendices.

16.20.035    Intent.

16.20.040    Referenced codes.

16.20.045    International Building Code.

16.20.050    International Residential Code – Scope.

16.20.055    Mechanical code – Scope.

16.20.060    Liquid propane gas code – Scope.

16.20.065    Natural gas code – Scope.

16.20.070    Plumbing code – Scope.

16.20.073    Sammamish Electrical Code – Scope.

16.20.075    Washington State Energy Code.

16.20.077    2015 International Existing Building Code.

16.20.078    International Swimming Pool and Spa Code.

16.20.080    General applicability.

16.20.085    Other laws.

16.20.090    Application of references.

16.20.095    Referenced codes and standards.

16.20.100    Partial invalidity.

16.20.105    Existing structures.

16.20.107    Moved buildings.

16.20.108    Requirements not covered by code.

16.20.109    Structures in areas of special flood hazard.

16.20.110    Creation of enforcement agency.

16.20.115    Appointment.

16.20.120    Deputies.

16.20.125    Duties and power of building official.

16.20.130    Applications and permits.

16.20.135    Notices and orders.

16.20.138    Tagging of buildings.

16.20.140    Inspections.

16.20.145    Identification.

16.20.150    Right of entry.

16.20.155    Department records.

16.20.160    Liability.

16.20.165    Approved materials and equipment.

16.20.170    Used materials and equipment.

16.20.175    Modifications.

16.20.180    Alternative materials, design and methods of construction and equipment.

16.20.185    Research reports.

16.20.190    Tests.

16.20.195    Permits required.

16.20.197    Electrical permits required.

16.20.200    Work exempt from permit.

16.20.205    Emergency repairs.

16.20.210    Ordinary repairs.

16.20.215    Application for permit.

16.20.220    Action on application.

16.20.225    Time limitation of application.

16.20.230    Validity of permit.

16.20.235    Expiration of issued permits.

16.20.237    Permit renewals.

16.20.240    Suspension or revocation.

16.20.245    Placement of permit.

16.20.248    Floor and roof design loads.

16.20.250    Construction documents – Submittal.

16.20.255    Information on construction documents.

16.20.260    Fire protection system shop drawings.

16.20.265    Means of egress.

16.20.270    Exterior wall envelope.

16.20.273    Building enclosure design requirements of Chapter 64.55 RCW.

16.20.275    Site plan.

16.20.280    Examination of documents.

16.20.285    Use of consultants.

16.20.290    Approval of construction documents.

16.20.295    Phased approval.

16.20.300    Design professional in responsible charge.

16.20.305    Deferred submittals.

16.20.310    Amended construction documents.

16.20.315    Retention of construction documents.

16.20.320    Temporary structure – General.

16.20.325    Temporary structure – Conformance.

16.20.330    Temporary structure – Termination of approval.

16.20.335    Payment of fees.

16.20.340    Schedule of permit fees.

16.20.345    Plan review fees.

16.20.350    Building permit valuations.

16.20.353    Registered plan program.

16.20.355    Work commencing before permit issuance.

16.20.360    Related fees.

16.20.365    Performance bonds.

16.20.370    Refunds.

16.20.375    Inspections – General.

16.20.380    Preliminary inspections.

16.20.385    Manufacturer’s installation instructions.

16.20.390    Required inspections.

16.20.393    Temporary erosion and sediment control inspection.

16.20.395    Footing and foundation inspection.

16.20.400    Concrete slab and under-floor inspection.

16.20.405    Lowest floor elevation certification.

16.20.410    Exterior wall sheathing inspection.

16.20.415    Roof sheathing inspection.

16.20.420    IMC/IPC/Gas/NEC/IFC rough in inspection.

16.20.423    Electrical rough in inspection.

16.20.425    Frame inspection.

16.20.430    Flashing and exterior weather barrier inspection.

16.20.435    Lath inspection and gypsum board inspection.

16.20.440    Fire-resistant penetrations.

16.20.445    Energy efficiency inspection.

16.20.450    Reinspection.

16.20.455    Other inspections.

16.20.460    Special inspections.

16.20.465    Final inspection.

16.20.470    Inspection agencies.

16.20.475    Inspection requests.

16.20.480    Approval required.

16.20.483    Traffic management systems.

16.20.485    Certificate of occupancy – Use and occupancy.

16.20.490    Certificate of occupancy issued.

16.20.495    Temporary or phased occupancy.

16.20.500    Revocation of certificate of occupancy.

16.20.505    Connection of service utilities.

16.20.510    Temporary connection of service utilities.

16.20.515    Authority to disconnect service utilities.

16.20.520    Appeals – General.

16.20.525    Appeals – Limitations on authority.

16.20.530    Unlawful acts.

16.20.535    Notice of violation.

16.20.540    Prosecution of violation.

16.20.545    Violation – Penalties.

16.20.550    Stop work order – Authority.

16.20.555    Stop work order – Issuance.

16.20.560    Stop work order – Effect.

16.20.565    Stop work order – Remedy – Civil penalties.

16.20.570    Unsafe structures and equipment.


16.20.010 Short title.

This chapter shall constitute the construction administrative code of the City of Sammamish, hereinafter referred to as “this code.” (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.015 Purpose.

The purpose of the codes and regulations adopted by this code is to provide a consistent method for administration of the construction codes adopted in Chapter 16.05 SMC. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.020 Scope.

The provisions of this construction administrative code shall apply to the administration of the following codes as adopted by the state of Washington and the City of Sammamish and as listed:

(1) 2015 International Building Code – Chapter 51-50 WAC;

(2) 2015 International Residential Code – Chapter 51-51 WAC;

(3) 2015 International Mechanical Code – Chapter 51-52 WAC;

(4) 2015 National Fuel Gas Code (NFPA 54) – Chapter 51-52 WAC;

(5) 2014 Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code (NFPA 58) – Chapter 51-52 WAC;

(6) 2015 International Fuel Gas Code – Chapter 51-52 WAC;

(7) 2015 Uniform Plumbing Code – Chapter 51-56 WAC;

(8) 2015 Washington State Energy Codes – Chapters 51-11C and 51-11R WAC;

(9) 2015 International Existing Building Code – Chapter 51-50 WAC;

(10) 2015 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code – WAC 51-50-3109 and 51-51-0329;

(11) Sammamish Electrical Code. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.025 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall have the meanings set forth in this section. Where terms are not defined, they shall have their ordinary accepted meanings within the context with which they are used. “Webster’s Third International Dictionary of the English Language,” unabridged latest edition, shall be considered as providing ordinary accepted meanings. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural the singular. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine, and the feminine the masculine.

“Action” means a specific response complying fully with a specific request by the City of Sammamish.

“Amended construction documents” means changes or revisions to the approved plans which do not alter the size, shape, height, location or orientation on property, major components of the structural load path, or existing requirements.

“Building division” means the staff of the City of Sammamish community development department under the direction of the building official responsible for review of construction drawings and construction inspection for compliance with adopted building, plumbing, mechanical, fire, and other applicable construction codes.

“Building official” means the person or persons designated by the director of community development, charged with the administration and enforcement of the adopted construction codes.

“Building service equipment” means and refers to the plumbing, mechanical and electrical equipment including piping, wiring, fixtures, and other accessories which provide sanitation, lighting, heating, ventilation, cooling, refrigeration, firefighting, and transportation facilities essential to the occupancy of the building or structure for its designated use.

“Code official” means the person or persons charged with the enforcement of the adopted administrative and construction codes, or any duly authorized representative.

“Complete response” means an adequate response to all requests from City staff in sufficient detail to allow the application to be processed.

“Energy code” means the International Energy Conservation Code promulgated by the Washington State Building Code Council as adopted by the City of Sammamish.

“Existing building” means a building erected prior to the adoption of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC, or one for which a legal building permit has been issued and approved.

“IBC” means the latest edition of the International Building Code promulgated by the International Code Council as adopted by the City of Sammamish.

“IEBC” means the latest edition of the International Existing Building Code promulgated by the International Code Council as adopted by this jurisdiction.

“IMC” means the latest edition of the International Mechanical Code promulgated by the International Code Council as adopted by the City of Sammamish.

“IRC” means the latest edition of the International Residential Code for one- and two-family dwellings promulgated by the International Code Council as adopted by the City of Sammamish.

“NEC” means the latest edition of the National Electrical Code promulgated by the National Fire Protection Association as amended by the Washington Cities Electrical Code and adopted by the City.

“Occupancy” means the purpose for which a building, or part thereof, is used or intended to be used.

“Permit center” means the staff of the City of Sammamish community development department under the direction of the permit center manager responsible for intake and issuance of building, plumbing, mechanical, fire and other development permits.

“Public service agency” shall include those agencies providing noncompetitive services and rates to the public for the purpose of delivering electrical, water, sewer or gas utilities. The equipment installed by a public service agency shall be owned, operated and maintained by that agency.

“PUDs” means public utility districts such as water and sewer, etc.

“SEPA” means the State Environmental Policy Act.

“Shall,” as used in this code, is mandatory.

“SMC” means the latest edition of the Sammamish Municipal Code.

“UPC” means the latest edition of the Uniform Plumbing Code promulgated by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials as adopted by the City of Sammamish.

“Valuation” or “value,” as applied to a building or building service equipment, means and shall be the estimated cost to replace the building and its building service equipment in kind, based on current material and labor replacement costs, and shall include contractor’s overhead and profit. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2009-253 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 3. Formerly § 16.20.030) 


16.20.030 Appendices.

Provisions in the appendices of adopted codes shall not apply unless specifically adopted. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3. Formerly § 16.20.035) 


16.20.035 Intent.

The purpose of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC is to establish the minimum requirements to provide a reasonable level of safety, public health, and general welfare through structural strength, means of egress facilities, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, energy conservation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment and to provide a reasonable level of safety to fire fighters and emergency responders during emergency operations. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3. Formerly § 16.20.040) 


16.20.040 Referenced codes.

The codes listed in SMC 16.20.045 through 16.20.075 and referenced elsewhere in this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC shall be considered part of the requirements of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC to the prescribed extent of each such reference. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3. Formerly § 16.20.045) 


16.20.045 International Building Code.

(1) Scope. The provisions of the International Building Code shall apply to the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal, and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures.

(2) Exceptions: Detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories above grade in height with separate means of egress and their accessory structures not more than three stories above grade plane in height shall comply with the International Residential Code. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3. Formerly § 16.20.050) 


16.20.050 International Residential Code – Scope.

(1) The provisions of the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings shall apply to the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal, and demolition of detached one- and two-family dwellings, adult family homes, and townhouses not more than three stories in height above grade plane with separate means of egress and their accessory structures that are not more than three stories in height above grade plane.

(2) Exceptions.

(a) Live/work units located in townhouses and complying with the requirements of Section 419 of the International Building Code shall be permitted to be constructed in accordance with the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings. Fire suppression required by Section 419.5 of the International Building Code where constructed under the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings shall conform to Appendix Q.

(b) Owner-occupied lodging houses with one or two guestrooms shall be permitted to be constructed in accordance with the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings.

(c) Owner-occupied lodging homes with three to five guestrooms shall be permitted to be constructed in accordance with the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings where equipped with a fire sprinkler system in accordance with Appendix Q. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3. Formerly § 16.20.055) 


16.20.055 Mechanical code – Scope.

(1) The provisions of the International Mechanical Code shall apply to the installation, alterations, repairs and replacement of mechanical systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators and other energy-related systems.

(2) Exceptions.

(a) The International Fuel Gas Code: for all installations utilizing natural gas except those regulated by the IRC and those utilizing LPG.

(b) International Residential Code: for all structures regulated by the IRC except LPG installations.

(c) NFPA 54 and 58: for all LPG installations. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3. Formerly § 16.20.060) 


16.20.060 Liquid propane gas code – Scope.

The provisions of the National Fuel Gas Code and Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code (NFPA 54 and 58) shall apply to the installation of all materials and equipment utilizing liquid propane gas. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3. Formerly § 16.20.065) 


16.20.065 Natural gas code – Scope.

The provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code shall apply to the installation of all materials and equipment utilizing natural gas including gas piping systems, fuel gas utilization equipment, gaseous hydrogen systems, and related accessories except those regulated by the International Residential Code. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 3. Formerly § 16.20.070) 


16.20.070 Plumbing code – Scope.

The provisions of the Uniform Plumbing Code shall apply to the installation, alteration, repair and replacement of plumbing systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and where connected to a water or sewage system and all aspects of a medical gas system. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3. Formerly § 16.20.075)


16.20.073 Sammamish Electrical Code – Scope.

The provisions of the Sammamish Electrical Code apply to the installation of electric conductors, electric equipment and additions, alterations, modifications, or repairs to existing electrical installations for the following:

(1) Electric conductors, electric equipment, and electrical raceways installed within or on public and private buildings, property or other structures.

(2) Signaling and communications conductors and equipment, telecommunications conductors and equipment, fiber optic cables, and raceways installed within or on public and private buildings, property or other structures.

(3) Yards, lots, parking lots, and industrial substations.

(4) Temporary electrical installations for use during the construction of buildings.

(5) Temporary electrical installations for carnivals, conventions, festivals, fairs, traveling shows, the holding of religious services, temporary lighting of streets, or other approved uses.

(6) Installations of conductors and equipment that connect to a supply of electricity.

(7) All other outside electrical conductors on the premises.

(8) Optional standby systems derived from portable generators.

Exception: Installations under the exclusive control of electric utilities for the purpose of communication, transmission, and distribution of electric energy located in buildings used exclusively by utilities for such purposes or located outdoors on property owned or leased by the utilities or on public highways, streets, roads, etc., or outdoors by established rights on private property.

It is the intent of this section that the Sammamish Electrical Code covers all premises’ wiring or wiring other than utility owned metering equipment, on the load side of the service point of buildings, structures, or any other premises not owned or leased by the utility. Also, it is the intent that the Sammamish Electrical Code covers installations in buildings used by the utility for purposes other than listed above, such as office buildings, warehouses, garages, machine shops, and recreational buildings which are not an integral part of a generating plant, substation, or control center. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A))


16.20.075 Washington State Energy Code.

The provisions of the Washington State Energy Code shall apply to all matters governing the design and construction of buildings for energy efficiency. The Washington State Energy Codes (WSEC), as adopted by the State Building Code Council in Chapters 51-11C and 51-11R WAC, are adopted by reference.

Exception: The provisions of these codes do not apply to temporary growing structures used solely for the commercial production of horticultural plants including ornamental plants, flowers, vegetables, and fruits. A temporary growing structure is not considered a building for the purposes of these codes. However, the installation of other than listed, portable mechanical equipment or listed, portable lighting fixtures is not allowed. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A))


16.20.077 2015 International Existing Building Code.

The provisions of the International Existing Building Code shall apply to the repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition to and relocation of existing buildings not regulated under the International Residential Code. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B))


16.20.078 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code.

Scope. The provisions of this code shall apply to the construction, alteration, movement, renovation, replacement, repair and maintenance of aquatic recreation facilities, pools and spas. The pools and spas covered by this code are either permanent or temporary, and shall be only those that are designed and manufactured to be connected to a circulation system and that are intended for swimming, bathing or wading. Swimming pools, spas and other aquatic recreation facilities shall comply with the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, where the facility is one of the following:

(1) For the sole use of residents and invited guests at a single-family dwelling;

(2) For the sole use of residents and invited guests of a duplex owned by the residents; or

(3) Operated exclusively for physical therapy or rehabilitation and under the supervision of a licensed medical practitioner.

All other “water recreation facilities” as defined in RCW 70.90.110 are regulated under Chapters 246-260 and 246-262 WAC. Public swimming pool barriers are regulated by WAC 246-260-031(4). (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B))


16.20.080 General applicability.

Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. Where, in any specific case, different sections of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern, except that the hierarchy of the codes named in Chapter 19.27 RCW shall govern. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.085 Other laws.

The provisions of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.090 Application of references.

References to chapter or section numbers, or to provisions not specifically identified by number, shall be construed to refer to such chapter, section or provision of this code or Chapter 16.05 SMC. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.095 Referenced codes and standards.

The codes and standards referenced in this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC shall be considered part of the requirements of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC and referenced codes and standards, the provisions of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC shall apply. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.100 Partial invalidity.

In the event that any part or provision of this code is held to be illegal or void, this shall not have the effect of making void or illegal any of the other parts or provisions. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3)


16.20.105 Existing structures.

The legal occupancy of any structure existing on the date of adoption of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC shall be permitted to continue without change, except as is specifically covered in this code, the International Fire Code, the Sammamish Building and Property Maintenance Code, or as is deemed necessary by the building official or fire marshal for the general safety and welfare of the occupants and the public. Modifications to existing structures shall be permitted to be performed in accordance with WAC 51-50-480000 (International Existing Building Code).

Electrical wiring added to an existing service, feeder, or branch circuit shall not result in an installation that violates the provisions of the code in force at the time the additions were made. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.107 Moved buildings.

(1) Buildings or structures moved into or within a jurisdiction shall comply with the provisions of SMC 16.05.155.

(2) Electrical requirements for moved buildings shall be in accordance with SMC 16.05.155(2). (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1) 


16.20.108 Requirements not covered by code.

Requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed structure or installation, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this code, shall be determined by the building official. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A)) 


16.20.109 Structures in areas of special flood hazard.

Buildings located in areas of special flood hazard shall be regulated under the International Building Code, the International Residential Code and the Sammamish Municipal Code. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A)) 


16.20.110 Creation of enforcement agency.

The building division of the community development department is hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the building official. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.115 Appointment.

The building official shall be appointed by the chief appointing authority of the City of Sammamish. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.120 Deputies.

In accordance with the prescribed procedures of the City of Sammamish and with the concurrence of the appointing authority, the building official shall have the authority to appoint a deputy building official, the related technical officers, inspectors, plan examiners and other employees. Such employees shall have powers as delegated by the building official. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.125 Duties and power of building official.

The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC. The building official shall have the authority to render interpretations of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of their provisions. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC. Such policies and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3)


16.20.130 Applications and permits.

The permit center shall receive and review applications for the erection, alteration, demolition and moving of buildings, structures and building service equipment, shall route to the appropriate divisions or departments of the City of Sammamish and/or other agencies for review and approval and, when approved by all appropriate divisions, departments, or agencies, issue the appropriate permit. The building division shall review construction documents for the erection, alteration, demolition and moving of buildings, structures and building service equipment, inspect the premises for which such permits have been issued and enforce compliance with the provisions of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.135 Notices and orders.

The building official shall have the authority to issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC. Notices and orders shall be as prescribed in Chapter 23.60 SMC. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.138 Tagging of buildings.

Following a City of Sammamish issued formal declaration of emergency, the building official shall be authorized to evaluate and provide building safety evaluations. Evaluations shall generally follow standards from the Applied Technology Council ATC 20, ATC 20-1 or ATC 45 manuals. The procedure shall allow for the tagging of buildings as “Inspected,” “Limited Entry” or “Unsafe” along with associated penalties per SMC 16.20.545 for removal of building tags. Notice and orders pertaining to dangerous buildings and appeal procedures established under adopted building codes shall not apply under official declarations of emergency. This section for tagging of buildings shall also apply for unsafe structures and equipment identified in SMC 16.25.150. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A)) 


16.20.140 Inspections.

The building division shall make all of the required inspections, or the building official shall have the authority to accept reports of inspection by approved agencies or individuals. Reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the responsible individual. The building official is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise at the applicant’s expense. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.145 Identification.

Building division personnel shall carry proper identification when inspecting structures or premises in the performance of duties under this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.150 Right of entry.

Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC, or where the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a structure or upon a premises a condition which is contrary to or in violation of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC which makes the structure or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official is authorized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC; provided, that if such structure or premises be occupied that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such structure or premises is unoccupied, the building official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner, the owner’s authorized agent, or other person having charge or control of the structure or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry.

Where the code official has first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, an owner, the owner’s authorized agent or occupant or person having charge, care or control of the building or premises shall not fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the code official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to the applicable construction code. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.155 Department records.

The permit center shall keep official records of applications received, permits and certificates issued, and fees collected. The building official shall keep official records of reports of inspections, and notices and orders issued. Such records shall be retained in the official records for the period required for retention of public records. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.160 Liability.

The building official or employee charged with the enforcement of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC, while acting for the City of Sammamish in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties required by this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally and is hereby relieved from personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of any act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against an officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC shall be defended by legal representative of the City of Sammamish until the final termination of the proceedings. The building official or any subordinate shall not be liable for cost in any action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.165 Approved materials and equipment.

Materials, equipment and devices approved by the building official shall be constructed and installed in accordance with such approval. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.170 Used materials and equipment.

The use of used materials and building service equipment which meet the requirements of this code for new materials is permitted. Used equipment and devices shall not be reused unless approved by the building official. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.175 Modifications.

Wherever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC, the building official shall have the authority to grant modifications for individual cases, upon application of the owner or the owner’s authorized agent, provided the building official shall first find that special individual reason makes the strict letter of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC impractical and the modification is in compliance with the intent and purpose of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC and that such modification does not lessen health, accessibility, life and fire safety, or structural requirements. The details of action granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the files of the department. The building official is authorized to charge an additional fee to evaluate any proposed modification under the provisions of this section. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.180 Alternative materials, design and methods of construction and equipment.

The provisions of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to prohibit any design or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC; provided, that any such alternative has been approved by the building official. An alternative material, design or method of construction shall be approved where the building official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC, and that the material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. Where the alternative material, design or method of construction is not approved, the building official shall respond in writing, stating the reasons why the alternative was not approved. The building official is authorized to charge an additional fee to evaluate any proposed alternate material, design and/or method of construction and equipment under the provisions of this section. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3)


16.20.185 Research reports.

Supporting data, where necessary to assist in the approval of materials or assemblies not specifically provided for in this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC, shall consist of valid research reports from approved sources. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.190 Tests.

Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC, or evidence that a material or method does not conform to the requirements of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC, or in order to substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the building official shall have the authority to require tests as evidence of compliance to be made at no expense to the City of Sammamish. Test methods shall be as specified in this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC or by other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the building official shall approve the testing procedures. Tests shall be performed by an approved agency. Reports of such tests shall be retained by the building official for the period required for retention of public records. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.195 Permits required.

Any owner or owner’s authorized agent who intends to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by Chapter 16.05 SMC, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the permit center and obtain the required permit. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.197 Electrical permits required.

In accordance with Chapter 19.28 RCW, an electrical permit is required for the following installations:

(1) The installation, alteration, repair, replacement, modification or maintenance of all electrical systems, wire and electrical equipment regardless of voltage.

(2) The installation and/or alteration of low voltage systems defined as:

(a) NEC, Class 1 power limited circuits at 30 volts maximum.

(b) NEC, Class 2 circuits powered by a Class 2 power supply as defined in NEC 725.41(A).

(c) NEC, Class 3 circuits powered by a Class 3 power supply as defined in NEC 725.41(A).

(3) Telecommunications Systems.

(a) Installation of telecommunications systems on the customer side of the network demarcation point for projects greater than 10 telecommunications outlets.

(b) All backbone installations, regardless of size, and all telecommunications cable or equipment installations involving penetrations of fire barriers or passing through hazardous locations require a permit and inspection.

(c) The installation of greater than 10 outlets and the associated cables along any horizontal pathway from a telecommunications closet to work areas during any continuous 90-day period requires a permit and inspection.

(d) Backbone installations in multifamily residential dwellings which require penetration of fire barriers or installation of more than 10 outlets in common areas.

(e) Definitions of telecommunications technical terms shall be as set forth in Chapter 19.28 RCW, EIA/TIA standards, and the Sammamish Electrical Code. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A)) 


16.20.200 Work exempt from permit.

Exemptions from permit requirements of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC or any other laws or ordinances of the City of Sammamish. Permit exemptions for activities outside the footprint of an existing legally established structure shall not apply within critical areas or within the standard shoreline setbacks. Permits shall not be required for the following:

(1) Public Service Agencies or Work in the Public Right-of-Way.

(a) Installation, alteration or repair of generation, transmission, distribution or metering or other related equipment that is under the ownership and control of public service agencies.

(b) Work located primarily in a public right-of-way, on public utility towers and poles (but no exemption for wireless communications facilities that are not located in a public way) and hydraulic flood control structures.

(2) Building.

(a) IRC accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, one-story tree-supported play structures, playhouses and similar uses, but not including vehicle storage, provided the floor area does not exceed 200 square feet and, except one-story tree-supported play structures, the height does not exceed 12 feet from the grade plane to the highest point of the roof.

(b) Fences not over six feet (1,829 mm) high.

(c) Oil derricks.

(d) Retaining walls which are not over four feet (1,219 mm) in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II or III-A liquids.

(e) Rockery walls which are not over four feet (1,219 mm) in height measured from finished grade to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II or III-A liquids.

(f) Water tanks supported directly on grade if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons (18,925 L) and the ratio of height to diameter or width does not exceed two to one.

(g) Sidewalks and driveways that are not part of an accessible path of travel.

(h) Decks and associated platforms and steps accessory to buildings which are not more than 30 inches (762 mm) above adjacent grade at any point within 36 inches horizontally to the edge of the open side, are not over any basement or story below and are not part of an accessible path of travel.

(i) Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, countertops, nonstructural wood or vinyl siding, and similar finish work; provided, that existing accessible features are not altered.

(j) In-kind reroofing of one- and two-family dwellings, provided the existing roofing material is not removed or replaced.

(k) Window replacement in IRC structures where no alteration of structural members is required; however, this does not include windows which require safety glass or provide egress under the IRC.

(l) Replacement of nonstructural siding on IRC structures except for exterior insulation finish systems (EIFS) or stucco finish.

(m) Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery.

(n) Reserved.

(o) Shade cloth structures constructed for garden, nursery or agricultural purposes and not including service systems.

(p) Swings, slides and other similar playground equipment.

(q) Window awnings supported by an exterior wall of a one- and two-family dwelling or Group R-3 and Group U occupancies, which do not project more than 54 inches (1,372 mm) from the exterior wall and do not require additional support.

(r) Nonfixed and movable fixtures, cases, racks, counters and partitions not over five feet nine inches (1,753 mm) in height.

(s) Satellite earth station antennas six and one-half feet (two m) or less in diameter or diagonal in zones other than residential zones.

(t) Satellite earth station antennas three and one-quarter feet (one m) or less in diameter in residential zones.

(u) Video programming service antennas three and one-quarter feet (one m) or less in diameter or diagonal dimension, regardless of zone.

(v) Job shacks that are placed at the job site during construction, for which a permit has been issued, may be allowed on a temporary basis and shall be removed upon final approval of construction. A “job shack” means a portable or temporary structure for which the primary purpose is to house equipment or supplies and which may serve as a temporary office during construction activity. Sales offices are not considered construction related.

(w) Flag and light poles located on private property less than or equal to 20 feet in height.

(3) Electrical.

(a) Portable motors or other portable appliances which are energized by means of a cord or cable having an attachment plug end to be connected to an approved receptacle, when that cord or cable is permitted by the National Electrical Code.

(b) Repair or replacement of fixed motors, transformers, or fixed approved appliances or devices rated 50 amps or less and which are like-in-kind and in the same location.

(c) Temporary decorative lighting; when used for a period not to exceed 90 days and removed at the conclusion of the 90-day period.

(d) Repair or replacement of current-carrying parts of any switch, conductor or control device, which are like-in-kind and in the same location.

(e) Repair or replacement of attachment plug(s) and associated receptacle(s) rated 50 amperes or less, which are like-in-kind in the same location.

(f) Repair or replacement of any over current device, which is like-in-kind and in the same location.

(g) Repair or replacement of electrodes or transformers of the same size and capacity for signs or gas tube systems.

(h) Removal of electrical wiring.

(i) Telecommunication outlet installations within individual dwelling units.

(j) Listed wireless security systems for which power is supplied by a listed Class 2 plug-in transformer and which are installed within dwelling units.

(k) The installation, alteration or repair of electrical wiring, apparatus or equipment or the generation, transmission, distribution or metering of electrical energy or in the operation of signals or the transmission of intelligence, by a public or private utility in the exercise of its function as a serving utility.

(l) Portable generators serving only cord and plug connected loads supplied through receptacles on the generator.

(m) Travel trailers.

(n) Heat cable repair.

(o) Like-in-kind replacement of one or more of the following: lamps, a single battery smaller than 150-amp hour, contactors, relays, timers, starters, circuit boards, or similar control components, one household appliance, circuit breakers, single-family residential luminaires, a maximum of five snap snap switches, dimmers, receptacle outlets, thermostats, heating elements, luminaire ballasts with an exact same ballast, component(s) of electric signs, outline lighting, skeleton neon tubing when replaced on site by an appropriate electrical contractor and when the sign, outline lighting or skeleton neon tubing electrical system is not modified; one ten-horsepower or smaller motor; and induction detection loops that comply with WAC 296-46B-300(2) and are used to control gate access devices.

(p) All wiring for low voltage installations within a one-family dwelling unit or its accessory structure except wired security, fire or smoke alarm systems, provided the power is supplied by a listed Class 2 power supply and none of the wiring penetrates the wall or ceiling between the dwelling unit and an attached garage, or wall separating two dwelling units.

(4) Mechanical.

(a) Portable heating, cooking, or clothes-drying appliances.

(b) Portable ventilation equipment.

(c) Portable cooling unit.

(d) Steam or hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC.

(e) Replacement of any part which does not alter its approval or make it unsafe.

(f) Portable evaporative cooler.

(g) Self-contained refrigeration system containing 10 pounds (4.54 kg) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one horsepower (746 W) or less.

(h) Portable fuel cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping system and are not interconnected.

(5) Plumbing.

(a) The stopping and/or repairing of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe; provided, however, that should any concealed trap, drain pipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe become defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new material, the same shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be procured and inspection made as provided in this code.

(b) The clearing of stoppages.

(c) Reinstallation or replacement of prefabricated fixtures that do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves or pipes. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2009-249 § 1; Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.205 Emergency repairs.

Where equipment replacements and equipment repairs must be performed in an emergency situation, the permit application shall be submitted within the next working business day to the permit center. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.210 Ordinary repairs.

Application or notice to the permit center is not required for ordinary repairs to structures, replacement of lamps, or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles. Such repairs shall not include the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or load-bearing support, or the removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress requirements; nor shall ordinary repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting public health or general safety. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.215 Application for permit.

To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file a complete application as defined by the jurisdiction therefor in writing on a form furnished by the permit center for that purpose. Such application shall:

(1) Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which application is made.

(2) The legal description, or the tax parcel number and the street address if available, that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work.

(3) The property owner’s name, address, and phone number.

(4) The prime contractor’s business name, address, phone number, and current state contractor registration number.

(5) Either:

(a) The name, address, and phone number of the office of the lender administering the interim construction financing, if any; or

(b) The name and address of the firm that has issued a payment bond, if any, on behalf of the prime contractor for the protection of the owner, if the bond is for an amount not less than 50 percent of the total amount of the construction project.

(6) Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is intended.

(7) Be accompanied by plans, diagrams, computations and specifications and other information as required in SMC 16.20.255 through 16.20.275.

(8) State the valuation of the proposed work.

(9) Be signed by the applicant, or the applicant’s authorized agent.

(10) Give such other data and information as required by the City of Sammamish.

The information required on the building permit application by subsections (2) through (5) of this section shall be set forth on the building permit document which is issued to the owner, and on the inspection record card which shall be posted at the construction site.

If the information required by subsection (5) of this section is not available at the time the application is submitted, the applicant shall so state and the application shall be processed forthwith and the permit issued as if the information had been supplied, and the lack of the information shall not cause the application to be deemed incomplete for the purposes of vesting. However, the applicant shall provide the remaining information as soon as the applicant can reasonably obtain such information. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.220 Action on application.

City staff shall examine or cause to be examined applications for permits and amendments thereto prior to acceptance of the building, electrical, plumbing, mechanical or related permit application. If the application or the construction documents are incomplete or lack sufficient information to demonstrate compliance with applicable codes and standards, the application shall be returned to the applicant stating the reasons therefor. If the City staff is satisfied that the application or construction documents are complete and provide sufficient information to proceed with review, the permit center shall accept the permit application and collect the appropriate submittal fees.

Notwithstanding the language of this or any other provision of this code, no building permit shall be issued until all other project permits related to the project action for which the building permit is sought have been approved and issued, and all related fees, bonds, and approval conditions have been paid and/or satisfied, including but not limited to: SEPA approvals, subdivisions, PUDs, building site plans, conditional use permits, variances, shoreline substantial development permits, critical area alterations permits and frontage improvements.

When a reasonable use exception is required to determine placement of the proposed structure and all appurtenances, the reasonable use exception shall be obtained prior to application for a building permit. If, after the application is submitted, it is determined that the proposed structure must be altered or redesigned in order to comply with land use, fire, or other regulations, the building official is authorized to require the applicant to withdraw said application. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.225 Time limitation of application.

(1) Applications for which no permit is issued within 18 months following the date of application shall expire by limitation and plans and other data submitted for review may thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed in accordance with state law by the building official. Permit applications that will expire shall be extended to June 30, 2016, by the building official upon written request by the applicant, subject to the following:

(a) A counter service fee as established by the current fee schedule.

(2) Applications may be canceled for inactivity if an applicant fails to respond to the building official’s written request for revisions, corrections, actions or additional information within 90 days of the date of request. The building official may extend the response period beyond 90 days if within the original 90-day time period the applicant provides and subsequently adheres to an approved schedule with specific target dates for submitting the full revisions, corrections or other information needed by the building official.

(3) The building official may extend the life of an application beyond the expiration period established in subsection (1) of this section, if any of the following conditions exist:

(a) Compliance with the State Environmental Policy Act is in progress; or

(b) Any other City review is in progress, provided the applicant has submitted a complete response to City requests for information or corrections; or

(c) The building official determines that unique or unusual circumstances exist that warrant additional time for such response, and the building official determines that the review is proceeding in a timely manner toward the final City decision; or

(d) Litigation against the City or applicant is in progress, the outcome of which may affect the validity or the provisions of any permit issued pursuant to such application. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2009-253 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.230 Validity of permit.

The issuance or granting of a permit shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC or of any other ordinance of the City of Sammamish. Permits presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC or other ordinances of the City of Sammamish shall not be valid. The issuance of a permit based on construction documents and other data shall not prevent the building division from requiring the correction of errors in the construction documents and other data. The building official is also authorized to prevent occupancy or use of a structure wherein violation of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC or of any other ordinances of the City of Sammamish exist. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.235 Expiration of issued permits.

(1) Every building permit and its associated ancillary permits issued shall expire in two years from the date of issuance. Within two years of the issuance of the permit for an IRC structure, the outside must be complete including roofing, siding, windows, exterior doors and applicable site and right-of-way improvements. The two years to complete the IRC structure may not be extended.

(2) Signs, mechanical, plumbing, electrical and other ancillary permits shall expire at the same time as the associated building permit, except that if no associated building permit is issued, the mechanical, plumbing, electrical, and/or other ancillary permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance.

(3) The building official may grant a 30-day extension of time for permits when only the final inspection is remaining and all other work has been approved.

(4) It is a violation of this chapter to allow a permit to expire without first obtaining an approved final inspection.

Exception 1: A new building permit issued for an IRC structure to complete the work covered by a previous, expired permit shall expire in:

(a) One year if the framing inspection was not approved on the previous permit; or

(b) Six months if the framing inspection was approved on the previous permit and the exterior of the structure is not completed per subsection (4)(c) of this section; or

(c) Two years if the outside of the structure is complete including roofing, siding, windows, exterior doors and applicable site and right-of-way improvements.

Exception 2: For permits resulting from work without a permit or other code enforcement action(s), the expiration date will be determined by the building official. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2009-253 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 3)


16.20.237 Permit renewals.

An existing building permit may be renewed one time for a fee of one-half the original permit fee, provided the permit has not been expired for more than one year and the framing inspection has been approved. Permit renewals shall expire in:

(1) Six months if the exterior of the structure is not completed per subsection (2) of this section; or

(2) Two years if the outside of the structure is complete including roofing, siding, windows, exterior doors and applicable site and right-of-way improvements. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A))


16.20.240 Suspension or revocation.

The building official is authorized to suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC wherever the permit is issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of any ordinance or regulation of the City of Sammamish or any of the provisions of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC, or if the permitted structure is being constructed in violation of the permit or in violation of any ordinance or regulation of the City of Sammamish or any of the provisions of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.245 Placement of permit.

The building permit or copy shall be kept on the site of the work until the completion of the project. For access to permit for inspections, see SMC 16.20.475. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.248 Floor and roof design loads.

(1) Live Loads Posted. Where the live load for which each floor or portion thereof of a commercial or industrial building is or has been designed exceeds 50 pounds per square foot (2.40 kN/m2), such design live load shall be conspicuously posted by the owner in that part of each story in which it applies, using durable signs. It shall be unlawful to remove or deface such notice signs.

(2) Issuance of Certificate of Occupancy. A certificate of occupancy required by SMC 16.20.490 shall not be issued until the floor load signs required by subsection (1) of this section have been installed.

(3) Restrictions on Loading. It shall be unlawful to place, cause or permit to be placed, on any floor or room of a building, structure or portion thereof, a load greater than is permitted by this code. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A)) 


16.20.250 Construction documents – Submittal.

Construction documents, statements of special inspections, geotechnical reports, structural observation programs, and other data required to be submitted shall be submitted in one or more sets, as determined by the building official, with each application for a permit. The construction documents shall be prepared by a registered design professional where required by the state of Washington. When special conditions exist, the building official is authorized to require additional construction documents to be prepared by a registered design professional.

Exception: The building official is authorized to waive the submission of construction documents and other data not required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the work applied for is such that review of construction documents is not necessary to obtain compliance with this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.255 Information on construction documents.

(1) General. Construction documents shall be dimensioned and drawn upon suitable material. Electronic media documents are permitted to be submitted when approved by the building official. Construction documents shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed in the proper orientation and layout as it is to be constructed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC and relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, as determined by the building official. Construction documents shall not be altered once submitted except as required by notice of the City reviewer to achieve compliance with applicable codes.

(2) (a) Electrical. Electrical plans for the following installations shall be prepared by, or under the direction of, an electrical engineer registered under Chapter 18.43 RCW and Chapters 392-344, 246-320, and 388-97 WAC. All electrical plans must bear the engineer’s stamp and signature:

(i) All educational facilities, hospitals, and nursing homes;

(ii) All services or feeders rated 1,600 amperes or larger;

(iii) All installations identified in the National Electrical Code as requiring engineering supervision; and

(iv) As required by the building official for installations which by their nature are complex, hazardous, or pose unique design problems.

(b) Construction Documents. Construction documents shall identify the name and classification of the facility and clearly show the electrical installation or alteration in floor plan view, include all switchboard and panel board schedules, and, when a service or feeder is to be installed or altered, must include a riser diagram, load calculation, fault current calculation, and interrupting rating of equipment.

(c) Penetrations. Construction documents shall indicate where penetrations will be made for electrical systems and shall indicate the materials and methods for maintaining required structural safety, fire-resistance rating, and fire blocking.

(d) Load Calculations. Where an addition or alteration is made to an existing electrical system, an electrical load calculation shall be prepared to determine if the existing electrical service has the capacity to serve the added load.

(e) Site Plan. The construction documents submitted with the application for permit shall be accompanied by a site plan, showing to scale the size and location of new construction and existing structures on the site, distances from lot lines, the established street grades, and the proposed finished grades. The site plan shall be drawn in accordance with an accurate boundary line survey. In the case of demolition, the site plan shall show construction to be demolished and the location and size of existing structures and construction that are to remain on the site or plot. The building official is permitted to waive or modify the requirement for a site plan, where the application for permit is for alteration or repair or where otherwise warranted.

(f) Plan Review Required. Electrical plan review is required for all new or altered electrical projects in the following occupancies and/or installations including but not limited to:

(i) Educational, institutional, or health care facilities/buildings as follows:

(A) Hospitals.

(B) Nursing home units or long-term care units.

(C) Boarding homes.

(D) Assisted living facilities.

(E) Private alcoholism hospitals.

(F) Alcoholism treatment facilities.

(G) Private psychiatric hospitals.

(H) Maternity homes.

(I) Ambulatory surgery facilities.

(J) Renal hemodialysis clinics.

(K) Residential treatment facilities for psychiatrically impaired children and youth.

(L) Adult residential rehabilitation centers.

(M) Educational facilities.

(N) Institutional facilities.

Exceptions: Electrical plan review is not required for the following types of installations in the above educational, institutional, or health care facilities buildings:

(A) Lighting-specific projects that result in an electrical load reduction on each feeder involved in the project.

(B) Low voltage systems.

(C) Modification to existing electrical installations when all of the following conditions are met:

(1) Service or distribution equipment involved is rated less than 100 amperes and does not exceed 250 volts;

(2) Does not involve emergency systems other than listed unit equipment per NEC 700.12(F);

(3) Does not involve branch circuits or feeders of an essential electrical system as defined in NEC 517.2; and

(4) Service and feeder load calculations are increased by five percent or less.

(D) Standalone utility fed services that do not exceed 250 volts, 100 amperes, where the project’s distribution system does not include:

(1) Emergency systems other than listed unit equipment per NEC 700.12(F);

(2) Critical branch circuits or feeders as defined in NEC 517.2; or

(3) A required fire pump system.

(ii) Installations in occupancies except one- and two-family dwellings where a service or feeder rated 100 amperes or greater is installed or altered or if more than 100 amperes is added to the service or feeder.

(iii) All work on electrical systems operating at/over 600 volts.

(iv) All commercial generator installations or alterations.

(v) All work in areas classified as hazardous locations by the NEC.

(vi) If 60 percent or more of luminaires change.

(vii) Installations of switches or circuit breakers rated 400 amperes or over except for one- and two-family dwellings.

(viii) Wind-driven generators.

(ix) Solar photovoltaic systems.

(x) Any proposed installation which cannot be adequately described in the application form. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.260 Fire protection system shop drawings.

Shop drawings for the fire protection system(s) shall be submitted to indicate conformance with this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC and the construction documents and shall be approved prior to the start of system installation. Shop drawings shall contain all information as required by the referenced installation standards in Chapter 9 IBC. Shop drawings shall be prepared by a certified individual as required by the state of Washington. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.265 Means of egress.

The construction documents shall show in sufficient detail the location, construction, size and character of all portions of the means of egress in compliance with the provisions of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC. In other than one- and two- family dwellings and occupancies in Groups R-2 and R-3, the construction documents shall designate the number of occupants to be accommodated on every floor, and in all rooms and spaces. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.270 Exterior wall envelope.

Construction documents for all buildings shall describe the exterior wall envelope in sufficient detail to determine compliance with this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC. The construction documents shall provide details of the exterior wall envelope as required, including flashing, intersections with dissimilar materials, corners, end details, control joints, intersections at roof, eaves or parapets, means of drainage, water-resistive membrane and details around openings. The construction documents shall include manufacturer’s installation instructions that provide supporting documentation that the proposed penetration and opening details described in the construction documents maintain the weather resistance of the exterior wall envelope. The supporting documentation shall fully describe the exterior wall system which was tested, where applicable, as well as the test procedure used.

Exception: Subject to the approval of the building official, R-3 one- and two-family dwellings and U occupancies may be exempt from the detailing requirements of this section. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.273 Building enclosure design requirements of Chapter 64.55 RCW.

Building enclosure design documents of new or rehabilitated multifamily buildings that are subject to these regulations shall be submitted at the time of permit application. This section includes buildings containing more than two attached dwelling units and buildings containing nonresidential units if the building also contains more than two attached dwelling units. This section does not apply to hotels, motels, dormitories, care facilities, or floating homes or buildings that contain attached dwelling units that are each located on a single platted lot.

All applications for building construction or rehabilitation shall include design documents prepared and stamped by a Washington State licensed architect or engineer and shall identify the building enclosure (building enclosure documents) including, but not limited to, waterproofing, weatherproofing and/or other protection from water or moisture intrusion, unless a recorded, irrevocable sale prohibition covenant is submitted to and approved by the City.

The City will not issue a permit for construction or rehabilitative construction unless the building enclosure documents contain a stamped statement in substantially the following form:

The undersigned has provided building enclosure documents that in my professional judgment are appropriate to satisfy the requirements of RCW 64.55.005 through 64.55.090. I acknowledge: (a) that the city building department is not charged with determining whether the building enclosure design documents are adequate or appropriate to satisfy the requirements of RCW 64.55.005 through 64.55.090; and (b) that nothing in RCW 64.55.005 through 64.55.090 requires a building department to review, approve, or disapprove enclosure design documents.

(Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A)) 


16.20.275 Site plan.

The construction documents submitted with the application for permit shall be accompanied by a site plan showing to scale the size, location, orientation and layout of new construction and existing structures on the site including all roof overhangs, projections, cantilevers and building footprint, distances from lot lines, the established street grades and the proposed finished grades and average grades as required, calculations for building height, and, as applicable, flood hazard areas, floodways, and design flood elevations; and it shall be drawn in accordance with an accurate boundary line survey. Site plans shall also be provided which show width, slope, distance, and surface requirements for emergency vehicle access roads and/or driveways and depict all lots which contain structures served by the access road. In the case of demolition, the site plan shall show construction to be demolished and the location and size of existing structures and construction that are to remain on the site or plot. The building official is authorized to waive or modify the requirement for a site plan when the application for permit is for alteration or repair or when otherwise warranted. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.280 Examination of documents.

The building official shall examine or cause to be examined the accompanying submittal documents and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC and other pertinent laws or ordinances. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.285 Use of consultants.

Whenever review of a building permit application requires retention by the City of Sammamish for professional consulting services, the applicant shall reimburse the City of Sammamish the full cost of such professional consulting services. This fee shall be in addition to the normal plan review and building permit fees. The City of Sammamish may require the applicant to deposit an amount with the City of Sammamish estimated in the discretion of the building official to be sufficient to cover anticipated costs for retaining professional consultant services and to ensure reimbursement for such costs. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.290 Approval of construction documents.

When the permit center issues a permit, the construction documents shall be approved by the building division, in writing or by stamp. One set of construction documents so reviewed shall be retained by the City of Sammamish. The other set shall be returned to the applicant, shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or a duly authorized representative. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.295 Phased approval.

The building official is authorized to issue a permit for the construction of foundations or any other part of a building or structure before the construction documents for the whole building or structure have been submitted; provided, that adequate information and detailed statements have been filed complying with pertinent requirements of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC. The holder of such permit for the foundation or other parts of a building or structure shall proceed at the holder’s own risk with the building operation and without assurance that a permit for the entire structure will be granted. The permit center is authorized to require that a performance bond be posted with the City in an amount equal to 150 percent of the cost of demolition and removal of the work authorized under a phased approval. The bond shall be refundable upon issuance of a building permit for the complete building or structure and a request in writing for the refund. It shall be the duty of the applicant to request the refund. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.300 Design professional in responsible charge.

When it is required that documents be prepared by a qualified, registered design professional, the building official shall be authorized to require the owner to engage and designate on the building permit application a registered design professional who shall act as the registered design professional in responsible charge. If the circumstances require, the owner shall designate a substitute registered design professional in responsible charge who shall perform the duties required of the original registered design professional in responsible charge. The building official shall be notified in writing by the owner if the registered design professional in responsible charge is changed or is unable to continue to perform the duties. The registered design professional in responsible charge shall be responsible for reviewing and coordinating submittal documents prepared by others, including phased and deferred submittal items, for compatibility with the design of the building. Where structural observation is required by Chapter 17 of the IBC, the statement of special inspections shall name the individual or firms who are to perform structural observation and describe the stages of construction at which structural observation is to occur (see also duties specified in Section 1704 IBC). (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 3)


16.20.305 Deferred submittals.

For the purposes of this section, “deferred submittals” are defined as those portions of the design that are not submitted at the time of the application and that are to be submitted to the permit center within a specified period. Deferral of any submittal items shall have the prior approval of the building division. The registered design professional in responsible charge shall list the deferred submittals on the construction documents for review by the building division. Documents for deferred submittal items shall be submitted to the registered design professional in responsible charge, who shall review them and forward them to the permit center with a notation indicating that the deferred submittal documents have been reviewed and been found to be in general conformance to the design of the building. The deferred submittal items shall not be installed until the design and submittal documents have been approved by the building division. The permit center is authorized to charge an additional plan review fee to evaluate deferred submittals under the provisions of this section. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.310 Amended construction documents.

Work shall be installed in accordance with the approved construction documents, and any changes made during construction that are not in compliance with the approved construction documents shall be submitted for approval as an amended set of construction documents along with an application for permit revision. Where changes to the approved plan alter the size, shape, height, location or orientation on the property, major components of the structural load path, or exiting requirements, a new permit application shall be submitted and applicable fee paid. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.315 Retention of construction documents.

One set of approved construction documents shall be retained by the City of Sammamish for a period of not less than 180 days from date of completion of the permitted work, or as required by state or local laws. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.320 Temporary structure – General.

(1) General. The building official is authorized to approve a permit for temporary structures and temporary uses. Such permits shall be limited as to time of service, but shall not be permitted for more than 180 days. The building official is authorized to grant extensions for demonstrated cause.

Exception: The building official may authorize unheated tents and yurts under 500 square feet accommodating an R-1 occupancy for recreational use as a temporary structure and allow them to be used indefinitely.

(2) Electrical. If the building official finds that the safety of life and property will not be jeopardized, permits may be issued for temporary electrical installations for use during the construction of buildings or for carnivals, conventions, festivals, fairs, the holding of religious services, temporary lighting of streets, or other approved uses. Permission to use such temporary installations shall not be granted for a length of time greater than 90 days, except that a permit for a temporary installation to be used for constructing a building may be issued for the period of construction. Where such temporary lighting is over the street area, the proper authorization for such use of the street must first be obtained.

All such temporary installations shall be made in accordance with the requirements of this code; provided, that the building official may permit deviations which will not permit hazards to life or property; and further provided, that whenever such hazards are deemed by the building official to exist, the building official may at once rescind or cancel the permit covering such installation and disconnect, or order the disconnection of, all energy to such equipment. Additional permits may be required under the technical codes or other city codes and regulations, including the Land Division Code.

(3) Plumbing and Mechanical. The building official is authorized to issue a permit for temporary equipment, systems and uses. Such permits shall be limited as to time of service, but shall not be permitted for more than 180 days. The code official is authorized to grant extensions for demonstrated cause.

(4) Utilities. The code official is authorized to give permission to temporarily supply utilities before an installation has been fully completed and the final certificate of completion has been issued. The part covered by the temporary certificate shall comply with the requirements specified for temporary lighting, heat or power in the code. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.325 Temporary structure – Conformance.

Temporary structures and uses shall conform to the structural strength, fire safety, means of egress, accessibility, light, ventilation and sanitary requirements of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC as necessary to ensure the public health, safety and general welfare. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.330 Temporary structure – Termination of approval.

The building official is authorized to terminate such permit for a temporary structure or use issued under the provisions of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC wherever the permit is issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of any ordinance or regulation of the City of Sammamish or any of the provisions of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC, or if the permitted structure is being constructed in violation of the permit or in violation of any ordinance or regulation of the City of Sammamish or any of the provisions of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC and to order the temporary structure or use to be discontinued. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.335 Payment of fees.

A permit shall not be valid until the fees prescribed by law have been paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, has been paid. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.340 Schedule of permit fees.

On buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with this code and the fee schedule as established in the City of Sammamish fee resolution. In no case shall the building permit fee be less than the City’s hourly inspection fee multiplied by the number of inspections expected to be performed for work authorized by the permit. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.345 Plan review fees.

When submittal documents are required by SMC 16.20.250 through 16.20.310 and Chapter 16.05 SMC, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time of submitting the submittal documents for plan review. The permit center may have the option to charge a deposit, in lieu of the full plan review fee, if the full amount is not known at the time. Any plan review deposit shall be applied toward the total plan review fee owed. The actual permit fees and related plan review fee shall be determined upon completion of the plan review and the balance owing shall be paid at the time of permit issuance. The plan review fee shall be a separate fee from the permit fees specified in this section and is in addition to the permit fees. When submittal documents are incomplete or changed so as to require additional plan review or when the project involves deferred submittal items as defined in SMC 16.20.250 through 16.20.310, an additional plan review fee shall be charged at the rate shown in the fee resolution established by the City of Sammamish. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.350 Building permit valuations.

The applicant for a permit shall provide an estimated building valuation at the time of application. The final determination of value or valuation under any of the provisions of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC shall be made by the permit center based on building valuation data published by a nationally recognized code organization, and may include a regional modifier from a nationally recognized organization. When a specific building type or occupancy is not noted in the valuation table, the permit center is authorized to use the classification type noted in the table that most closely resembles the proposed type of building or determine a valuation type independently. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2014-380 § 1; Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.353 Registered plan program.

An applicant who intends to apply for permits to build a number of single-family structures using the same plans may elect to participate in the “Registered Plan Program.” This program is intended to improve customer service by simplifying the application process and reducing plan review times. This program is also intended to encourage variations in building design to produce aesthetically pleasing, yet diversified, neighborhoods that add to the quality of Sammamish as a unique community.

Options are allowed to be submitted with the initial registering of the basic plan to accommodate a variation of building styles using the basic plan. When plans are submitted under the jurisdiction’s “Registered Plan Program,” a plan review fee shall be paid at the time of application for a registered plan.

The building official may have the option to charge a partial deposit, in lieu of the full plan review fee. All portions of fees paid as a deposit amount shall be applied to the total plan review fees owed. The applicant shall be required to pay the balance of amount owed for the plan review prior to final approval of the registered plan.

Valuations used to compute the permit fees shall include all options submitted with a registered plan. When a registered plan consists of a number of plan options that can produce any number of similar but different buildings, the building official may charge plan review fees based on each different building configuration.

Plan review fees shall be paid for at the time of application for a building permit. The building official may have the option to charge a partial deposit, in lieu of the full plan review fee. All portions of fees paid as a deposit amount shall be applied to the total plan review fees owed. The applicant shall be required to pay the balance of amount owed for the plan review. The plan review fees specified in this subsection are separate fees from the permit fees and are in addition to the permit fees.

Plan orientation: Building construction shall follow the direction, layout and orientation of the plan as approved. Applications to reverse or flip a plan shall only be allowed as an approved option to a registered plan where all drawing floor plans, site plans, sections, elevations and structural drawings reflect the layout of the building to be constructed.

Revisions: Once a plan and associated options are reviewed, approved and registered, changes or revisions to that plan are not permitted unless approved by the building official in accordance with the registered plan program.

Field revision: Once a permit is issued for a registered plan, no revisions will be permitted except for minor field changes. Changes other than minor field changes will be considered major changes and require the permit holder to resubmit those changes as a new submittal and pay the appropriate fee. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1) 


16.20.355 Work commencing before permit issuance.

Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a stop work order and special investigation fee established by the City of Sammamish that shall be in addition to the required permit fees.

When it is determined that construction has taken place that required a permit and construction is at such a stage that structural conformance cannot be visually assured by the City of Sammamish building division, the following will be required:

(1) As determined necessary by the building official the owner shall hire a licensed registered design professional to submit a certified report as to the structural integrity of the structure erected, and the compliance of the structure with applicable construction codes and regulations along with the building permit application. This document (certification) must state any deficiencies and the acceptable (code) corrective action accompany the building permit application and include any deficiencies.

(2) As determined necessary by the building official the owner must secure building, electrical, fire, plumbing and/or mechanical permits as appropriate. Inspection of these items may require removal of construction materials in order to validate that the systems have been installed correctly.

(3) As determined necessary by the building official the owner must be able to substantiate and/or show proof if necessary that he/she is in compliance with all other local, state and federal laws pertaining to land use.

(4) As determined necessary by the building official a site inspection and life safety inspection must be performed prior to temporary occupancy or use of the building or structure prior to permit issuance and final inspection. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.360 Related fees.

The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration, removal or demolition for work done in connection to or concurrently with the work authorized by a building permit shall not relieve the applicant or holder of the permit from the payment of other fees that are prescribed by law. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.365 Performance bonds.

Prior to the issuance of a demolition permit, the applicant or agent shall post a $500.00 cash deposit or surety bond to ensure cleanup of the site, which shall be refundable upon final inspection, approval and written request to the permit center from the permit holder.

Exception: Where the demolition permit is issued in conjunction with a building permit for a new structure to be placed in a similar location as building or structure to be demolished. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.370 Refunds.

The permit center may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC. The permit center may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan review is done. No refund shall be made for application or plan review fees where a plan review has been performed and the application is rejected in accordance with SMC 16.20.220. The permit center shall not authorize refunding of any fee paid except on written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180 days after the date of application. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.375 Inspections – General.

Construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building division and other agencies as designated on the inspection card. Such construction or work shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes until approved. Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC or of other ordinances of the City of Sammamish. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC or of other ordinances of the City of Sammamish shall not be valid. It shall be the duty of the person(s) who performs the work to make request for inspections and cause the work to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Neither the building division nor the City of Sammamish shall be liable for expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any material required to allow inspection.

Electrical systems and equipment regulated by the Sammamish Electrical Code shall not be connected to the energy source until authorized by the building official. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.380 Preliminary inspections.

Before issuing a permit, the building official is authorized to examine or cause to be examined buildings, structures and sites for which an application has been filed. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.385 Manufacturer’s installation instructions.

Manufacturer’s installation instructions, as required by this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC, shall be available on the job site at the time of inspection. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.390 Required inspections.

The building division, upon notification, shall make the inspections set forth in SMC 16.20.395 through 16.20.465. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.393 Temporary erosion and sediment control inspection.

Temporary erosion and sediment control inspections shall be made after all required silt fencing, construction fencing, straw bales, storm drain catch basin inserts (socks), entrance rocking, and other required elements are in place and prior to commencement of construction and/or clearing the site. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2009-249 § 1) 


16.20.395 Footing and foundation inspection.

Footing and foundation inspections shall be made after poles or piers are set, trenches or basement areas are excavated, or excavations for footings are complete, any forms erected, and all required hold-down anchor bolts, hold-down straps, and any required reinforcing steel are in place and supported. The foundation inspection shall include excavations for thickened slabs intended for the support of bearing walls, partitions, structural supports, or equipment. Foundation inspections shall also include special requirements for wood foundations, and for any setbacks required from property lines; building setback lines; critical area buffers; and/or the ordinary high water mark on lake properties. For concrete foundations, any required forms shall be in place prior to inspection. Materials for the foundation shall be on the job, except where concrete is ready-mixed in accordance with ASTM C 94 the concrete need not be on the job. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2009-249 § 1; Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.400 Concrete slab and under-floor inspection.

Concrete slab and under-floor inspections shall be made after in-slab or under-floor reinforcing steel and building service equipment, conduit, slab insulation, piping accessories and other ancillary equipment items are in place, but before any concrete is placed or floor sheathing installed, including the subfloor. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.405 Lowest floor elevation certification.

In flood hazard areas, upon placement of the lowest floor, including the basement, and prior to further vertical construction, the elevation certification required in IBC Section 1612.5 or IRC Section R324 shall be submitted to the building division. FEMA flood elevation certificates shall contain an original stamp and signature of the surveyor, licensed by the state of Washington, and shall document the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, and other information required by the flood elevation certificate. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.410 Exterior wall sheathing inspection.

Exterior wall sheathing shall be inspected after all wall framing is complete and strapping and nailing are properly installed but prior to being covered. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.415 Roof sheathing inspection.

The roof sheathing shall be inspected after all roof framing is complete. No roof coverings shall be installed until inspections are made and approved, and confirmation that the height of the structure is in conformance with the requirements of the development code, SMC Title 21A, and/or shoreline master program. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2009-249 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.420 IMC/IPC/Gas/NEC/IFC rough in inspection.

Rough in mechanical, gas piping, plumbing, and fire suppression systems shall be inspected when the rough in work is complete and, if required, under test. No connections to primary utilities shall be made until the rough in work is inspected and approved. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3)


16.20.423 Electrical rough in inspection.

Rough in inspection shall be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing are in place and all wiring and other components to be concealed are complete and prior to covering or concealment, but before fixtures, equipment or appliances are set or installed, and prior to framing inspection. All required equipment grounding conductors installed in concealed cable or flexible conduit systems must be completely installed and made up at the time of the rough in cover inspection. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A))


16.20.425 Frame inspection.

Framing inspections shall be made after the roof deck or sheathing, all framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and pipes, chimneys and vents to be concealed are complete and the rough electrical, plumbing, fire suppression piping, heating wires, pipes and ducts are approved. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.430 Flashing and exterior weather barrier inspection.

Flashing and exterior weather barrier inspections shall be made after flashing and weather barrier materials have been installed, but prior to any of the work being covered. Subject to approval of the building official, an approved special inspection agency may be utilized for these inspections during the course of construction. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.435 Lath inspection and gypsum board inspection.

Lath and gypsum board inspections shall be made after lathing and gypsum board, interior and exterior, are in place, but before any plastering is applied or gypsum board joints and fasteners are taped and finished.

Subject to approval of the building official, an approved special inspection agency may be utilized for these inspections during the course of construction.

Exception: Gypsum board that is not part of a fire resistance rated assembly or a shear assembly does not require inspection. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.440 Fire-resistant penetrations.

Protection of joints and penetrations in fire resistance rated assemblies shall not be concealed from view until inspected and approved. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.445 Energy efficiency inspection.

(1) Envelope.

(a) Wall Insulation Inspection. To be made after exterior wall weather protection and all wall insulation and air vapor retarder, sheet or film materials are in place, but before any wall covering is placed.

(b) Glazing Inspection. To be made after glazing materials are installed in the building.

(c) Exterior Roofing and Vaulted Ceiling Insulation Inspection. To be made after the installation of the roofing and roof insulation, but before concealment.

(d) Slab/Floor Insulation Inspection. To be made after the installation of the slab/floor insulation, but before concealment.

(e) Attic Insulation Inspection. To be made after the installation of the attic insulation and prior to final inspection approval.

(2) Mechanical.

(a) Mechanical Equipment Efficiency and Economizer Inspection. To be made after all equipment and controls required by this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC are installed and prior to the concealment of such equipment or controls.

(b) Mechanical Pipe and Duct Insulation Inspection. To be made after all pipe, fire suppression piping and duct insulation is in place, but before concealment.

(3) Lighting and Motors.

(a) Lighting Equipment and Controls Inspection. To be made after the installation of all lighting equipment and controls required by this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC, but before concealment of the lighting equipment.

(b) Motor Inspections. To be made after installation of all equipment covered by this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC, but before concealment. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.450 Reinspection.

The building official may require a structure or portions of work to be reinspected. A reinspection fee may be assessed for each inspection or reinspection when such portion of work for which the inspection was requested is not complete; or when previous corrections called for are not made; or when there are reoccurring missed items that have previously been identified to the same builder on multiple lots; or when the approved plans and permit are not on site in a conspicuous or pre-approved location; or when the building is not accessible. In instances where reinspection fees have been assessed, no additional inspection of the work shall be provided by the City until the required fees are paid. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.455 Other inspections.

In addition to the inspections specified above, the building official is authorized to make or require other inspections of any construction work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC and other laws that are enforced by the building department. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.460 Special inspections.

In addition to the inspections specified above, the building official is authorized to make or require special inspections for any type of work related to the technical codes by an approved agency at no cost to the City of Sammamish.

(1) In accordance with the building enclosure special inspection requirements of Chapter 64.55 RCW, the owner(s) of affected multiunit residential buildings shall provide the City with a building enclosure inspection report prepared by a third-party, independent, and qualified inspector during the course of initial construction and during rehabilitative construction. Note: The City does not verify the qualifications of the inspector or determine whether the building enclosure inspection is adequate or appropriate. The City is prohibited from issuing a certificate of occupancy for the building until the inspector submits the report to the building department and a signed letter certifying that the building enclosure has been inspected during the course of construction or rehabilitative construction and that the construction is in substantial compliance with the building enclosure design documents.

See SMC 16.20.273, Building enclosure design requirements of Chapter 64.55 RCW, for additional requirements. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.465 Final inspection.

The final inspection shall be made after all work required by the building permit is completed. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.470 Inspection agencies.

The building official is authorized to accept reports of approved inspection agencies, provided such agencies satisfy the requirements as to qualifications and reliability. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.475 Inspection requests.

It shall be the duty of the holder of the building permit or their duly authorized agent to notify the City of Sammamish when work is ready for inspection. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to provide access to and means for inspections of such work that are required by this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.480 Approval required.

Work shall not be done beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the approval of the building division. The building division, upon notification, shall make the requested inspections and shall either indicate the portion of the construction that is satisfactory as completed, or notify the permit holder or his or her agent wherein the same fails to comply with this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC. Any portions that do not comply shall be corrected and such portion shall not be covered or concealed until authorized by the building division. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3)


16.20.483 Traffic management systems.

(1) The City building official will perform the electrical inspection and acceptance of traffic management systems within its jurisdiction. A traffic management system includes:

(a) Traffic illumination systems;

(b) Traffic signal systems;

(c) Traffic monitoring systems;

(d) The electrical service cabinet and all related components and equipment installed on the load side of the service cabinet supplying electrical power to the traffic management system; and

(e) Signalization system(s) necessary for the operation of a light rail system. A traffic management system can provide signalization for controlling vehicular traffic, pedestrian traffic, or rolling stock.

(2) The City recognizes that traffic signal conductors, pole and bracket cables, signal displays, traffic signal controllers/cabinets, and associated components used in traffic management systems are acceptable for the purpose of meeting the requirements of Chapter 19.28 RCW, provided they conform with the following standards or are listed on the Washington State Department of Transportation (WSDOT) qualified products list:

(a) WSDOT/APWA Standard Specifications and Plans;

(b) WSDOT Design Manual;

(c) International Municipal Signal Association (IMSA);

(d) National Electrical Manufacturer’s Association (NEMA);

(e) Federal Standards 170/Controller Cabinets;

(f) Manual for Uniform Road, Bridge, and Municipal Construction;

(g) Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE); or

(h) Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD).

(3) Associated induction detection loop or similar circuits will be accepted by the City without inspection.

(4) For the licensing requirements of Chapter 19.28 RCW, jurisdictions will be considered owners of traffic management systems when doing electrical work for another jurisdiction(s) under a valid interlocal agreement, as permitted by Chapter 39.34 RCW. Interlocal agreements for traffic management systems must be filed with the city prior to work being performed for this provision to apply.

(5) Jurisdictions with an established electrical inspection authority and WSDOT may perform electrical inspection on their rights-of-way for each other by interlocal agreement. They may not perform electrical inspection on other rights-of-way except as allowed in Chapter 19.28 or 39.34 RCW.

(6) Underground Installations.

(a) In other than open trenching, raceways will be considered “fished” according to the NEC and do not require visual inspection.

(b) The City will conduct inspections in open trenching within its jurisdiction upon request.

(7) Identification of Traffic Management System Components. Local government jurisdictions or WSDOT may act as the certifying authority for the safety evaluation of all components.

(a) An electrical service cabinet must contain only listed components. The electrical service cabinet enclosure is not required to be listed but will conform to the standards in subsection (8) of this section.

(b) The local government jurisdiction must identify, as acceptable, the controller cabinet or system component(s) with an identification plate. The identification plate must be located inside the cabinet and may be attached with adhesive.

(8) Conductors of Different Circuits in Same Cable, Enclosure, or Raceway. All traffic management system circuits will be permitted to occupy the same cable, enclosure, or raceway without regard to voltage characteristics, provided all conductors are insulated for the maximum voltage of any conductor in the cable, enclosure, or raceway. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A))


16.20.485 Certificate of occupancy – Use and occupancy.

No building or structure shall be used or occupied and no change in the existing occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion thereof shall be made until the City has issued a certificate of occupancy therefor as provided herein.

Exceptions:

(1) Residential accessory buildings or structures.

(2) Work exempt from permits per SMC 16.20.200.

Structures approved under the provisions of the International Residential Code may be issued a certificate of occupancy in the form of a signed-off permit inspection card.

Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC or of other ordinances of the City of Sammamish. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.490 Certificate of occupancy issued.

After the building division inspects the building or structure and finds no violations of the provisions of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC or other laws that are enforced by the department of building safety, the City of Sammamish shall issue a certificate of occupancy.

Structures approved under the International Residential Code may be issued a certificate of occupancy in the form of a “final inspection” approval signature on the permit inspection card.

For all other structures requiring a certificate of occupancy, the certificate of occupancy shall contain the following information:

(1) The building permit number.

(2) The address of the structure.

(3) The name and address of the owner.

(4) A description of that portion of the structure for which the certificate is issued.

(5) A statement that the described portion of the structure has been inspected for compliance with the requirements of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC for the occupancy and division of occupancy and the use for which the proposed occupancy is classified.

(6) The name of the building official.

(7) The edition of the code under which the permit was issued.

(8) The use and occupancy, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 3 of the International Building Code or International Residential Code as applicable.

(9) The type of construction as defined in Chapter 6 of the International Building Code or International Residential Code as applicable.

(10) The design occupant load.

(11) If an automatic sprinkler system is provided, and whether the sprinkler system is required.

(12) Any special stipulations and conditions of the building permit. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.495 Temporary or phased occupancy.

The building official is authorized to issue a temporary or phased certificate of occupancy before the completion of the entire work covered by the permit; provided, that such portion or portions shall be occupied safely. The building official is authorized to require, in addition to the completion of life safety building components, completion of any or all accessibility components prior to issuance of a temporary or phased certificate of occupancy. The building official shall set a time period during which the temporary or phased certificate of occupancy is valid. The building official is authorized to require that a performance bond be posted with the City in an amount equal to 150 percent of the incomplete work as determined by the design professional. The bond shall be refundable upon inspection, final approval and a request in writing for the refund. It shall be the duty of the applicant to request the refund. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.500 Revocation of certificate of occupancy.

The building official is authorized to, in writing, suspend or revoke a certificate of occupancy or completion issued under the provisions of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC wherever the certificate is issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect information provided by the owner or owner’s representatives, or where it is determined that the building or structure or portion thereof is in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.505 Connection of service utilities.

No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system that is regulated by this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC for which a permit is required, until released by the building official. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.510 Temporary connection of service utilities.

The building official shall have the authority to authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.515 Authority to disconnect service utilities.

The building official shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC and the codes referenced in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property, or when such utility connection has been made without the required approval. The building official shall notify the serving utility, and wherever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system, of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.520 Appeals – General.

(1) Appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretations of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC shall be heard and decided by the hearing examiner following an open record hearing. Following review of the evidence, the examiner shall issue final decisions, including findings and conclusions, based on the issues and evidence in the record.

(2) The hearing examiner’s final decision shall be the final decision of the City council on the appeal and shall be conclusive unless proceedings for review of the decision are properly commenced in superior court within the time period specified by state law. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.525 Appeals – Limitations on authority.

An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC do not fully apply or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed. The hearing examiner shall have no authority relative to interpretation of the administrative provisions of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC, nor shall the hearing examiner be empowered to waive requirements of either this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC or the technical codes which are the codes, appendices and referenced code standards adopted by the City of Sammamish. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.530 Unlawful acts.

It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish or occupy any building, structure or equipment regulated by this code, and Chapters 16.05 and 16.25 SMC, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this code, and Chapters 16.05 and 16.25 SMC. Unlawful acts shall be considered a “civil code violation” as defined in SMC 23.150.010. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.535 Notice of violation.

The building official is authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, moving, removal, demolition or occupancy of a building or structure in violation of the provisions of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.540 Prosecution of violation.

If the notice of violation is not complied with in the time prescribed by such notice, the building official is authorized to request the legal counsel of the City of Sammamish to institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the building or structure in violation of the provisions of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.545 Violation – Penalties.

Any person who violates a provision of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed in SMC Title 23, code enforcement. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.550 Stop work order – Authority.

Whenever the building official finds any work being performed in a manner either contrary to the provisions of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC or other pertinent laws or ordinances implemented through the enforcement of this code and Chapter 16.05 SMC, the building official is authorized to issue a stop work order. Issuance of a notice of violation, infraction or notice and order is not a condition precedent to the issuance of the stop work order. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.555 Stop work order – Issuance.

The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner’s agent, or to the person doing the work. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the reason for the order, and the conditions under which the cited work will be permitted to resume. Service of the stop work order shall be in accordance with Chapter 23.90 SMC. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.560 Stop work order – Effect.

(1) The building official is authorized to assess a special investigation fee for the issuance of a stop work order when work has started without the issuance of a permit.

(2) A stop work order represents a determination that a civil code violation has occurred and that any work or activity that is causing or contributing to the violation on the property where the violation has occurred or is occurring must cease.

(3) A stop work order requires the immediate cessation of the specified work or activity on the named property. Work or activity may not resume unless specifically authorized by the building official or designee.

(4) A stop work order may be appealed to the City of Sammamish hearing examiner according to the procedures prescribed by Chapter 23.110 SMC.

(5) Failure to appeal the stop work order within the applicable time limits renders the stop work order a final determination that the civil code violation occurred and that work was properly ordered to cease.

(6) Failure to comply with the terms of a stop work order subjects the person responsible for code compliance to civil penalties and costs. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.565 Stop work order – Remedy – Civil penalties.

Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law.

(1) In addition to any other judicial or administrative remedy, the building official or designee may assess civil penalties for the violation of any stop work order as set forth in the civil penalty schedule contained in Chapter 23.100 SMC.

(2) Civil penalties for the violation of any stop work order shall begin to accrue on the first day the stop work order is violated and shall cease on the day the work is actually stopped.

(3) Violation of a stop work order shall be a separate violation from any other civil code violation. Civil penalties assessed create a joint and several personal obligation in all persons responsible for code violation. The City of Sammamish may collect the civil penalties assessed by any appropriate legal means.

(4) In addition to all other remedies, a lien for the value of the civil penalties imposed may be filed against the real property that is subject to compliance with the City of Sammamish building code. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


16.20.570 Unsafe structures and equipment.

Structures or existing equipment that are or hereafter become unsafe, unsanitary or deficient because of inadequate means of egress facilities, inadequate light and ventilation, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life or the public welfare, or that involve illegal or improper occupancy or inadequate maintenance, shall be deemed an unsafe condition. A vacant structure that is not secured against entry or that has been abandoned for more than one year, or the applicant or owner fails to request the appropriate inspections, shall be deemed unsafe.

Where a structure has been deemed unsafe, the building official or designee shall first issue a notice of violation as prescribed in SMC 16.20.535. The notice of violation shall include a statement requiring the unsafe structure or equipment be taken down and removed or made safe, as the building official deems necessary and as provided for in Chapter 16.25 SMC, Sammamish Building and Property Maintenance Code. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-409 § 1 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 3) 


Chapter 16.25 SAMMAMISH BUILDING AND PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE

Sections: 

16.25.010    Short title.

16.25.015    Scope.

16.25.020    Intent.

16.25.025    Severability.

16.25.030    Applicability.

16.25.035    Maintenance.

16.25.040    Application of other codes.

16.25.045    Existing remedies.

16.25.050    Workmanship.

16.25.055    Historic buildings.

16.25.060    Referenced codes and standards.

16.25.065    Requirements not covered by code.

16.25.070    Duties and powers of the code official.

16.25.075    Fees.

16.25.080    Modifications.

16.25.085    Alternative materials, methods and equipment.

16.25.090    Required testing.

16.25.095    Test methods.

16.25.100    Test reports.

16.25.105    Material and equipment reuse.

16.25.110    Violations.

16.25.145    Transfer of ownership.

16.25.150    Unsafe structures and equipment.

16.25.155    Closing of vacant structures.

16.25.160    Notice.

16.25.165    Placarding.

16.25.170    Placard removal.

16.25.175    Prohibited occupancy.

16.25.180    Emergency measures.

16.25.185    Demolition.

16.25.190    Definitions.

16.25.195    General requirements.

16.25.200    Exterior property areas.

16.25.205    Swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs.

16.25.210    Exterior structure.

16.25.215    Interior structure.

16.25.220    Handrails and guards.

16.25.225    Rubbish and garbage.

16.25.230    Extermination.

16.25.235    Light and ventilation.

16.25.240    Occupancy limitations.

16.25.245    Plumbing facilities and fixture requirements.

16.25.250    Plumbing systems and fixtures.

16.25.255    Water system.

16.25.260    Sanitary drainage system.

16.25.265    Storm drainage.

16.25.270    Mechanical and electrical requirements.

16.25.275    Elevators, escalators and dumbwaiters.

16.25.280    Fire safety requirements.


16.25.010 Short title.

These regulations shall be known as the City of Sammamish Building and Property Maintenance Code, hereinafter referred to as “this code.” (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 4) 


16.25.015 Scope.

The provisions of this code shall apply to all existing residential and nonresidential structures and all existing premises and shall constitute minimum requirements and standards for premises, structures, equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, space, heating, sanitation, protection from the elements, life safety, safety from fire and other hazards, and for safe and sanitary maintenance; the responsibility of owners, operators and occupants; the occupancy of existing structures and premises; and for administration, enforcement and penalties. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 4) 


16.25.020 Intent.

This code is intended to ensure public health, safety and welfare regarding the continued occupancy and maintenance of structures and premises. Existing structures and premises that do not comply with these provisions shall be altered or repaired to provide a minimum level of health and safety as required herein. Repairs, alterations, additions to and change of occupancy in existing buildings shall comply with this title, SMC Titles 21A and 21B and SMC 46.30.090. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 4) 


16.25.025 Severability.

If a section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 4) 


16.25.030 Applicability.

The provisions of this code shall apply to all matters affecting or relating to structures and premises, as set forth in this chapter. Where, in a specific case, different sections of this code specify different requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 4) 


16.25.035 Maintenance.

Equipment, systems, devices and safeguards required by this code or a previous regulation or code under which the structure or premises was constructed, altered or repaired shall be maintained in good working order. No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment or utility which is required under this section to be removed from, shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling, except for such temporary interruption as necessary while repairs or alterations are in progress. The requirements of this code are not intended to provide the basis for removal or abrogation of fire protection and safety systems and devices in existing structures. Except as otherwise specified herein, the owner or the owner’s designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures and premises. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 4) 


16.25.040 Application of other codes.

Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the Sammamish Municipal Code. Nothing in this code shall be construed to cancel, modify or set aside any other provisions of the Sammamish Municipal Code. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 4) 


16.25.045 Existing remedies.

The provisions in this code shall not be construed to abolish or impair existing remedies of the jurisdiction or its officers or agencies relating to the removal or demolition of any structure which is dangerous, unsafe and unsanitary. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 4) 


16.25.050 Workmanship.

Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or installations which are caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this code shall be executed and installed in a workmanlike manner and installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 4) 


16.25.055 Historic buildings.

The provisions of this code shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures designated as historic buildings as defined in the International Existing Building Code when such buildings or structures are judged by the code official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 4) 


16.25.060 Referenced codes and standards.

The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be considered part of the requirements of this code when specifically adopted by the City of Sammamish. Where differences occur between provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of the referenced codes and standards shall apply. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 4) 


16.25.065 Requirements not covered by code.

Requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing fixture, structure or equipment, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this code, shall be determined by the code official. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 4) 


16.25.070 Duties and powers of the code official.

(1) The code official shall enforce the provisions of this code.

(2) The code official shall be appointed by the chief appointing authority of the jurisdiction, and the code official shall not be removed from office except for cause and after full opportunity to be heard on specific and relevant charges by and before the appointing authority.

(3) In accordance with the prescribed procedures of this jurisdiction and with the concurrence of the appointing authority, the code official shall have the authority to appoint a deputy code official, other related technical officers, inspectors and other employees.

(4) The code official, officer or employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting for the jurisdiction, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of an act required or permitted in the discharge of official duties.

Any suit instituted against any officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this code shall be defended by the legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. The code official or any subordinate shall not be liable for costs in an action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this code; and any officer of the department of property maintenance inspection, acting in good faith and without malice, shall be free from liability for acts performed under any of its provisions or by reason of any act or omission in the performance of official duties in connection therewith.

(5) The code official shall have authority as necessary in the interest of public health, safety and general welfare to adopt and promulgate rules and procedures; to interpret and implement the provisions of this code; to secure the intent thereof; and to designate requirements applicable because of local climatic or other conditions. Such rules shall not have the effect of waiving structural or fire performance requirements specifically provided for in this code, or of violating accepted engineering methods involving public safety.

(6) The code official is authorized to make all of the required inspections, or shall accept reports of inspection by approved agencies or individuals. All reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the responsible individual. The code official is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise, subject to the approval of the appointing authority.

(7) An initial enforcement determination shall be undertaken regarding buildings or properties whenever the code official has reason to believe that a violation of this code exists, or a complaint is filed with the department by any person; provided, that where complaints have been filed by tenants, the tenant shall first exhaust all remedies provided through the Washington State Landlord Tenant Act, unless circumstances exist that give evidence of an immediate life safety or health condition that warrants an immediate response by the department.

(8) The code official shall carry proper identification when inspecting structures or premises in the performance of duties under this code.

(9) The code official shall keep official records of all business and activities of the department specified in the provisions of this code. Such records shall be retained in the official records as required by state law. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 4) 


16.25.075 Fees.

The fees for activities and services performed by the department in carrying out its responsibilities under this code shall be as per City of Sammamish fee resolution. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 4) 


16.25.080 Modifications.

Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of this code, the code official shall have the authority to grant modifications for individual cases, provided the code official shall first find that special individual reason makes the strict letter of this code impractical and the modification is in compliance with the intent and purpose of this code and that such modification does not lessen health, life and fire safety requirements. The details of action granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the department files. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 4) 


16.25.085 Alternative materials, methods and equipment.

The provisions of this code are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to prohibit any method of construction not specifically prescribed by this code; provided, that any such alternative has been approved and complies with all other codes adopted by the City of Sammamish. An alternative material or method of construction shall be approved where the code official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of this code, and that the material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this code in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 4) 


16.25.090 Required testing.

Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of this code, or evidence that a material or method does not conform to the requirements of this code, or in order to substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the code official shall have the authority to require tests to be made as evidence of compliance at no expense to the City. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 4) 


16.25.095 Test methods.

Test methods shall be as specified in this code or by other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the code official shall be permitted to approve appropriate testing procedures performed by an approved agency. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 4) 


16.25.100 Test reports.

Reports of tests shall be retained by the code official for the period required for retention of public records. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 4) 


16.25.105 Material and equipment reuse.

Materials, equipment and devices shall not be reused unless such elements are in good repair or have been reconditioned and tested when necessary, placed in good and proper working condition and approved. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 4) 


16.25.110 Violations.

Any person, firm, corporation or organization violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the provisions of SMC Title 23, code enforcement. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 4) 


16.25.145 Transfer of ownership.

It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling unit or structure who has received a compliance order or upon whom a notice of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such dwelling unit or structure to another until the provisions of the compliance order or notice of violation have been complied with, or until such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any compliance order or notice of violation issued by the code official and shall furnish to the code official a signed and notarized statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or notice of violation and fully accepting the responsibility without condition for making the corrections or repairs required by such compliance order or notice of violation. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 4) 


16.25.150 Unsafe structures and equipment.

(1) General. When a structure or equipment is found by the code official to be unsafe, or when a structure is found unfit for human occupancy, or is found unlawful, or is found to be a dangerous building, the code official is authorized to condemn the structure pursuant to the provisions of this code.

(2) Unsafe Structures. An unsafe structure is one that is found to be dangerous to the life, health, property or safety of the public or the occupants of the structure by not providing minimum safeguards to protect or warn occupants in the event of fire, or because such structure contains unsafe equipment or is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe or of such faulty construction or unstable foundation that partial or complete collapse is possible.

(3) Unsafe Equipment. Unsafe equipment includes any boiler, heating equipment, elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device, flammable liquid containers or other equipment on the premises or within the structure which is in such disrepair or condition that such equipment is a hazard to life, health, property or safety of the public or occupants of the premises or structure.

(4) Structure Unfit for Human Occupancy. A structure is unfit for human occupancy whenever the code official finds that such structure is unsafe, unlawful or, because of the degree to which the structure is in disrepair or lacks maintenance, is unsanitary or vermin- or rat-infested, contains filth and contamination, or lacks ventilation, illumination, sanitary or heating facilities or other essential equipment required by this code, or because the location of the structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants of the structure or to the public, or is declared a dangerous building.

(5) Unlawful Structure. An unlawful structure is one found in whole or in part to be occupied by more persons than permitted under this code, or which was erected, altered or occupied contrary to law.

(6) Dangerous Building. For the purpose of this code, any building or structure which has any or all of the conditions or defects hereinafter described shall be deemed to be a dangerous building; provided, that such conditions or defects exist to the extent that the life, health, property or safety of the public or occupants is endangered:

(a) Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is not of sufficient width or size or is not so arranged to provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire and panic.

(b) Whenever the walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is so warped, worn, loose, or torn or otherwise unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic.

(c) Whenever the stress in any materials, member or portion thereof, due to all dead and live loads, is more than one and one-half times the working stress or stress allowed in the adopted construction codes for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location.

(d) Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood or by any other cause, to such an extent that the structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was before such catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of the adopted construction codes for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location.

(e) Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance thereof is likely to fail, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property.

(f) Whenever any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance or ornamentation on the exterior thereof, is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place, so as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of one-half of that specified in the adopted construction codes for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location without exceeding the working stresses permitted in the adopted construction codes for such buildings.

(g) Whenever any portion thereof has wracked, warped, buckled or settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of similar new construction.

(h) Whenever the building or structure, or any portion thereof, because of dilapidation, deterioration or decay; faulty construction; the removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building; the deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation; or any other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse.

(i) Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used.

(j) Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity does not fall within one-third of the base.

(k) Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the foundation, shows 33 percent or more damage or deterioration of its supporting member or members, or 50 percent damage or deterioration of its nonsupporting members, enclosing or outside walls or coverings.

(l) Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become an attractive nuisance to children; a harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons; or as to enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing unlawful or immoral acts.

(m) Whenever any building or structure has been constructed, exists, or is maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to such building or structure provided by the regulations of this jurisdiction as specified in the Sammamish Municipal Code relating to the condition and/or location of structures and buildings.

(n) Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six months so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public.

(o) Whenever any building or structure, because of obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections or heating apparatus, or other cause, is determined by the fire marshal to be a fire hazard. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 4) 


16.25.155 Closing of vacant structures.

(1) If the structure is vacant and unfit for human habitation and occupancy, and is not in danger of structural collapse, the code official is authorized to post a placard on the premises and order the structure closed up so as not to be an attractive nuisance. Upon failure of the owner to close up the premises within the time specified in the order, the code official is authorized to cause the premises to be closed and secured through any available public agency or by contract or arrangement by private persons and the cost thereof shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate and may be collected by any other legal resource.

(2) To secure a building all doors, window openings or other openings on floors accessible from grade shall be closed and locked, or shuttered to prevent casual entry. If openings are damaged so they cannot be secured using normal building amenities, they shall be secured by covering with seven-sixteenths-inch minimum thickness structural panel sheathing cut to fit over the building opening and secured with No. 10 wood screws with fender washers. The screws shall penetrate the wood framing by a minimum of one and one-quarter inches and the screws shall be spaced around the perimeter of the opening at no more than 12 inches on center. The exterior structural panel sheathing shall be painted to match the house.

(3) The code official is authorized to require additional securing measures as deemed necessary. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 4)


16.25.160 Notice.

Whenever the code official has determined that a structure or equipment is unsafe under the provisions of this chapter, notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice and served on the owner or the person or persons responsible for the structure or equipment in accordance with SMC 16.25.165. If the notice pertains to equipment, it shall also be placed on the unsafe equipment. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 4) 


16.25.165 Placarding.

Upon failure of the owner or person responsible to comply with the notice provisions within the time given, the code official is authorized to post on the premises or on defective equipment a placard bearing the words “UNSAFE – DO NOT ENTER OR OCCUPY” and a statement of the penalties provided for occupying the premises, operating the equipment or removing the placard. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 4) 


16.25.170 Placard removal.

The code official is authorized to remove the “UNSAFE – DO NOT ENTER OR OCCUPY” placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the placarding actions were based have been eliminated. Any person who defaces or removes a placard without the approval of the code official shall be subject to the penalties provided by this code. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 4) 


16.25.175 Prohibited occupancy.

Any occupied structure placarded by the code official is authorized to be vacated as ordered by the code official. Any person who shall occupy a placarded premises or shall operate placarded equipment, and any owner or any person responsible for the premises who shall let anyone occupy a placarded premises or operate placarded equipment, shall be liable for the penalties provided by this code. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 4) 


16.25.180 Emergency measures.

(1) Imminent Danger. When, in the opinion of the code official, there is imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building or structure which endangers life, or when any structure or part of a structure has fallen and life is endangered by the occupation of the structure, or when there is actual or potential danger to the building occupants or those in the proximity of any structure because of explosives, explosive fumes or vapors or the presence of toxic fumes, gases or materials, or operation of defective or dangerous equipment, the code official is hereby authorized and empowered to order and require the occupants to vacate the premises forthwith. The code official is authorized to cause to be posted at each entrance to such structure a notice reading as follows: “This Structure Is Unsafe and Its Occupancy Has Been Prohibited by the Code Official.” It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such structure except for the purpose of securing the structure, making the required repairs, removing the hazardous condition or of demolishing the same.

(2) Temporary Safeguards. Notwithstanding other provisions of this code, whenever, in the opinion of the code official, there is imminent danger due to an unsafe condition, the code official is authorized to order the necessary work to be done, including the boarding up of openings, to render such structure temporarily safe whether or not the legal procedure herein described has been instituted; and is authorized to cause such other action to be taken as the code official deems necessary to meet such emergency.

(3) Closing Streets. When necessary for public safety, the code official is authorized to temporarily close structures and close, or order the authority having jurisdiction to close, sidewalks, streets, public ways and places adjacent to unsafe structures, and prohibit the same from being utilized.

(4) Emergency Repairs. For the purposes of this section, the code official is authorized to employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the required work as expeditiously as possible.

(5) Costs of Emergency Repairs. Costs incurred in the performance of emergency work may be paid by the jurisdiction. The legal counsel of the jurisdiction is authorized to institute appropriate action against the owner of the premises where the unsafe structure is or was located for the recovery of such costs.

(6) Hearing. Any person ordered to take emergency measures shall comply with such order forthwith. Any affected person shall thereafter, upon petition directed to the appeals board, be afforded a hearing as described in this code. For provisions related to appeals, see Chapters 20.10 and 23.110 SMC. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 4) 


16.25.185 Demolition.

(1) General. The code official shall have the authority to order the owner of any premises upon which is located any structure, which in the code official’s judgment is so old, dilapidated or has become so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation or occupancy, and such that it is unreasonable to repair the structure, to demolish and remove such structure; or if such structure is capable of being made safe by repairs, to repair and make safe and sanitary or to demolish and remove at the owner’s option; or where there has been a cessation of normal construction of any structure for a period of more than two years, to demolish and remove such structure.

(2) Notices and Orders. All notices and orders shall comply with SMC Title 23, code enforcement.

(3) Failure to Comply. If the owner of a premises fails to comply with a demolition order within the time prescribed, the code official shall have the authority to cause the structure to be demolished and removed, either through an available public agency or by contract or arrangement with private persons, and the cost of such demolition and removal shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.

(4) Salvage Materials. When any structure has been ordered demolished and removed, the governing body or other designated officer under said contract or arrangement aforesaid shall have the right to sell the salvage and valuable materials at the highest price obtainable. The net proceeds of such sale, after deducting the expenses of such demolition and removal, shall be promptly remitted with a report of such sale or transaction, including the items of expense and the amounts deducted, for the person who is entitled thereto, subject to any order of a court. If such a surplus does not remain to be turned over, the report shall so state. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 4) 


16.25.190 Definitions.

Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the purposes of this code, have the meanings shown in this chapter.

Words stated in the present tense include the future; words stated in the masculine gender include the feminine gender and the feminine the masculine; the singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular.

Where terms are not defined in this code and are defined in the Sammamish Municipal Code and those codes adopted under the Sammamish Municipal Code, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as in those codes.

Where terms are not defined through the methods authorized by this section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies.

Whenever the words “dwelling unit,” “dwelling,” “premises,” “building,” “rooming house,” “rooming unit,” “housekeeping unit” or “story” are stated in this code, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words “or any part thereof.”

“Approved” means approved by the code official.

“Basement” means that portion of a building which is partly or completely below grade.

“Bathroom” means a room containing plumbing fixtures including a bathtub or shower.

“Bedroom” means any room or space used or intended to be used for sleeping purposes.

“Code official” means the official who is charged with the administration and enforcement of this code, or any duly authorized representative.

“Condemn” means to adjudge unfit for occupancy.

“Dwelling unit” means a single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.

“Easement” means that portion of land or property reserved for present or future use by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the property. The easement shall be permitted to be for use under, on or above said lot or lots.

“Exterior property” means the open space on the premises and on adjoining property under the control of owners or operators of such premises.

“Extermination” means the control and elimination of insects, rats or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that serve as their food; by poison spraying, fumigating, or trapping or by any other approved pest elimination methods.

“Garbage” means the animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.

“Guard” means a building component or a system of building components located at or near the open sides of elevated walking surfaces that minimizes the possibility of a fall from the walking surface to a lower level.

“Habitable space” means a space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces, and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces.

“Housekeeping unit” means a room or group of rooms forming a single habitable space equipped and intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating which does not contain, within such a unit, a toilet, lavatory and bathtub or shower.

“Imminent danger” means a condition which could cause serious or life-threatening injury or death at any time.

“Infestation” means the presence, within or contiguous to a structure or premises, of insects, rats, vermin or other pests.

“Inoperable motor vehicle” means a vehicle which cannot be driven upon the public streets for reasons including but not limited to being unlicensed, wrecked, abandoned, in a state of disrepair, or incapable of being moved under its own power.

“Labeled” means devices, equipment, appliances, or materials to which has been affixed a label, seal, symbol or other identifying mark of a nationally recognized testing laboratory, inspection agency or other organization concerned with product evaluation that maintains periodic inspection of the production of the above-labeled items and by whose label the manufacturer attests to compliance with applicable nationally recognized standards.

“Let for occupancy” or “let” means to permit, provide or offer possession or occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building, premises or structure by a person who is or is not the legal owner of record thereof, pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or license, or pursuant to a recorded or unrecorded agreement of contract for the sale of land.

“Occupancy” means the purpose for which a building or portion thereof is utilized or occupied.

“Occupant” means any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having possession of a space within a building.

“Openable area” means that part of a window, skylight or door which is available for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.

“Operator” means any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises which is let or offered for occupancy.

“Owner” means any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court.

“Person” means an individual, corporation, partnership or any other group acting as a unit.

“Premises” means a lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or public way, including any structures thereon.

“Public way” means any street, alley or similar parcel of land essentially unobstructed from the ground to the sky, which is deeded, dedicated or otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use.

“Rooming house” means a building arranged or occupied for lodging, with or without meals, for compensation and not occupied as a one- or two-family dwelling.

“Rooming unit” means any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping or living, but not for cooking purposes.

“Rubbish” means combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage; the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery, dust and other similar materials.

“Sleeping unit” means a room or space in which people sleep, which can also include permanent provisions for living, eating and either sanitation or kitchen facilities, but not for both. Such rooms and spaces that are also part of a dwelling unit are not sleeping units.

“Strict liability offense” means an offense in which the prosecution in a legal proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as a part of its case. It is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which was prohibited, or failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required to do.

“Structure” means that which is built or constructed or a portion thereof.

“Tenant” means a person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not the legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit.

“Toilet room” means a room containing a water closet or urinal but not a bathtub or shower.

“Ventilation” means the natural or mechanical process of supplying conditioned or unconditioned air to, or removing such air from, any space.

“Workmanlike” means executed in a skilled manner; e.g., generally plumb, level, square, in line, undamaged and without marring adjacent work.

“Yard” means an open space on the same lot with a structure. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2007-214 § 1; Ord. O2004-148 § 4) 


16.25.195 General requirements.

(1) Scope. The provisions of this chapter and SMC Title 8 shall govern the minimum conditions and the responsibilities of persons for maintenance of structures, equipment and exterior property.

(2) Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall maintain the structures and exterior property in compliance with these requirements, except as otherwise provided for in this code. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy premises which are not in a sanitary and safe condition and which do not comply with the requirements of this chapter. Occupants of a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit are responsible for keeping in a clean, sanitary and safe condition that part of the dwelling unit, rooming unit, housekeeping unit or premises which they occupy and control.

(3) Vacant Structures and Land. All vacant structures and premises thereof or vacant land shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition as provided herein so as not to cause a blighting problem or adversely affect the public health or safety. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 4) 


16.25.200 Exterior property areas.

(1) Sanitation. All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition in accordance with this code and the provisions of SMC 23.30.010. The occupant shall keep that part of the exterior property which such occupant occupies or controls in a clean and sanitary condition.

(2) Grading and Drainage. All premises shall be graded and maintained to prevent the erosion of soil and to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any structure located thereon.

Exception: Approved retention areas and reservoirs.

(3) Sidewalks and Driveways. All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces and similar areas shall be kept in a proper state of repair, and maintained free from hazardous conditions.

(4) Rodent Harborage. All structures and exterior property shall be kept free from rodent harborage and infestation. Where rodents are found, they shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes which will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to eliminate rodent harborage and prevent reinfestation.

(5) Exhaust Vents. Clearances to property lines and openings into a building prescribed in the codes applicable to the installation of pipes, ducts, conductors, fans or blowers shall be maintained.

(6) Accessory Structures. All accessory structures, including detached garages, fences and walls, shall be maintained structurally sound and in good repair.

(7) Defacement of Property. No person shall willfully or wantonly damage, mutilate or deface any exterior surface of any structure or building on any private or public property by placing thereon any marking, carving or graffiti. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to restore said surface to an approved state of maintenance and repair. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 4) 


16.25.205 Swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs.

(1) Swimming Pools. Swimming pools shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, and in good repair.

(2) Enclosures. Private swimming pools, hot tubs and spas containing water more than 36 inches (915 mm) in depth shall be completely surrounded by a fence or barrier at least 48 inches (1,219 mm) in height above the finished ground level measured on the side of the barrier away from the pool. Openings in the fence or barrier shall not allow the passage of a four-inch-diameter sphere. Gates and doors in such barriers shall be self-closing and self-latching. Where the self-latching device is less than 54 inches (1,372 mm) above the bottom of the gate, the release mechanism shall be located on the pool side of the gate. Self-closing and self-latching gates shall be maintained such that the gate will positively close and latch when released from an open position of six inches (152 mm) from the gatepost. No existing pool enclosure shall be removed, replaced or changed in a manner that reduces its effectiveness as a safety barrier. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 4) 


16.25.210 Exterior structure.

(1) General. The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare.

(2) Protective Treatment. All exterior surfaces, including, but not limited to, doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies, decks and fences, shall be maintained in good condition. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. All siding and masonry joints as well as those between the building envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors, and skylights shall be maintained weather resistant and watertight. All metal surfaces subject to rust or corrosion shall be coated to inhibit such rust and corrosion and all surfaces with rust or corrosion shall be stabilized and coated to inhibit future rust and corrosion. Oxidation stains shall be removed from exterior surfaces. Surfaces designed for stabilization by oxidation are exempt from this requirement.

(3) Premises Identification. Buildings shall have approved address numbers placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of four inches (102 mm) high with a minimum stroke width of one-half inch (12.7 mm).

(4) Structural Members. All structural members shall be maintained free from deterioration, and shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed dead and live loads.

(5) Foundation Walls. All foundation walls shall be maintained plumb and free from open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to prevent the entry of rodents and other pests.

(6) Exterior Walls. All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks, and loose or rotting materials; and maintained weatherproof and properly surface-coated where required to prevent deterioration.

(7) Roofs and Drainage. The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and not have defects that admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the structure. Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in good repair and free from obstructions. Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance.

(8) Decorative Features. All cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings and similar decorative features shall be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition.

(9) Overhang Extensions. All overhang extensions including, but not limited to, canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes and exhaust ducts shall be maintained in good repair and be properly anchored so as to be kept in a sound condition. When required, all exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.

(10) Stairways, Decks, Porches and Balconies. Every exterior stairway, deck, porch, balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto shall be maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage and capable of supporting the imposed loads.

(11) Chimneys and Towers. All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks, and similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe and sound, and in good repair. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.

(12) Handrails and Guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition.

(13) Window, Skylight and Door Frames. Every window, skylight, and door frame shall be kept in sound condition, good repair and weather tight.

(a) Glazing. All glazing materials shall be maintained free from cracks and holes.

(b) Openable Windows. Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be easily openable and capable of being held in position by window hardware.

(c) Doors. All exterior doors, door assemblies, operator systems if provided and hardware shall be maintained in good condition. Locks at all entrances to dwelling units, rooming units and guestrooms shall tightly secure the door. Locks on means of egress doors shall be in accordance with SMC 16.25.280(1)(c).

(14) Building Security. Doors, windows or hatchways for dwelling units, rooming units or housekeeping units shall be provided with devices designed to provide security for the occupants and property within. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 4) 


16.25.215 Interior structure.

(1) General. The interior of a structure and equipment therein shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary condition. Occupants shall keep that part of the structure which they occupy or control in a clean and sanitary condition. Every owner of a structure containing a rooming house, housekeeping units, a hotel, a dormitory, two or more dwelling units or two or more nonresidential occupancies shall maintain, in a clean and sanitary condition, the shared or public areas of the structure and exterior property.

(2) Structural Members. All structural members shall be maintained structurally sound, and be capable of supporting the imposed loads.

(3) Interior Surfaces. All interior surfaces shall be maintained in a sanitary condition. Peeling, chipping, flaking or abraded paint shall be repaired, removed or covered. Cracked or loose plaster, decayed wood, mold and other defective surface conditions shall be corrected.

(4) Stairs and Walking Surfaces. Every stair, ramp, landing, balcony, porch, deck or other walking surface shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair.

(5) Handrails and Guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition.

(6) Interior Doors. Every interior door shall fit reasonably well within its frame and shall be capable of being opened and closed by being properly and securely attached to jambs, headers or tracks as intended by the manufacturer of the attachment hardware. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 4) 


16.25.220 Handrails and guards.

Every exterior and interior flight of stairs having more than four risers shall have a handrail on one side of the stair and every open portion of a stair, landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp or other walking surface which is more than 30 inches (762 mm) above the floor or grade below shall have guards. Handrails shall not be less than 30 inches (762 mm) high or more than 42 inches (1,067 mm) high measured vertically above the nosing of the tread or above the finished floor of the landing or walking surfaces. Guards shall not be less than 30 inches (762 mm) high above the floor of the landing, balcony, porch, deck, or ramp or other walking surface.

Exception: Guards shall not be required where exempted by the adopted building code. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 4) 


16.25.225 Rubbish and garbage.

(1) Accumulation of Rubbish or Garbage. All exterior property and premises, and the interior of every structure, shall be free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage.

(2) Disposal of Rubbish. Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of all rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such rubbish in approved containers.

(a) Rubbish Storage Facilities. The owner of every occupied premises shall supply approved covered containers for rubbish, and the owner of the premises shall be responsible for the removal of rubbish.

(b) Refrigerators. Refrigerators and similar equipment not in operation shall not be discarded, abandoned or stored on premises and are defined as an attractive nuisance.

(3) Disposal of Garbage. Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such garbage in an approved garbage disposal facility or approved garbage containers maintained for regular collection.

(a) Garbage Facilities. The owner of every dwelling shall supply an approved leakproof, covered, outside garbage container.

(b) Containers. The operator of every establishment producing garbage shall provide, and at all times cause to be utilized, approved leakproof containers provided with close-fitting covers for the storage of such materials until removed from the premises for disposal.

(c) Recyclable Materials and Solid Waste Storage. Space required by WAC 51-50-009 for the storage of recycled materials and solid waste shall be maintained to meet the needs of the occupancy, efficiency of pickup, and shall be available to occupants and haulers. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 4) 


16.25.230 Extermination.

(1) Infestation. All structures shall be kept free from insect and rodent infestation. All structures in which insects or rodents are found shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes that will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent reinfestation.

(2) Owner. The owner of any structure shall be responsible for extermination within the structure prior to renting or leasing the structure.

(3) Single Occupant. The occupant of a one-family dwelling or of a single-tenant nonresidential structure shall be responsible for extermination on the premises.

(4) Multiple Occupancy. The owner of a structure containing two or more dwelling units, a multiple occupancy, a rooming house or a nonresidential structure shall be responsible for extermination in the public or shared areas of the structure and exterior property. If infestation is caused by failure of an occupant to prevent such infestation in the area occupied, the occupant shall be responsible for extermination.

(5) Occupant. The occupant of any structure shall be responsible for the continued rodent- and pest-free condition of the structure.

Exception: Where the infestations are caused by defects in the structure, the owner shall be responsible for extermination. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 4) 


16.25.235 Light and ventilation.

The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum conditions and standards for light, ventilation and space for occupying a structure.

The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain light, ventilation and space conditions in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant, or permit another person to occupy, any structures that do not comply with the requirements of this chapter.

In lieu of the means for natural light and ventilation herein prescribed, artificial light or mechanical ventilation complying with this title and locally adopted amendments shall be permitted.

(1) Natural Light. Every habitable space shall have at least one window of approved size facing directly to the outdoors or to a court. The minimum total glazed area for every habitable space shall be eight percent of the floor area of such room. Wherever walls or other portions of a structure face a window of any room and such obstructions are located less than three feet (914 mm) from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors nor to a court and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window area for the room.

Exception: Where natural light for rooms or spaces without exterior glazing areas is provided through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the adjoining room shall be at least eight percent of the floor area of the interior room or space, but not less than 25 square feet (2.33 m2). The exterior glazing area shall be based on the total floor area being served.

(2) The glazed areas need not be installed in rooms where an emergency rescue and escape opening is not required and artificial light is provided capable of producing an average illumination of six footcandles (65 lux) over the area of the room at a height of 30 inches (762 mm) above the floor level.

(3) Common Halls and Stairways. Every common hall and stairway in residential occupancies, other than in one- and two-family dwellings, shall be lighted at all times with at least a 60-watt standard incandescent light bulb for each 200 square feet (19 m2) of floor area or equivalent illumination; provided, that the spacing between lights shall not be greater than 30 feet (9,144 mm). In other than residential occupancies, means of egress, including exterior means of egress and stairways, shall be illuminated at all times the building space served by the means of egress is occupied with a minimum of one footcandle (11 lux) at floors, landings and treads.

(4) Other Spaces. All other spaces shall be provided with natural or artificial light sufficient to permit the maintenance of sanitary conditions, and the safe occupancy of the space and utilization of the appliances, equipment and fixtures.

(5) Ventilation. Every habitable space shall have at least one openable window. The total openable area of the window in every room shall be equal to at least 45 percent of the minimum glazed area required in subsection (1) of this section.

Exceptions:

(a) Where rooms and spaces without openings to the outdoors are ventilated through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the adjoining room shall be at least eight percent of the floor area of the interior room or space, but not less than 25 square feet (2.33 m2). The ventilation openings to the outdoors shall be based on a total floor area being ventilated.

(b) The glazed areas need not be openable where an emergency rescue and escape opening is not required and an approved mechanical ventilation system capable of producing 0.35 air change per hour in the room is installed or a whole-house mechanical ventilation system is installed capable of supplying outdoor ventilation air of 15 cubic feet per minute (cfm) (78 L/s) per occupant computed on the basis of two occupants for the first bedroom and one occupant for each additional bedroom.

(6) Bathrooms and Toilet Rooms. Every bathroom and toilet room shall comply with the ventilation requirements for habitable spaces as required by subsection (5) of this section, except that a window shall not be required in such spaces equipped with a mechanical ventilation system. Air exhausted by mechanical ventilation system from a bathroom or toilet room shall discharge to the outdoors and shall not be recirculated.

(7) Cooking Facilities. Unless approved through the certificate of occupancy, cooking shall not be permitted in any rooming unit or dormitory unit, and a cooking facility or appliance shall not be permitted to be present in a rooming unit or dormitory unit.

Exception: Where specifically approved in writing by the code official.

(8) Process Ventilation. Where injurious, toxic, irritating or noxious fumes, gases, dusts or mists are generated, a local exhaust ventilation system shall be provided to remove the contaminating agent at the source. Air shall be exhausted to the exterior and not be recirculated to any space.

(9) Clothes Dryer Exhaust. Clothes dryer exhaust systems shall be independent of all other systems and shall be exhausted in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 4) 


16.25.240 Occupancy limitations.

(1) Privacy. Dwelling units, hotel units, housekeeping units, rooming units and dormitory units shall be arranged to provide privacy and be separate from other adjoining spaces.

(2) Minimum Room Widths. A habitable room, other than a kitchen, shall not be less than seven feet (2,134 mm) in any plan dimension. Kitchens shall have a clear passageway of not less than three feet (914 mm) between counter fronts and appliances or counter fronts and walls.

(3) Minimum Ceiling Heights. Habitable spaces, hallways, corridors, laundry areas, bathrooms, toilet rooms and habitable basement areas shall have a clear ceiling height of not less than seven feet (2,134 mm).

Exceptions:

(a) In one- and two-family dwellings, beams or girders spaced not less than four feet (1,219 mm) on center and projecting not more than six inches (152 mm) below the required ceiling height.

(b) Basement rooms in one- and two-family dwellings occupied exclusively for laundry, study or recreation purposes, having a ceiling height of not less than six feet eight inches (2,033 mm) with not less than six feet four inches (1,932 mm) of clear height under beams, girders, ducts and similar obstructions.

(c) Rooms occupied exclusively for sleeping, study or similar purposes and having a sloped ceiling over all or part of the room, with a clear ceiling height of at least seven feet (2,134 mm) over not less than one-third of the required minimum floor area. In calculating the floor area of such rooms, only those portions of the floor area with a clear ceiling height of five feet (1,524 mm) or more shall be included.

(4) Bedroom Requirements. Every bedroom shall comply with the following requirements:

(a) Area for Sleeping Purposes. Every bedroom shall contain at least 70 square feet (6.5 m2) of floor area.

(b) Water Closet Accessibility. In other than Group R-3 occupancies (single-family residence), every bedroom shall have access to at least one water closet and one lavatory without passing through another bedroom and shall have access to at least one water closet and lavatory located on the same story as the bedroom.

(c) Prohibited Occupancy. Kitchens and nonhabitable spaces shall not be used for sleeping purposes.

(d) Other Requirements. Bedrooms shall comply with the applicable provisions of this code including, but not limited to, the light, ventilation, room area, ceiling height and room width requirements of this chapter; the plumbing facilities and water heating facilities requirements of SMC 16.25.245 through 16.25.260; the heating facilities and electrical receptacle requirements of SMC 16.25.270; and the smoke alarm and emergency escape requirements of SMC 16.25.280.

(5) Food Preparation. All spaces to be occupied for food preparation purposes shall contain suitable space and equipment to store, prepare and serve foods in a sanitary manner. There shall be adequate facilities and services for the sanitary disposal of food wastes and refuse, including facilities for temporary storage. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 4) 


16.25.245 Plumbing facilities and fixture requirements.

The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum plumbing systems, facilities and plumbing fixtures to be provided in existing structures. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain such plumbing facilities and plumbing fixtures in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy any structure or premises which does not comply with the requirements of this chapter or the provisions of this title and SMC 46.30.090.

(1) Number and Type of Fixtures. Plumbing fixtures shall be provided and maintained in the quantity and location as required under the building and plumbing codes in existence at the time the occupancy was first approved by the jurisdiction unless subsequently approved to be relocated or removed under an approved permit.

(2) Privacy. Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall provide privacy and shall not constitute the only passageway to a hall or other space, or to the exterior. A door and interior locking device shall be provided for all common or shared bathrooms and toilet rooms in a multiple dwelling.

(3) Location. Toilet rooms and bathrooms serving hotel units, rooming units or dormitory units or housekeeping units shall have access by traversing not more than one flight of stairs and shall have access from a common hall or passageway.

(4) Location of Employee Toilet Facilities. Toilet facilities shall have access from within the employees’ working area. The required toilet facilities shall be located not more than one story above or below the employees’ working area and the path of travel to such facilities shall not exceed a distance of 500 feet (152 m). Employee facilities shall either be separate facilities or combined employee and public facilities.

Exception: Facilities that are required for employees in storage structures or kiosks, which are located in adjacent structures under the same ownership, lease or control, shall not exceed a travel distance of 500 feet (152 m) from the employees’ regular working area to the facilities.

(5) Floor Surface. In other than dwelling units, every toilet room floor shall be maintained to be a smooth, hard, nonabsorbent surface to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 4) 


16.25.250 Plumbing systems and fixtures.

All plumbing fixtures shall be properly installed and maintained in working order, and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects and be capable of performing the function for which such plumbing fixtures are designed. All plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary and functional condition. Plumbing fixtures shall have adequate clearances for usage and cleaning.

Where it is found that a plumbing system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service, inadequate venting, cross-connection, back siphonage, improper installation, deterioration or damage or for similar reasons, the code official shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 4) 


16.25.255 Water system.

(1) General. Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain, water closet or other plumbing fixture shall be properly connected to either a public water system or to an approved private water system. All kitchen sinks, lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied with hot or tempered and cold running water in accordance with this title and SMC 46.30.090.

(2) Contamination. The water supply shall be maintained free from contamination, and all water inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be located above the flood-level rim of the fixture. Shampoo basin faucets, janitor sink faucets and other hose bibs or faucets to which hoses are attached and left in place shall be protected by an approved atmospheric-type vacuum breaker or an approved permanently attached hose connection vacuum breaker.

(3) Supply. The water supply system shall be installed and maintained to provide a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices and appurtenances in sufficient volume and at pressures adequate to enable the fixtures to function properly, safely, and free from defects and leaks.

(4) Water Heating Facilities. Water heating facilities shall be properly installed, maintained and capable of providing an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower and laundry facility at a temperature of not less than 110 degrees Fahrenheit (43 degrees Celsius). A gas-burning water heater shall not be located in any bathroom, toilet room, bedroom or other occupied room normally kept closed, except where allowed by this title and SMC 46.30.090. An approved combination temperature and pressure-relief valve and relief valve discharge pipe shall be properly installed and maintained on water heaters. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 4) 


16.25.260 Sanitary drainage system.

All plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected to either a public sewer system or to an approved private sewage disposal system.

Every plumbing stack, vent, waste and sewer line shall function properly and be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 4) 


16.25.265 Storm drainage.

Drainage of roofs and paved areas, yards and courts, and other open areas on the premises shall be discharged in a manner consistent with the Sammamish Municipal Code and shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 4) 


16.25.270 Mechanical and electrical requirements.

The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment to be provided.

The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy any premises which does not comply with the requirements of this chapter.

(1) Heating Facilities Required. Heating facilities shall be provided in structures as follows:

(a) Residential Occupancies. Dwellings shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68 degrees Fahrenheit (20 degrees Celsius) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms.

(b) Heat Supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling unit, rooming unit, dormitory or guestroom on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat to maintain a temperature of not less than 68 degrees Fahrenheit (20 degrees Celsius) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and toilet rooms.

(c) Occupiable Work Spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat to maintain a temperature of not less than 65 degrees Fahrenheit (18 degrees Celsius) during the period the spaces are occupied.

Exceptions:

(i) Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special temperature conditions.

(ii) Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical activities.

(d) Room Temperature Measurement. The required room temperatures shall be measured three feet (914 mm) above the floor near the center of the room and two feet (610 mm) inward from the center of each exterior wall.

(2) Mechanical Appliances. All mechanical appliances, fireplaces, solid fuel burning appliances, cooking appliances and water heating appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe working condition, and shall be capable of performing the intended function.

(a) Removal of Combustion Products. All fuel burning equipment and appliances shall be connected to an approved chimney or vent.

Exception: Fuel burning equipment and appliances which are labeled for unvented operation.

(b) Clearances. All required clearances to combustible materials shall be maintained.

(c) Safety Controls. All safety controls for fuel burning equipment shall be maintained in effective operation.

(d) Combustion Air. A supply of air for complete combustion of the fuel and for ventilation of the space containing the fuel burning equipment shall be provided for the fuel burning equipment.

(e) Energy Conservation Devices. Devices intended to reduce fuel consumption by attachment to a fuel burning appliance, to the fuel supply line thereto, or to the vent outlet or vent piping therefrom shall not be installed unless labeled for such purpose and the installation is specifically approved.

(f) Duct Systems. Duct systems shall be maintained free of obstructions and shall be capable of performing the required function.

(3) Electrical Facilities. Every occupied building shall be provided with an electrical system in compliance with the following requirements:

(a) Service. The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall serve as a basis for determining the need for additional facilities in accordance with Chapter 16.05 SMC. Existing dwelling units shall be served by a three-wire, 120/240 volt, single-phase electrical service having a rating as required by the electrical code in effect at the time of construction but in no case shall the service rating be less than 60 amperes.

(b) Electrical System Hazards. Where it is found that the electrical system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient receptacle and lighting outlets, improper wiring or installation, deterioration or damage, or for similar reasons, the code official shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard.

(c) Abatement of Electrical Hazards Associated with Water Exposure. The provisions of this section shall govern the repair and replacement of electrical systems and equipment that have been exposed to water. Electrical equipment and wiring that have been submerged or exposed to water shall comply with the provisions of this title.

(d) Abatement of Electrical Hazards Associated with Fire Exposure. The provisions of this section shall govern the repair and replacement of electrical systems and equipment that have been exposed to fire. Electrical switches, receptacles and fixtures, including furnace, water heating, security system and power distribution circuits, that have been exposed to fire shall be replaced in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 16.05 SMC.

Exception: Electrical switches, receptacles and fixtures shall be allowed to be repaired where an inspection report from the equipment manufacturer or approved manufacturer’s representative indicates that the equipment has not sustained damage that requires replacement.

(e) Installation. All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe and approved manner.

(f) Receptacles. Every habitable space in a dwelling shall contain receptacle outlets as required by the electrical code in effect at the time of installation or construction. Every laundry area shall contain at least one grounded-type receptacle or a receptacle with a ground fault circuit interrupter. Every bathroom shall contain at least one receptacle. Any new bathroom receptacle outlet shall have ground fault circuit interrupter protection.

(g) Luminaires. Every public hall, interior stairway, toilet room, kitchen, bathroom, laundry room, boiler room and furnace room shall contain at least one electric luminaire.

(h) Wiring. Flexible cords and extension cords shall not be used for permanent wiring. Flexible cords and extension cords shall not extend from one room to another, be placed across a doorway, extend through a wall or partition, or run through cabinets, or concealed within walls, floors, or ceilings, or be used in any area where such cord may be subject to physical damage. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 4) 


16.25.275 Elevators, escalators and dumbwaiters.

Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators shall be maintained to sustain safely all imposed loads, to operate properly, and to be free from physical and fire hazards. The most current certificate of inspection shall be on display at all times within the elevator or attached to the escalator or dumbwaiter; or the certificate shall be available for public inspection in the office of the building operator, or as required by state law.

In buildings equipped with passenger elevators, at least one elevator shall be maintained in operation at all times when the building is occupied.

Exception: Buildings equipped with only one elevator shall be permitted to have the elevator temporarily out of service for testing or servicing. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 4) 


16.25.280 Fire safety requirements.

The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum conditions and standards for fire safety relating to structures and exterior premises, including fire safety facilities and equipment to be provided.

The owner of the premises shall provide and maintain such fire safety facilities and equipment in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy any premises that does not comply with the requirements of this chapter.

(1) Means of Egress.

(a) General. A safe, continuous and unobstructed path of travel shall be provided from any point in a building or structure to the public way. Means of egress shall comply with this title and SMC 46.30.090.

(b) Aisles. The required width of aisles in accordance with this title and SMC 46.30.090 shall be unobstructed.

(c) Locked Doors. All means of egress doors shall be readily openable from the side from which egress is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort, except where the door hardware conforms to that permitted by this title and SMC 46.30.090.

(d) Emergency Escape Openings. Required emergency escape openings shall be maintained in accordance with the code in effect at the time of construction, and the following: Required emergency escape and rescue openings shall be operational from the inside of the room without the use of keys or tools; bars, grilles, grates or similar devices are permitted to be placed over emergency escape and rescue openings provided the minimum net clear opening size complies with the code that was in effect at the time of construction and such devices shall be releasable or removable from the inside without the use of a key, tool or force greater than that which is required for normal operation of the escape and rescue opening.

(2) Fire Resistance Ratings.

(a) Fire Resistance Rated Assemblies. The required fire resistance rating of fire resistance rated walls, fire stops, shaft enclosures, partitions and floors shall be maintained.

(b) Opening Protective. Required opening protective shall be maintained in an operative condition. All fire and smoke stop doors shall be maintained in operable condition. Fire doors and smoke barrier doors shall not be blocked or obstructed or otherwise made inoperable.

(3) Fire Protection Systems.

(a) General. All systems, devices and equipment to detect a fire, actuate an alarm, or suppress or control a fire or any combination thereof shall be maintained in an operable condition at all times in accordance with this title and SMC 46.30.090.

(b) Smoke Alarms. Single- or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed and maintained in Groups R-2, R-3 and R-4 and in dwellings not regulated in Group R occupancies, regardless of occupant load, at all of the following locations:

(i) On the ceiling or wall outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of bedrooms.

(ii) In each room used for sleeping purposes.

(iii) In each story within a dwelling unit, including basements and cellars but not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. In dwellings or dwelling units with split levels and without an intervening door between the adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall suffice for the adjacent lower level; provided, that the lower level is less than one full story below the upper level.

Single- or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed in other groups in accordance with this title and SMC 46.30.090.

(4) Power Source. In Group R occupancies and in dwellings not regulated as Group R occupancies, single-station smoke alarms shall receive their primary power from the building wiring; provided, that such wiring is served from a commercial source and shall be equipped with a battery backup. Smoke alarms shall emit a signal when the batteries are low. Wiring shall be permanent and without a disconnecting switch other than as required for overcurrent protection.

Exception: Smoke alarms are permitted to be solely battery-operated in buildings where no construction is taking place, buildings that are not served from a commercial power source and in existing areas of buildings undergoing alterations or repairs that do not result in the removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or basement available which could provide access for building wiring without the removal of interior finishes.

(5) Interconnection. Where more than one smoke alarm is required to be installed within an individual dwelling unit in Groups R-2, R-3 and R-4 and in dwellings not regulated as Group R occupancies, the smoke alarms shall be interconnected in such a manner that the activation of one alarm will activate all of the alarms in the individual unit. The alarm shall be clearly audible in all bedrooms over background noise levels with all intervening doors closed.

Exceptions:

(a) Interconnection is not required in buildings which are not undergoing alterations, repairs, or construction of any kind.

(b) Smoke alarms in existing areas are not required to be interconnected where alterations or repairs do not result in the removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or basement available which could provide access for interconnection without the removal of interior finishes. (Ord. O2017-440 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-345 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-283 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2004-148 § 4)


Title 17 FIRE

Chapters:

17.05    Repealed


Chapter 17.05 MISCELLANEOUS CRIMES*

(Repealed by Ord. 2012-323)

*For fire-related traffic offenses, see SMC 46.30.090.

 


Title 18 (Reserved)


Title 19 SUBDIVISIONS

(Repealed by Ord. 2010-284)


Title 19A LAND DIVISION

Chapters:

19A.01    Purpose

19A.04    Definitions

19A.08    Administration

19A.12    Subdivisions and Short Subdivisions

19A.16    Final Plat and Final Short Plat Maps for Preliminarily Approved Subdivisions and Short Subdivisions

19A.20    Binding Site Plans

19A.24    Boundary Line Adjustments


Chapter 19A.01 PURPOSE

Sections:

19A.01.010    Purpose.


19A.01.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this title is to:

(1) Establish the authority and procedures for dividing land in the City of Sammamish.

(2) Define and regulate divisions of land that are exempt from the short subdivision or subdivision requirements.

(3) Ensure consistency with and implement the City of Sammamish Comprehensive Plan as amended in accordance with the Washington State Growth Management Act, RCW 36.70A.120.

(4) Ensure uniform monumenting of land subdivisions and conveyance by accurate legal description.

(5) Protect and preserve the public health, safety and general welfare in accordance with the standards established by City of Sammamish and the state of Washington.

(6) Ensure consistency with Chapter 58.17 RCW. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


Chapter 19A.04 DEFINITIONS

Sections:

19A.04.010    Acre.

19A.04.020    Alteration.

19A.04.030    Applicant.

19A.04.040    Binding site plan.

19A.04.050    Building envelope.

19A.04.060    Building site.

19A.04.070    Civil engineer.

19A.04.075    City engineer.

19A.04.080    Condominium.

19A.04.090    Dedication.

19A.04.100    Department.

19A.04.110    Development review engineer.

19A.04.120    Director.

19A.04.130    Easement.

19A.04.140    Engineered preliminary drainage plan.

19A.04.150    Financial guarantee.

19A.04.170    Homeowners’ association (HOA).

19A.04.180    Improvements.

19A.04.190    Innocent purchaser.

19A.04.200    Land surveyor.

19A.04.210    Lot area.

19A.04.220    Nonbuilding lot.

19A.04.230    Ownership interest.

19A.04.250    Plat, final.

19A.04.260    Plat, preliminary.

19A.04.270    Revisions.

19A.04.280    Separate lot.

19A.04.290    Short plat, final.

19A.04.300    Short plat, preliminary.

19A.04.310    Short subdivision.

19A.04.320    Street.

19A.04.330    Subdivision.

19A.04.340    Tract.

19A.04.350    Definitions not listed.


19A.04.010 Acre.

“Acre” means an area of land equal to 43,560 square feet. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.04.020 Alteration.

“Alteration” means the modification of a previously recorded plat, short plat, binding site plan, or any portion thereof, that results in modifications to conditions of approval, the addition of new lots or more land, or the deletion of existing lots or the removal of plat or lot restrictions or dedications that are shown on the recorded plat, except as otherwise allowed by law. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.04.030 Applicant.

“Applicant” means a property owner or a public agency or public or private utility that owns a right-of-way or other easement or has been adjudicated the right to such easement pursuant to RCW 8.12.090, or any person or entity designated or named in writing by the property or easement owner to be the applicant, in an application for a development proposal, permit or approval. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.04.040 Binding site plan.

“Binding site plan” means a plan drawn to scale which (1) identifies and shows the areas and locations of all streets, roads, improvements, utilities, open spaces, critical areas, parking areas, landscaped areas, surveyed topography, water bodies, drainage features, and building envelopes; (2) contains inscriptions or attachments setting forth such appropriate limitations and conditions for the use of the land as are established by the director or hearing examiner; and (3) contains provisions requiring any development be in conformity with the site plan; processed in accordance with SMC 19A.20.010 through 19A.20.060 and Chapter 58.17 RCW. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.04.050 Building envelope.

“Building envelope” means the area of a lot that delineates the limits of where a building may be placed on a lot. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.04.060 Building site.

“Building site” means an area of land, consisting of one or more lots or portions of lots, that is:

(1) Capable of being developed under current federal, state, and local statutes, including zoning and use provisions, dimensional standards, minimum lot width, shoreline master program provisions, critical area provisions and health and safety provisions; or

(2) Currently legally developed. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.04.070 Civil engineer.

“Civil engineer” means an individual registered and licensed as a professional civil engineer pursuant to Chapter 18.43 RCW. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.04.075 City engineer.

“City engineer” means the individual appointed as the City engineer for the City of Sammamish or his or her designee. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.04.080 Condominium.

“Condominium” menas real property, portions of which are designated for separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common ownership solely by the owners of those portions as defined in Chapters 64.32 and 64.34 RCW. Real property is not a condominium unless the undivided interests in the common elements are vested in the unit owners and unless a declaration, survey map and plans have been recorded pursuant to Chapter 64.32 or 64.34 RCW. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.04.090 Dedication.

“Dedication” means the deliberate conveyance of land by an owner for any general and public uses, reserving no rights other than those that are compatible with the full exercise and enjoyment of the public uses for which the property has been conveyed. The intention to dedicate shall be evidenced by the owner by the presentment for filing of a final plat, short plat or binding site plan showing the dedication thereon or deed. The acceptance by the public shall be evidenced by the approval of such plat, short plat, binding site plan or deed for filing. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.04.100 Department.

“Department” means the City of Sammamish department of community development and/or the department of public works as appropriate. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.04.110 Development review engineer.

“Development review engineer” means the director of the department of public works or his or her designee. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.04.120 Director.

“Director” means the director of the City of Sammamish department of community development or department of public works, as appropriate, or his or her designee. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.04.130 Easement.

“Easement” means a right granted by a property owner to specifically named parties or to the public for the use of certain land for specified purposes, that may include, but are not limited to, road access, pedestrian or bicycle pathways, minerals, utility easements, drainage and open space. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.04.140 Engineered preliminary drainage plan.

“Engineered preliminary drainage plan” means a preliminary plan, consistent with the City’s adopted drainage manual, that shows the locations, types and approximate sizes of the proposed drainage and conveyance facilities, including any required detention pond, bioswales, wetponds or other water quality facilities. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.04.150 Financial guarantee.

“Financial guarantee” means a form of financial security posted to ensure timely and proper completion of improvements, compliance with the City of Sammamish code or to warrant materials, workmanship of improvements and design. Financial guarantees include assignments of funds, surety bonds and other forms of financial security acceptable to the director. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.04.170 Homeowners’ association (HOA).

“Homeowners’ association (HOA)” means any combination or grouping of persons or any association, corporation or other entity that represents homeowners residing in a short subdivision, subdivision or binding site plan. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.04.180 Improvements.

“Improvements” means constructed appurtenances, including but not limited to road and drainage construction, utility installation, recreational features, lot grading prior to a building permit, street trees, landscaping, critical areas signage, sidewalks, plat monument signs, survey monuments. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.04.190 Innocent purchaser.

“Innocent purchaser” means an individual who has purchased real property for value, has not received actual notice that the lot has not been legally created as a separate lot, and has not previously been granted innocent purchaser status by the City. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.04.200 Land surveyor.

“Land surveyor” means an individual licensed as a land surveyor pursuant to Chapter 18.43 RCW. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.04.210 Lot area.

“Lot area” means the total area contained within the boundaries of the lot, excluding submerged land. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.04.220 Nonbuilding lot.

“Nonbuilding lot” means a lot identified as a nonbuilding lot on the face of the plat or short plat, for which improvements for the purpose of human habitation or occupancy are prohibited. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.04.230 Ownership interest.

“Ownership interest” means having property rights as a fee owner, contract purchaser, mortgagee, or deed of trust beneficiary or grantor. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.04.250 Plat, final.

“Plat, final” means the final drawing of the subdivision and dedication prepared for filing with the county auditor and containing all elements and requirements set forth in this title and in Chapter 58.17 RCW and Chapter 332-130 WAC. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.04.260 Plat, preliminary.

“Plat, preliminary” means a true and approximate drawing of a proposed subdivision showing the general layout of streets, alleys, lots, tracts, and other elements of a subdivision required by this title and Chapter 58.17 RCW. The preliminary plat shall be the basis for the approval or disapproval of the general layout of a subdivision. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.04.270 Revisions.

“Revisions” means a change prior to recording of a previously approved preliminary plat, preliminary short plat or binding site plan that includes, but is not limited to, the addition of new lots, tracts or parcels. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.04.280 Separate lot.

“Separate lot” means a physically separate and distinct parcel of property, which has been created through one of the following processes:

(1) The lot was created in compliance with the subdivision or short subdivision laws in effect at the time of creation of the lot;

(2) The lot has been recognized by the department as a lot pursuant to SMC 19A.08.070 (Determining and maintaining legal lot status), SMC 19A.08.080 (Removing limitations on nonbuilding lots), and SMC 19A.08.090 (Lots created in violation of this title); or

(3) The lot is a portion of a lot created through the processes cited in subsection (1) or (2) of this section that is separated from the remainder of the lot by one of the following:

(a) A public road right-of-way; or

(b) Shorelines as defined in SMC 25.10.450; or

(c) Another separate lot, or a tract as defined in this title, including railroad or public utility owned rights-of-way, publicly owned property, or other parcels recognized by the department pursuant to SMC 19A.08.040. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.04.290 Short plat, final.

“Short plat, final” means the final drawing of the short subdivision and dedication prepared for filing with the county auditor and containing all elements and requirements set forth in this title and in Chapter 58.17 RCW and Chapter 332-130 WAC. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.04.300 Short plat, preliminary.

“Short plat, preliminary” means a true and approximate drawing of a proposed short subdivision showing the general layout of streets, alleys, lots, and other elements of a short subdivision required by this title and Chapter 58.17 RCW. The preliminary short plat shall be the basis for the approval or disapproval of the general layout of a short subdivision. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.04.310 Short subdivision.

“Short subdivision” means a division or redivision of land into nine or fewer lots, tracts, parcels or sites for the purpose of sale, lease or transfer of ownership. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.04.320 Street.

“Street” means a public or recorded private thoroughfare providing pedestrian and vehicular access through neighborhoods and communities and to abutting property. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.04.330 Subdivision.

“Subdivision” means a division or redivision of land into two or more lots, tracts or parcels for the purpose of sale, lease or transfer of ownership, except as provided by the short subdivision of two to nine lots. A subdivision can also be known as a “long subdivision.” (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.04.340 Tract.

“Tract” means land encompassed by a separate property boundary and reserved on the final plat, final short plat, or binding site plan for specified uses including, but not limited to, reserve tracts, recreation, open space, critical areas, stormwater facilities, utility facilities and access. Tracts are not considered lots or building sites for purposes of residential dwelling or commercial/institutional construction. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.04.350 Definitions not listed.

For words not defined in this chapter, the definitions of SMC Title 21A shall control. For words not defined in either this title or SMC Title 21A, the usual and customary meaning shall apply. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


Chapter 19A.08 ADMINISTRATION

Sections:

19A.08.010    Scope of chapter.

19A.08.030    Transfer of land or granting of an easement to a public agency.

19A.08.040    Exemptions – Subdivision and short subdivision.

19A.08.050    Recording map and legal descriptions.

19A.08.060    Review for conformity with other codes, plans and policies.

19A.08.070    Determining and maintaining legal lot status.

19A.08.080    Removing limitations on nonbuilding lots.

19A.08.090    Lots created in violation of this title.

19A.08.100    Public street rights-of-way.

19A.08.110    Limitations within future road corridors.

19A.08.120    Public trail rights-of-way.

19A.08.130    Adequacy of access.

19A.08.140    Affidavit of correction.

19A.08.150    Vertical and horizontal survey controls.

19A.08.160    Financial guarantees.

19A.08.170    Application requirements for preliminary plats, preliminary short plats and preliminary binding site plans.

19A.08.180    Violations and enforcement.

19A.08.190    Circumvention of zoning density prohibited.

19A.08.200    Rules.


19A.08.010 Scope of chapter.

Any division of land is subject to the provisions of this title except as stated herein. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.08.030 Transfer of land or granting of an easement to a public agency.

The transfer of land or granting of an easement to a public agency for road and utility purposes shall not be considered a division of land. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.08.040 Exemptions – Subdivision and short subdivision.

The subdivision and short subdivision provisions of this title shall not apply to:

(1) Divisions of lands for cemeteries and other burial plots while used for that purpose.

(2) Divisions of land into lots or tracts each one of which is 20 acres or larger.

(3) Divisions of land into lots or tracts that are one one hundred twenty-eighth of a section, or five acres or larger only for the purpose of allowing fee simple purchase or deeding of such lots or tracts to public agencies.

(4) Divisions of land made by testamentary provisions or laws of descent.

(5) Divisions of land into lots or tracts consistent with RCW 58.17.040(7), for which a condominium binding site plan has been recorded in accordance with the binding site plan provisions set forth in this title.

(6) An adjustment of boundary lines in accordance with the provisions of this title.

(7) Divisions of land for the purpose of lease when no residential structures other than mobile homes are permitted to be placed upon the land and for which a binding site plan for the use of the land as a mobile home park has been approved by the director.

(8) Divisions of land by binding site plan into lots or tracts classified for commercial use consistent with the binding site plan provisions of this title.

(9) A parcel that is a portion of a lot that is separated from the remainder of the lot by one of the following: a public road right-of-way; shorelines as defined in SMC 25.10.450; or another separate lot; or a tract as defined in SMC 19A.04.340, including railroad or public utility owned rights-of-way, publicly owned property, or other parcels recognized by the department pursuant to this title.

(10) A division meeting the provisions of RCW 58.17.040(8) for the purpose of leasing land for facilities providing personal wireless services while used for that purpose.

(11) A division of land meeting the provisions of RCW 58.17.040(9) into lots or tracts of less than three acres that is recorded in accordance with Chapter 58.09 RCW and is used or to be used for the purpose of establishing a site for construction and operation of consumer-owned or investor-owned electric utility facilities. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.08.050 Recording map and legal descriptions.

The final recording map and legal description of a plat, short plat, boundary line adjustment or binding site plan shall be prepared by a land surveyor in accordance with Chapter 58.09 RCW and Chapter 332-130 WAC, Surveys and Recording, and be recorded with the King County office of records and elections as required by this title. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.08.060 Review for conformity with other codes, plans and policies.

Applications for approvals pursuant to this title shall be reviewed in accordance with the applicable procedures set forth in this title and SMC Title 20. A preliminary subdivision, short subdivision or binding site plan may be approved, approved with conditions or denied based on findings in accordance with City, special district and state rules, regulations, plans and policies including, but not limited to:

(1) Chapter 43.21C RCW (SEPA).

(2) Chapter 58.17 RCW (Subdivisions), including sidewalks and other planning features that assure safe walking conditions for students who walk to and from school.

(3) Chapters 36.70A and 36.70B RCW (Growth Management and Project Review).

(4) SMC Titles 14 and 14A (Public Works and Transportation, Public Facilities).

(5) SMC Title 15 (Environment).

(6) SMC Title 16 (Buildings and Construction).

(7) SMC Title 20 (Administrative Procedures/Environmental Policy).

(8) SMC Title 21A (Development Code).

(9) SMC Title 21B (Town Center).

(10) SMC Title 23 (Code Enforcement).

(11) Applicable shoreline master program, including SMC Title 25.

(12) City of Sammamish public works standards.

(13) Administrative rules adopted pursuant to Chapter 2.55 SMC.

(14) King County board of public health rules and regulations.

(15) Applicable water/sewer district requirements.

(16) City of Sammamish comprehensive plan.

(17) City of Sammamish stormwater comprehensive plan.

(18) SMC Title 27A (Financial Guarantees).

(19) This title. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.08.070 Determining and maintaining legal lot status.

(1) A property owner may request that the department determine whether a lot was legally created. The property owner shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the department that a lot was created in compliance with applicable state and local land use statutes or codes in effect at the time the lot was created.

(2) In requesting a determination, the property owner shall submit evidence, deemed acceptable to the department, such as:

(a) Recorded subdivisions, or division of land into four lots or less;

(b) King County or City of Sammamish documents indicating approval of a short subdivision;

(c) Recorded deeds or contracts describing the lot or lots either individually or as part of a conjunctive legal description (e.g., Lot 1 and Lot 2);

(d) Tax records or other evidence, describing the lot as an individual parcel. The department shall give weight to the existence of historic tax records or tax parcels in making its determination.

(3) Once the department has determined that the lot was legally created, the department shall continue to acknowledge the lot as such, unless the property owner aggregates or merges the lot with another lot or lots in order to:

(a) Create a parcel of land that would qualify as a building site; or

(b) Implement a deed restriction or condition, a covenant or court decision.

(4) The department’s determination shall not be construed as a guarantee that the lot constitutes a building site as defined in SMC 19A.04.060. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.08.080 Removing limitations on nonbuilding lots.

Limitations placed on a nonbuilding lot may be removed and the lot recognized by the City of Sammamish as a building lot by approval of a subdivision, short subdivision, binding site plan or alteration of a plat, short plat or binding site plan. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.08.090 Lots created in violation of this title.

(1) All contiguous lots created in violation of this title and that are under the same ownership at the time of application for innocent purchaser status shall be recognized only as a single lot.

(2) A lot that has been determined to meet the requirements for innocent purchaser status by the City, including filing of a notarized affidavit of innocent purchase with the department on forms satisfactory to the director, shall be treated as follows for purposes of determining zoning compliance and for establishing eligibility for building permits and future subdivisions:

(a) A lot recognized pursuant to this innocent purchaser provision will be treated the same as a legally subdivided lot if the parcel meets current zoning requirements for access, lot area and lot width;

(b) Innocent purchaser lots that do not meet current zoning requirements, but that did meet zoning requirements in effect at the time that they were created, will be treated the same as legally created substandard lots as provided in the City’s development code;

(c) Innocent purchaser lots that do not meet current zoning requirements and that did not meet the zoning requirements in effect at the time of their creation will be treated the same as legally created lots for purpose of conveyance, but will not be eligible for building permits; and

(d) A determination by the department of innocent purchaser status of a lot shall not relieve a property owner or applicant from compliance with all other codes, requirements and restrictions applicable to the lot. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.08.100 Public street rights-of-way.

The City engineer shall have the authority to make determinations under this section whether dedication or deeding of right-of-way is required. Right-of-way widths shall comply with current public works standards. Dedication or deeding to the City of right-of-way or a portion thereof for public streets shall be required within or along the boundaries of all binding site plans, subdivisions and short subdivisions or of any lot or lots within them, under the following circumstances, where facts support that such dedication is reasonably necessary as a result of the impact created by the proposed development:

(1) Where the current six-year Transportation Improvement Program (TIP), or projects identified in the City’s adopted comprehensive plan transportation element will require a new right-of-way or portion thereof for street purposes; or

(2) Where necessary to extend or to complete the existing or future neighborhood street pattern, including connection to existing adjacent right-of-way stubs; or

(3) Where necessary to provide additional or new right-of-way to existing City right-of-way network; or

(4) Where necessary to comply with the City’s current public works standards; or

(5) Where necessary to provide a public transportation system that supports future development of abutting property consistent with the City of Sammamish Comprehensive Plan or Title 21A SMC; provided, that the right-of-way shall:

(a) Provide for vehicular and pedestrian circulation within and between neighborhoods; or

(b) Provide local traffic alternatives to the use of arterial streets. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.08.110 Limitations within future road corridors.

In order to allow for the development of future road corridors that would complete the public circulation system or that would provide a sole source of access for an abutting property, the City may limit improvements within specific areas of a proposed binding site plan, subdivision or short subdivision. These limitations may preclude the construction of buildings, driveways, drainage facilities or other improvements within the specified areas. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.08.120 Public trail rights-of-way.

In conformance with SMC 21A.30.200 (Trail corridors – Applicability), a dedication, deeding or easement to the City for public trail purposes shall be required where a binding site plan, subdivision, or short subdivision or portion thereof is located on properties that include trail corridors shown within an adopted City parks or trails plan. The trail corridor dedication, deeding, or easement shall be in an appropriate location and of sufficient width and dimension to meet the requirements of SMC 21A.30.210 (Trail corridors – Development standards) and the trails, bikeways and paths plan. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.08.130 Adequacy of access.

Each lot within the subdivision, short subdivision, or binding site plan shall have acceptable access conforming to the current public works standards. In order to assure safe and adequate access, the City engineer:

(1) May limit direct access to certain streets and require on-site public streets in lieu of private streets, individual driveways or access panhandles, in accordance with the City street standards as set forth in the current public works standards;

(2) May require off-site improvements to public or private streets as necessary to provide access from the subdivision, short subdivision or binding site plan to a road acceptable to the City engineer;

(3) May require off-site mitigation of identified significant impacts to neighborhood streets; and

(4) May assure that the number of lots, units or commercial space to be served by the street system complies with the street standards as set forth in the current public works standards. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.08.140 Affidavit of correction.

(1) Any map page or document recorded with the King County records and elections division, or its successor agency, under the provisions of this title that contains an error in fact or omission may be amended by an affidavit of correction. The following types of errors may be corrected by affidavit:

(a) Any courses, distances or elevations omitted from the recorded document;

(b) An error in any courses, distances or elevations shown on the recorded document;

(c) An error in the description of the real property shown on the recorded document;

(d) An error in the field location of any shown easement; or

(e) Any other error or omission where the error or omission is ascertainable from the data shown on the recorded document.

(2) Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit changes in courses, distances or elevations for the purpose of redesigning lot or tract configurations.

(3) The affidavit of correction shall contain the seal and signature of the land surveyor making the correction.

(4) The affidavit of correction shall set forth in detail the corrections made and show the names of the present fee owners of the property materially affected by the correction. The notarized signatures of the owners shall be required, if deemed necessary by the department.

(5) The affidavit of correction form, as provided by the department, shall be submitted to the department for review and approval. After department approval, the affidavit shall be recorded with the King County records and elections division, or its successor agency. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.08.150 Vertical and horizontal survey controls.

(1) Vertical Requirements. The vertical datum on all engineering plans, plats, binding site plans and short plats shall be the North American Vertical Datum of 19A88 (NAVD 88) and shall be tied to at least one King County survey control network benchmark. The benchmark will be shown on the plans.

(2) Horizontal Requirements. The horizontal component of all plats, binding site plans and short plats shall have the North American Datum of 19A83/91 (NAD 83/91) as its coordinate base and basis for bearings. All horizontal control for these projects shall be referenced to a minimum of two King County survey horizontal control monuments. The basis of bearing shall be shown on the plans. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.08.160 Financial guarantees.

Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, the director is authorized to require all applicants issued permits or approvals under the provisions of this title to post financial guarantees consistent with the provisions of SMC Title 27A. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.08.170 Application requirements for preliminary plats, preliminary short plats and preliminary binding site plans.

The application requirements shall be set forth in an official application packet approved by the director, and shall identify all items necessary for a complete application. The determination that an application is complete shall not preclude the department from requesting additional information in order to determine compliance with applicable standards and regulations. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.08.180 Violations and enforcement.

Any person or entity violating any provision of this title shall, in addition to any remedies and sanctions provided for under state law, be subject to the enforcement provisions of SMC Title 23. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.08.190 Circumvention of zoning density prohibited.

A lot, which has been created through a legally recognized process and is of sufficient land area to be subdivided at the density applicable to the lot, may be further subdivided. Provided, however, further division of a lot or alteration of a tract shall only be permitted to the extent that the total number of lots contained within the external boundaries of the original short subdivision, subdivision or binding site plan does not exceed the density allowed under current zoning. (Ord. O2018-457 § 2; Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.08.200 Rules.

The director is authorized to adopt rules to implement the provisions of this title pursuant to Chapter 2.55 SMC. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


Chapter 19A.12 SUBDIVISIONS AND SHORT SUBDIVISIONS

Sections:

19A.12.010    Purpose.

19A.12.020    Preliminary approval of subdivisions and short subdivisions – Filing of final plat or final short plat.

19A.12.030    Limitations for short subdivisions.

19A.12.040    Revisions of preliminary short subdivisions and subdivisions.


19A.12.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to specify the requirements for the division of land through short subdivisions and subdivisions, in accordance with applicable Washington State and City of Sammamish laws, rules and regulations, including permit processing procedures required by SMC Title 20. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.12.020 Preliminary approval of subdivisions and short subdivisions – Filing of final plat or final short plat.

(1) Preliminary subdivision approval shall be effective for the period of time set forth in RCW 58.17.140, as currently enacted or as may be subsequently amended, and preliminary short subdivision approval shall be effective for the same period of time as a subdivision approval. If any condition is not satisfied and/or the final plat or final short plat is not recorded within the approval period identified herein, the subdivision or short subdivision shall be null and void. If all conditions have been satisfied and all required documents have been submitted within the approval period, the department may grant a single extension of up to 90 days for the processing and recording of the final documents.

(2) Preliminary subdivision or short subdivision approval shall be considered the basis upon which the applicant may proceed toward development of the subdivision or short subdivision and preparation of the final plat or short plat subject to all the conditions of the preliminary approval.

(3) If the final plat is being developed in divisions, and final plats for all of the divisions have not been recorded within the time limits provided in this section, preliminary subdivision approval for all unrecorded divisions shall become void. The preliminary subdivision for any unrecorded divisions must again be submitted to the department with a new application, subject to the fees and regulations applicable at the time of submittal. (Ord. O2016-413 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.12.030 Limitations for short subdivisions.

(1) A maximum of nine lots may be created by a single application.

(2) An application for further division may not be submitted within five years after recording, except through the filing of a subdivision application or unless the short plat contains fewer than nine lots, in which case an alteration application may be submitted to create a cumulative total of up to nine lots within the original short plat boundary.

(3) A maximum of nine lots may be created from two or more contiguous parcels with any common ownership interest. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.12.040 Revisions of preliminary short subdivisions and subdivisions.

Applications to revise short subdivisions or subdivisions that have received preliminary approval shall comply with the following:

(1) Revisions that result in any substantial changes, as determined by the department, shall be treated as a new application for purposes of vesting. Short subdivisions shall be reviewed as a Type 2 land use decision and subdivisions as a Type 3 land use decision pursuant to SMC 20.05.020. For the purpose of this section, substantial change includes the creation of additional lots, the elimination of open space, substantial change in access, or changes to conditions of approval on an approved preliminary short subdivision or subdivision.

(2) Approval of the following modifications by the department shall not be considered revisions:

(a) Engineering design, unless the proposed design alters or eliminates features required as a condition of preliminary approval.

(b) Changes in lot or tract dimensions that are consistent with SMC Title 21A.

(c) A decrease in the number of lots to be created so long as the decrease allows for future compliance with the minimum density provisions of SMC Title 21A, if applicable.

(3) The department shall have the authority to administratively review and approve modifications described in subsection (2) of this section through review procedures established by the department. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


Chapter 19A.16 FINAL PLAT AND FINAL SHORT PLAT MAPS FOR PRELIMINARILY APPROVED SUBDIVISIONS AND SHORT SUBDIVISIONS

Sections:

19A.16.010    Purpose.

19A.16.020    Phased development.

19A.16.030    Construction plan review requirements.

19A.16.040    Minimum subdivision and short subdivision improvements.

19A.16.045    Final plat and final short plat review procedures.

19A.16.050    Contents of final plat and final short plat.

19A.16.060    Final forms.

19A.16.070    Alterations of final plats.

19A.16.080    Alterations of final short plats.

19A.16.090    Vacations of a final plat or final short plat.


19A.16.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to specify provisions that must be satisfied prior to the final approval and recording of final plat and final short plat maps, for preliminarily approved subdivisions and short subdivisions, also referred to herein as plats and short plats. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.16.020 Phased development.

Portions of an approved preliminary subdivision may be processed separately by the department for the purpose of recording in phases. All phases shall be approved within the prescribed time limits for the preliminary subdivision, and all conditions of approval for each particular phase must be met. The department may require certain features, including but not limited to stormwater facilities, open space or access, be included in the first phase or in subsequent phases as necessary to assure compliance with applicable standards and regulations. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.16.030 Construction plan review requirements.

(1) Construction plans for streets, drainage controls and other proposed or conditioned improvements shall be prepared, submitted and reviewed for approval prior to the issuance of a site development permit. No on-site clearing or construction activities shall occur prior to issuance of a site development permit.

(2) Construction plans shall conform to the requirements of the department as set forth in the adopted Surface Water Design Manual and current public works standards. Plans and technical information reports shall be submitted to the City and prepared consistent with the requirements of the Sammamish Municipal Code, City of Sammamish current public works standards, adopted Surface Water Design Manual, and conditions of preliminary approval. Each plan set or document shall be stamped, signed and dated by a civil engineer licensed in the state of Washington.

(3) Approval of the engineering details of the proposed sanitary sewer and water systems and other proposed public facilities by the applicable water/sewer district will be required prior to the approval of the construction plans. Approval of the King County department of public health will be required when applicable.

(4) Prior to approval of construction plans, and issuance of a site development permit, the applicant shall post a site restoration guarantee consistent with the provisions of SMC Title 27A, and shall pay any mitigation and/or impact fee amounts due, and all applicable fees due as set forth in the City fee resolution. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.16.040 Minimum subdivision and short subdivision improvements.

(1) Prior to final recording of a plat or short plat, the following minimum improvements shall be constructed consistent with the approved plans, and shall be approved by the City, or in the case of water and sewer facilities, by the applicable district, unless otherwise approved by the City engineer.

(a) Public drainage facilities and erosion control measures consistent with the adopted surface water design manual;

(b) Water mains and hydrant(s) installed and fire flow available, if required by water and sewer district;

(c) Sewer mains installed if served by public sewer;

(d) Streets graded and paved, with the exception of the final lift of asphalt, to all lots within the subdivision or short subdivision and capable of providing access by passenger vehicle;

(e) Specific site improvements required by the preliminary plat approval or preliminary short plat approval decision, if the decision requires completion prior to plat recording;

(f) Delineation and required signage and fencing of critical areas;

(g) Temporary control monuments set by a land surveyor, located in conformance with this title, and in place at final inspection. Permanent monuments and control points shall be set and verified by a land surveyor within 90 days of the final lift of asphalt; and

(h) Improvements without which the director determines a safety hazard would exist.

(2) The City shall have right of entry onto any lot, tract, easement or parcel that is part of the final plat or short plat to ensure compliance with the minimum improvements required in subsection (1) of this section. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.16.045 Final plat and final short plat review procedures.

(1) Upon the City’s inspection and determination that the site improvements required by SMC 19A.16.040 have been substantially completed pursuant to the approved plans, a final plat or final short plat shall be surveyed by a land surveyor and submitted to the department for review and approval. Substantial completion of site improvements, for purposes of final plat or final short plat submittal, shall mean street and lot rough grading has been completed and water, sewer, stormwater, and natural gas utilities have been installed.

(2) All final plats and final short plats shall demonstrate conformance to the conditions of preliminary approval in a compliance matrix, as well as Chapter 58.17 RCW and Chapter 332-130 WAC.

(3) Plat certificates or owner’s duplicate certificates for land registered pursuant to Chapter 65.12 RCW shall be provided to the department prior to recording. Supplemental plat certificates shall be provided to the department if the final plat or final short plat is not recorded within 30 days of the original certificate or supplemental certificate date.

(4) All applicable processing fees specified by City fee resolution, applicable mitigation and impact fee amounts, and any civil penalty assessed pursuant to SMC Title 23 against a site being reviewed under this section shall be paid, and all required financial guarantees posted prior to recording.

(5) Prior to recording, all site improvements required by SMC 19A.16.040 shall be complete and approved by the City. Applicable performance bonds and written final approval from the applicable water/sewer district and health department shall be obtained, if required.

(6) A copy of protective deed covenants shall accompany the final plat or short plat, if applicable.

(7) Upon approval by the department, the City council shall consider the final plat at a public meeting to confirm the conformance of the final plat to the conditions of preliminary approval imposed by the hearing examiner. Upon approval, the final plat or short plat shall be recorded with the county records and elections division. (Ord. O2016-413 § 3 (Att. B); Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.16.050 Contents of final plat and final short plat.

The final plat or short plat shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 58.17 RCW and be in a form prescribed by the department and shall include all information as described in an official application packet approved by the director. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.16.060 Final forms.

(1) A final plat or final short plat shall be prepared on forms 18 inches by 24 inches in size, allowing for a two-inch border on one of the 18-inch sides, to allow for binding, and one-half-inch borders on the other three sides. The two-inch border will typically be on the top or left side depending on the configuration of the drawing.

(2) Forms shall be printed with materials acceptable for filing as specified in WAC 332-130-050 and be formatted consistent with forms provided by the department. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.16.070 Alterations of final plats.

(1) Alterations shall be processed in accordance with RCW 58.17.215 through 58.17.218 and shall comply with the regulations in effect at the time the alteration application is submitted. Alteration applications and recording documents shall contain the signatures of the majority of those persons having an ownership interest in lots, tracts, parcels or divisions in the subject subdivision to be altered or portion to be altered.

(2) If the subdivision is subject to restrictive covenants that were filed at the time of the approval of the subdivision, and the application for alteration would result in the violation of a covenant, the applicant shall submit with the application an agreement, signed by all parties subject to the covenants, to terminate or alter the relevant covenants in order to accomplish the proposed alteration.

(3) An application shall be processed as a Type 3 permit pursuant to SMC 20.05.020, except that a public hearing is not required unless requested by a person receiving notice within 14 days of receipt of the notice. The application may be approved if the proposed alteration is consistent with the required findings of SMC 20.10.200 and 20.10.220.

(4) After approval of an alteration, the applicant shall submit a revised drawing of the approved alteration of the final plat, to be processed in the same manner as set forth for final plats in this title. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.16.080 Alterations of final short plats.

Alteration of a final short plat may be approved by the department when consistent with the following requirements:

(1) Alterations shall be accomplished by following the same procedure and satisfying the same laws, rules and conditions as required for a new short plat application.

(2) Alteration applications and recording documents shall contain the signatures of the majority of those persons having an ownership interest in lots, tracts, parcels or divisions in the subject short plat to be altered or portion to be altered.

(3) If the short subdivision is subject to restrictive covenants that were filed at the time of the approval of the short subdivision, and the application for alteration would result in the violation of a covenant, the applicant shall submit with the application an agreement, signed by all parties subject to the covenants, to terminate or alter the relevant covenants in order to accomplish the proposed alteration.

(4) An application shall be processed as a Type 2 permit pursuant to SMC 20.05.020.

(5) An alteration may be allowed to remove nonbuilding lot status on short subdivisions; provided, that no public dedications are required and original conditions of approval do not prohibit conversion of a nonbuilding lot to a building lot. Approval of such alteration requires completion of the original conditions of approval, and the application of new conditions for the lot, consistent with current standards, preparation of a new map page prepared by a land surveyor for recording and payment of all fees required for such review. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.16.090 Vacations of a final plat or final short plat.

(1) Plat and short plat vacations shall be processed as follows and in accordance with the provisions of RCW 58.17.212.

(2) All plat and short plat vacation applications shall be referred to the hearing examiner for public hearing and consideration pursuant to SMC 20.10.240. Following the public hearing, the hearing examiner shall determine if the proposed vacation is consistent with the requirements of SMC 20.10.210. If the proposal is found to be consistent, the hearing examiner may recommend that the City council approve the application.

(3) Applications for vacations of City roads may be processed pursuant to this chapter only when such road vacations are proposed in conjunction with the vacation of a plat. Vacations limited to City roads shall be processed in accordance with Chapter 36.87 RCW and the current public works standards. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


Chapter 19A.20 BINDING SITE PLANS

Sections:

19A.20.010    Purpose.

19A.20.020    Applicability.

19A.20.030    Requirements and limitations.

19A.20.040    Alterations.

19A.20.050    Vacations.

19A.20.060    Recording.


19A.20.010 Purpose.

The purposes of this chapter are:

(1) To provide an alternative method for division of land for commercial zoned property or condominiums;

(2) To allow the director to modify interior lot-based or lot line requirements contained within the zoning, building, fire and other similar codes adopted by the City and allow use of the entire site for the purpose of satisfying these requirements;

(3) To allow the director to authorize sharing of open space, parking, access and other improvements among contiguous properties subject to the binding site plan; and

(4) To specify administrative requirements for binding site plans in addition to the procedural requirements of Chapter 20.05 SMC and in accordance with applicable Washington State and City of Sammamish laws, rules and regulations. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.20.020 Applicability.

(1) Any person seeking the use of a binding site plan process to divide property for the purpose of sale, lease or transfer of ownership of commercial zoned property, or creation of condominium units, is required to have an approved binding site plan prior to any property division, as provided for in Chapter 58.17, 64.32 or 64.34 RCW, and as required by this chapter. A binding site plan for a condominium shall be based on a building permit, an as-built site plan for developed sites, a site development permit issued for the entire site, or an approved site plan showing the anticipated development plan for the entire site, notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter 21A.95 SMC.

(2) An application for a binding site plan approval shall be processed as a Type 2 permit pursuant to SMC 20.05.020.

(3) The site that is subject to the binding site plan shall consist of one or more contiguous lots.

(4) The site that is subject to the binding site plan may be reviewed independently for developed sites, concurrently with or subsequent to a site development permit application for undeveloped land or concurrently with or subsequent to a building permit application.

(5) The binding site plan process creates or alters lot lines and does not authorize substantial improvements or changes to the property or the uses thereon. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.20.030 Requirements and limitations.

(1) The binding site plan shall ensure that the collective lots continue to function as one site with respect to, but not limited to, lot access, interior circulation, open space, landscaping, drainage facilities, facility maintenance and parking.

(2) The binding site plan shall:

(a) Identify the areas and locations of all streets, roads, improvements, utilities, water and sewer facilities, open spaces, critical areas, parking areas, landscaped areas, surveyed topography for preliminary map, water bodies and drainage features, and building envelopes;

(b) Contain inscriptions or attachments setting forth such limitations and conditions for the use of the land as are established by the director or the hearing examiner; and

(c) Contain provisions requiring any development or division of land to be in conformance with the approved site plan.

(3) Conditions of use, maintenance and restrictions on redevelopment of shared open space, parking, access and other improvements shall be identified and enforced by covenants, easements or other similar mechanisms. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.20.040 Alterations.

(1) Alteration of a binding site plan shall be accomplished by following the same process required for a new application as set forth in this chapter.

(2) Changes to a building permit, subdivision, short subdivision, or site development permit within a binding site plan area shall also require alteration of the binding site plan unless the director determines that such changes are consistent with the approved binding site plan. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.20.050 Vacations.

(1) Vacation of a binding site plan shall be accomplished by following the same procedure and satisfying the same laws, rules and conditions as required for a new binding site plan application, as set forth in this chapter. If a portion of a binding site plan is vacated, the property subject to the vacated portion shall constitute one lot unless the property is subsequently divided by an approved subdivision or short subdivision or another binding site plan.

(2) If a building permit or commercial site development permit is revised or expires, then the binding site plan shall be vacated unless the director determines that the revision or expiration is consistent with the approved binding site plan. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.20.060 Recording.

(1) Plat certificates or owner’s duplicate certificates for registered land pursuant to Chapter 65.12 RCW shall be provided to the department by the owner.

(2) Prior to recording, the approved binding site plan shall be surveyed and the final recording forms shall be prepared by a land surveyor. A final binding site plan shall be prepared in a format prescribed by the department.

(3) The binding site plan shall contain all information as set forth in an official submittal checklist signed by the director.

(4) Lots, parcels or tracts created through the binding site plan procedure shall be legal lots of record. All provisions, conditions and requirements of the binding site plan shall be legally enforceable on the purchaser or any other person acquiring a lease or other ownership interest of any lot, parcel, or tract created pursuant to the binding site plan.

(5) No person shall sell, transfer or lease any lot, tract or parcel created pursuant to the binding site plan that does not conform to the requirements of the binding site plan.

(6) The binding site plan shall set forth limitations and conditions, including irrevocable dedications of property and contain a provision that any development of the site shall be in conformity with the approved binding site plan. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


Chapter 19A.24 BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENTS

Sections:

19A.24.010    Purpose.

19A.24.020    Procedures and limitations of the boundary line adjustment process.

19A.24.030    Final approval and recording required.

19A.24.040    Boundary line agreement.


19A.24.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide procedures and criteria for the review and approval of adjustments to boundary lines of legal lots or tracts in order to rectify defects in legal descriptions, to allow the enlargement or merging of lots to improve or qualify as a building site, to achieve increased setbacks from property lines or sensitive areas, to correct situations wherein an established use is located across a lot line, or for other similar purposes. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.24.020 Procedures and limitations of the boundary line adjustment process.

Adjustment of boundary lines between adjacent lots shall be consistent with the following review procedures and limitations:

(1) Applications for boundary line adjustments shall be reviewed as a Type 1 permit as provided in Chapter 20.05 SMC. The review shall include examination for consistency with SMC Title 21A, the shoreline master program including SMC Title 25 and for developed lots building and fire codes and may include review by the applicable agency for department of health regulations and water and sewer district requirements;

(2) Any adjustment of boundary lines must be approved by the department prior to the transfer of property ownership between adjacent legal lots;

(3) May require modification or sharing of access from public works to be approved by the City engineer;

(4) A boundary line adjustment proposal shall not:

(a) Result in the creation of an additional lot;

(b) Result in a lot that does not qualify as a building site pursuant to this title;

(c) Reduce conforming lot dimensions such as area or width to nonconforming dimensions;

(d) Reduce the overall area in a plat or short plat devoted to open space;

(e) Result in a lot that previously met sewer/water district standards for sewer/water service no longer meeting district standards;

(f) Be inconsistent with any restrictions or conditions of approval for a recorded plat or short plat;

(g) Involve lots which do not have a common boundary; or

(h) Circumvent the subdivision or short subdivision procedures set forth in this title. Factors which indicate that the boundary line adjustment process is being used in a manner inconsistent with statutory intent include: numerous and frequent adjustments to the existing lot boundary, a proposal to move a lot or building site to a different location, and a large number of lots being proposed for a boundary line adjustment;

(5) The elimination of lines between two or more lots for the purpose of creating a single lot that meets requirements as a building site shall be considered an adjustment of boundary lines and shall not be subject to the subdivision and short subdivision provisions of this title; and

(6) Recognized lots in an approved site plan for a conditional use permit, special use permit or commercial site development permit shall be considered a single site and no lot lines on the site may be altered by a boundary line adjustment to transfer density or separate lots to another property not included in the original site plan of the subject development without additional conditional use permit, special use permit or commercial site development review and approval. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.24.030 Final approval and recording required.

(1) A title insurance certificate updated not more than 30 days prior to recording of the adjustment, which includes all parcels within the adjustment, must be submitted to the department with boundary line adjustment final review documents. All persons having an ownership interest within the boundary line adjustment shall sign the final recording document in the presence of a notary public.

(2) Final boundary line adjustment documents shall be in a form prescribed by the department and be reviewed and approved by the department prior to recording with the King County auditor. Lot lines within lots under the same ownership will be adjusted upon the recording of the boundary line adjustment and submittal to the City of the recorded boundary line adjustment documents. Lot lines within lots under different ownership shall be adjusted upon submittal to the City of the recorded boundary line adjustment and real estate conveyance documents transferring ownership of the adjusted land area. Approved boundary line adjustment approvals shall expire if the approved boundary line adjustment and real estate documents transferring property ownership are not recorded and a copy submitted to the City within one year from the date of approval.

(3) Final record-of-survey document must be prepared by a land surveyor in accordance with Chapter 332-130 WAC and Chapter 58.09 RCW. The document must contain a land surveyor’s certificate and a recording certificate.

(4) The final map page shall contain the following approval blocks:

(a) The King County department of assessments; and

(b) The City of Sammamish department of community development. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


19A.24.040 Boundary line agreement.

Whenever a point or line determining the boundary between two or more parcels of real property cannot be identified from the existing public record, monuments, and landmarks, or is in dispute, as evidenced by survey performed by a land surveyor as defined by SMC 19A.04.200 that demonstrates the following:

(1) The current legal description incorrectly identifies a property line location that is inconsistent with a location recognized by property owners through established use; or

(2) There is a defect in the recorded legal description that creates gaps or overlaps between existing lot lines;

the landowners affected by the determination of the point or line may resolve any dispute and fix the boundary point or line by the procedure below, in conformance with RCW 58.04.007.

If all of the affected landowners agree to a description and marking of a point or line determining a boundary, they shall document the agreement in a written instrument, using appropriate legal descriptions and including a survey map, filed in accordance with Chapter 58.09 RCW. The written instrument shall be signed and acknowledged by each party in the manner required for a conveyance of real property. The agreement is binding upon the parties, their successors, assigns, heirs and devisees and runs with the land. The agreement shall be recorded with King County, and a copy of the recorded boundary line correction and/or agreement shall be submitted to the City for the record. (Ord. O2010-284 § 2 (Att. A))


Title 20 ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES/ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY

Chapters:

20.05    Procedures for Land Use Permit Applications, Public Notice, Hearings and Appeals

20.10    Hearing Examiner

20.15    State Environmental Policy Act Procedures

20.20    Land Use Mediation Program


Chapter 20.05 PROCEDURES FOR LAND USE PERMIT APPLICATIONS, PUBLIC NOTICE, HEARINGS AND APPEALS

Sections:

20.05.010    Chapter purpose.

20.05.020    Classifications of land use decision processes.

20.05.030    Feasibility conference – Preapplication conference.

20.05.035    Neighborhood meetings.

20.05.037    Unified zone development plan process.

20.05.040    Application requirements.

20.05.050    Notice of complete application to applicant.

20.05.060    Notice of application.

20.05.070    Vesting.

20.05.080    Applications – Modifications to proposal.

20.05.085    Reasonable accommodation.

20.05.090    Notice of decision or recommendation – Appeals.

20.05.100    Permit issuance.

20.05.110    Semi-annual report.

20.05.120    Citizen’s guide.


20.05.010 Chapter purpose. 

The purpose of this chapter is to establish standard procedures for land use permit applications, public notice, hearings, and appeals in the City of Sammamish. These procedures are designed to promote timely and informed public participation in discretionary land use decisions; eliminate redundancy in the application, permit review, hearing and appeal processes; provide for uniformity in public notice procedures; minimize delay and expense; and result in development approvals that implement the policies of the interim comprehensive plan. These procedures also provide for an integrated and consolidated land use permit and environmental review process consistent with Chapter 347, Laws of 1995. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


20.05.020 Classifications of land use decision processes.

(1) Land use permit decisions are classified into four types, based on the amount of discretion associated with each decision. Procedures for the four different types are distinguished according to who makes the decision, whether public notice is required, whether a public hearing is required before a decision is made, and whether administrative appeals are provided. The types of land use decisions are listed in Exhibit A of this section.

(a) Type 1 decisions are made by the director (director) of the department of community development (department). Type 1 decisions are non-appealable administrative decisions that require the exercise of little or no administrative discretion. For Type 1 decisions for which the department has issued a SEPA threshold determination, the issuance of any subsequent permits shall not occur until any allowed administrative appeal of the SEPA threshold determination is decided.

(b) Type 2 decisions are made by the director, or his or her designee. Type 2 decisions are discretionary decisions that are subject to administrative appeal in accordance with applicable provisions of law or ordinance.

(c) Type 3 decisions are quasi-judicial decisions made by the hearing examiner following an open record hearing. Type 3 decisions may be appealed to superior court.

(d) Type 4 decisions are quasi-judicial decisions made by the hearing examiner. Type 4 decisions may be appealed to the State Shoreline Hearings Board.

(2) Except as provided in SMC 20.15.130(1)(f) or unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant, all Type 2, 3 and 4 decisions included in consolidated permit applications that would require more than one type of land use decision process may be processed and decided together, including any administrative appeals, using the highest numbered land use decision type applicable to the project application.

(3) Certain development proposals are subject to additional procedural requirements beyond the standard procedures established in this chapter.

(4) Land use permits that are categorically exempt from review under the State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA) will not require a threshold determination (determination of nonsignificance (DNS) or determination of significance (DS)). For all other projects, the SEPA review procedures codified in Chapter 20.15 SMC are supplemental to the procedures set forth in this chapter.

Exhibit A 

LAND USE DECISION TYPE 

	Type 1	Decision by director, no administrative appeal	Building; clearing and grading; boundary line adjustment; temporary use; TDR sending site certification; right-of-way; road variance except those rendered in conjunction with a subdivision or short plat decision1; variance from the requirements of Chapter 9.04 KCC as adopted by SMC Title 13; shoreline exemption; approval of a conversion harvest plan; temporary homeless encampment permit2

	Type 2	Decision by director appealable to hearing examiner, no further administrative appeal	Short plat; road variance decisions rendered in conjunction with a short plat decision; zoning variance; conditional use permit; procedural and substantive SEPA decision; site development permit; approval of residential density incentives; reuse of public schools; reasonable use exceptions under SMC 21A.50.070(2); preliminary determinations under SMC 20.05.030(3); critical areas exceptions and decisions to require studies or to approve, condition or deny a development proposal based on the requirements of Chapter 21A.50 SMC; binding site plan; unified zone development plan under Chapter 21B.95 SMC3

	Type 3	Recommendation by director, hearing and decision by hearing examiner appealable to superior court	Preliminary plat; plat alterations; preliminary plat revisions; plat vacations; zone reclassifications4; urban planned development; special use

	Type 4	Recommendation by director, hearing and decision by hearing examiner appealable to the State Shoreline Hearings Board	Shoreline variances; shoreline substantial development permits (SSDPs); shoreline conditional use permits

1 The road variance process is administered by the City engineer pursuant to the City’s street standards as set forth in the public works standards.

2 Subject to the notice requirements of SMC 21A.70.195(4).

3 Subject also to the procedural requirements of SMC 20.05.037 and Chapter 21B.95 SMC.

4 Approvals that are consistent with the interim comprehensive plan may be considered by the examiner at any time. Zone reclassifications that are not consistent with the interim comprehensive plan require a site-specific land use map amendment and the City council’s hearing and consideration will be scheduled with the amendment to the interim comprehensive plan pursuant to SMC 24.25.040 and 24.25.050.

(Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2014-372 § 1; Ord. O2011-297 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2009-249 § 1; Ord. O2004-150 §§ 1 – 4; Ord. O2000-63 §§ 1, 2, 3; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


20.05.030 Feasibility conference – Preapplication conference.

(1) Prior to the filing of a land use application, applicants shall contact the department for a feasibility conference and shall subsequently request a preapplication conference with the department as provided by subsections (2) and (3) of this section.

(a) Feasibility Conference. The purpose of the feasibility conference is to discuss the general scope of the proposed project prior to the preapplication conference. The feasibility conference may be an informal conversation between the department and the applicant.

(b) Preapplication Conference. The purpose of the preapplication conference is to review and discuss the application requirements with the applicant and provide comments on the development proposal. The preapplication conference shall be scheduled by the department, at the request of an applicant, and shall be held in a timely manner within 30 days from the date of the applicant’s request. The director may waive the requirement for a preapplication conference if it is determined to be unnecessary for review of an application. Except as provided in subsection (5) of this section, nothing in this section shall be interpreted to require more than one preapplication conference or to prohibit the applicant from filing an application if the department is unable to schedule a preapplication conference within 30 days following the applicant’s request. The provisions of subsections (2) through (5) of this section apply only to the preapplication conference and not to the feasibility conference.

(2) The applicant shall contact the department to schedule a preapplication conference prior to filing a permit application for a Type 1 decision involving any of the following:

(a) Property that will have 5,000 square feet or greater of development and/or right-of-way improvements; or

(b) Property in a critical drainage area; or

(c) Property that has a wetland, steep slope, landslide hazard, or erosion hazard; or

(d) Single-family residences and accessory buildings directly impacting critical areas and/or their buffers;

provided, that the provisions of this subsection shall not apply to structures where all work is in an existing building and no parking is required or added.

(3) Prior to filing a permit application requiring a Type 2, 3 or 4 decision, the applicant shall contact the department to schedule a preapplication conference that shall be held prior to filing the application, except as provided in subsection (1)(b) of this section.

(4) For the purposes of this section, “applicant” means the person(s) with actual or apparent authority to speak for and answer questions about the property or project on behalf of the applicant as defined in SMC 19A.04.030.

(5) Information presented at or required as a result of the preapplication conference shall be valid for a period of 180 days following the preapplication conference. An applicant wishing to submit a permit application more than 180 days following the preapplication conference for that permit must schedule and participate in another preapplication conference prior to submitting the permit application; however, the director may waive this requirement for de minimus deviations or if it is determined to be unnecessary for review of an application.

(6) At or subsequent to a preapplication conference, the department may issue a preliminary determination that a proposed development is not permissible under applicable City policies or regulatory enactments. In that event, the applicant shall have the option to appeal the preliminary determination to the hearing examiner in the manner provided for a Type 2 permit, as an alternative to proceeding with a complete application. Mailed and published notice of the appeal shall be provided for as in SMC 20.05.060(7) and (8). (Ord. O2016-415 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-413 § 4 (Att. C))


20.05.035 Neighborhood meetings.

(1) The applicant for a subdivision, short subdivision, or conditional use permit shall conduct and attend a neighborhood meeting within the City limits to discuss the proposed development after the preapplication conference but prior to submission of the development proposal to the City, at a date and time which shall not be unreasonable. The purpose of the meeting shall be to receive neighborhood input and suggestions prior to submission of the application, and an opportunity for the applicant to amend the proposal to address neighborhood feedback as appropriate. Such a public meeting is not a mediation, and any party who participates in such a meeting may still request mediation in accordance with SMC 20.20.060 and the provisions of the City land use mediation program. For the purposes of this subsection, “applicant” means the person(s) with actual or apparent authority to speak for and answer questions about the property or project on behalf of the applicant as defined in SMC 19A.04.030.

(2) At least 21 days prior to the neighborhood meeting, the applicant shall give notice of the date, time, and location of the meeting to the community development director and to all persons who would be entitled to receive notice of the proposed plat application, short subdivision application or conditional use permit application under the requirements of the Sammamish Municipal Code.

(3) The notice shall be on a form provided by the community development director and shall briefly describe the proposal and its location and shall include the name, address, and telephone number of the applicant or a representative of the applicant who may be contacted for additional information about the proposal. Notice to the community development director shall include a list of the persons and addresses notified of the neighborhood meeting.

(4) Within 30 days following the neighborhood meeting, the applicant shall provide to the community development director, and to all attendees who signed in at the meeting, documentation of the meeting as follows:

(a) The date, time, and location of the meeting;

(b) Contact information for all persons representing the applicant at the meeting;

(c) A summary of comments provided for the meeting attendees by the applicant prior to or during the meeting;

(d) A summary of comments received from meeting attendees or other persons prior to or during the meeting; and

(e) Copies of documents submitted or presented at the meeting.

(5) Complete applications must be received by the City within 120 days of the neighborhood meeting. If an application is not submitted in this time frame, or if the materials submitted with the application do not substantially conform to the materials provided at the meeting, the applicant shall be required to hold a new neighborhood meeting. (Ord. O2016-413 § 5 (Att. D); Ord. O2004-151 § 2)


20.05.037 Unified zone development plan process.

Following application submittal and prior to approval of the unified zone development plan, the applicant and City shall conduct an open house. Notice of the open house shall be provided at least 14 days prior to the open house, and shall include the date, time, and location of the meeting and shall be mailed to all persons who would be entitled to receive notice of decision pursuant to SMC 20.05.090. The purpose of this open house is to provide an additional opportunity for the community to review and provide comments on the proposed unified zone development plan. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


20.05.040 Application requirements.

(1) The department shall not commence review of any application set forth in this chapter until the applicant has submitted the materials and fees specified for complete applications. Applications for land use permits requiring Type 1, 2, 3, or 4 decisions shall be considered complete as of the date of submittal upon determination by the department that the materials submitted meet the requirements of this section. Except as provided in subsection (2) of this section, all land use permit applications described in SMC 20.05.020, Exhibit A, shall include the following:

(a) An application form provided by the department and completed by the applicant that allows the applicant to file a single application form for all land use permits requested by the applicant for the development proposal at the time the application is filed;

(b) Designation of who the applicant is, except that this designation shall not be required as part of a complete application for purposes of this section when a public agency or public or private utility is applying for a permit for property on which the agency or utility does not own an easement or right-of-way and the following three requirements are met:

(i) The name of the agency or private or public utility is shown on the application as the applicant;

(ii) The agency or private or public utility includes in the complete application an affidavit declaring that notice of the pending application has been given to all owners of property to which the application applies, on a form provided by the department; and

(iii) The form designating who the applicant is is submitted to the department prior to permit approval;

(c) A certificate of sewer availability from the Sammamish Plateau Sewer and Water District or site percolation data with preliminary approval by the Seattle-King County department of public health;

(d) A current certificate of water availability, as required by Chapter 21A.60 SMC;

(e) Review by Sammamish fire services;

(f) A site plan, prepared in a form prescribed by the director;

(g) Proof that the lot or lots are recognized as separate lots pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 19A.04 SMC;

(h) A sensitive areas affidavit if required by Chapter 21A.50 SMC;

(i) A completed environmental checklist, if required by Chapter 20.15 SMC, State Environmental Policy Act Procedures;

(j) Payment of any development permit review fees, excluding impact fees, as set forth by resolution;

(k) A list of any permits or decisions applicable to the development proposal that have been obtained prior to filing the application or that are pending before the City or any other governmental entity;

(l) Approved certificate of concurrency from the director or designee, if required by Chapter 14A.10 SMC;

(m) Certificate of future connection from the appropriate purveyor for lots located within the City that are proposed to be served by on-site or community sewage system and/or group B water systems or private well;

(n) A determination if drainage review applies to the project pursuant to Chapter 9.04 KCC as adopted by SMC Title 13, and, if applicable, all drainage plans and documentation required by the King County Surface Water Design Manual adopted pursuant to Chapter 9.04 KCC as adopted by SMC Title 13;

(o) Current assessor’s maps and a list of tax parcels to which public notice must be given as provided in this chapter, for land use permits requiring a Type 2, 3 or 4 decision;

(p) Legal description of the site;

(q) Variances obtained or required under SMC Title 21A to the extent known at the date of application;

(r) Verification that the property affected by the application is in the exclusive ownership of the applicant, or that the applicant has a right to develop the site and that the application has been submitted with the consent of all owners of the affected property; provided, that compliance with subsection (2)(d) of this section shall satisfy the requirements of this subsection (1)(r); and

(s) For commercial site development permits only, a phasing plan and a time schedule, if the site is intended to be developed in phases or if all building permits will not be submitted within three years.

A permit application is complete for purposes of this section when it meets the procedural submission requirements of the department and is sufficient for continued processing even though additional information may be required or project modifications may be undertaken subsequently. The determination of completeness shall not preclude the department from requesting additional information or studies either at the time of notice of completeness or subsequently if new or additional information is required or substantial changes in the proposed action occur, as determined by the department.

(2) Additional complete application requirements apply for the following land use permits:

(a) Clearing and grading permit, as set forth in SMC 16.15.070;

(b) Construction permits as set forth in SMC 16.20.215;

(c) Mobile home permits as set forth in SMC 21A.70.170;

(d) For all applications for land use permits requiring Type 2, 3, or 4 decisions, a title report from a reputable title company indicating that the applicant has either sole marketable title to the development site or has a publicly recorded right to develop the site (such as an easement); if the title report does not clearly indicate that the applicant has such rights, then the applicant shall include the written consent of the record holder(s) of the development site.

(3) The director may specify the requirements of the site plan required to be submitted for various permits and may waive any of the specific submittal requirements listed herein that are determined to be unnecessary for review of an application.

(4) The applicant shall attest by written oath to the accuracy of all information submitted for an application.

(5) Applications shall be accompanied by the payment of the applicable filing fees, if any, as set forth by resolution. (Ord. O2020-503 § 2; Ord. O2018-466 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-415 § 3 (Att. B); Ord. O99-29 § 1)


20.05.050 Notice of complete application to applicant.

(1) Within 28 days following receipt of a land use permit application, the department shall mail or provide written notice to the applicant that the application is either complete or incomplete. If the application is incomplete, the notice shall state with specificity what is necessary to make the application complete. To the extent known by the department, the notice shall identify other agencies of local, state, regional, or federal governments that may have jurisdiction over some aspects of the development proposal.

(2) An application shall be deemed complete under this section if the department does not provide written notice to the applicant that the application is incomplete within the 28-day period as provided herein. 

(3) If the application is incomplete and the applicant submits the additional information requested by the department, the department shall notify the applicant in writing within 14 days whether the application is complete or what additional information specified by the department as provided in subsection (1) of this section is necessary to make the application complete. An application shall be deemed complete if the department fails to provide written notice to the applicant within the 14-day period that the application is incomplete.

(4) The date an application is deemed complete is the date of receipt by the department of all of the information necessary to make the application complete as provided in this chapter. The department’s issuance of a notice of complete application as provided in subsections (1) or (3) of this section, or the failure of the department to provide such a notice as provided in subsections (2) or (3) of this section, shall cause an application to be conclusively deemed to be complete and vested as provided in this chapter.

(5) The department may cancel an incomplete application if the applicant fails to submit the additional information required by this chapter within 90 days following notification from the department that the application is incomplete. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


20.05.060 Notice of application.

(1) A notice of application shall be provided to the public for all land use permit applications requiring Type 2, 3 or 4 decisions or Type 1 decisions subject to SEPA pursuant to this section.

(2) Notice of the application shall be provided by the department within 14 days following the department’s determination that the application is complete. A public comment period of at least 21 days shall be provided, except as otherwise provided in Chapter 90.58 RCW.

(3) If the director has made a determination of significance (DS) under Chapter 43.21 RCW prior to the issuance of the notice of application, the notice of the DS shall be combined with the notice of application and the scoping notice.

(4) All required notices of application shall contain the following information:

(a) The file number;

(b) The name of the applicant;

(c) The date of application, the date of the notice of completeness and the date of the notice of application;

(d) A description of the project, the location, a list of the permits included in the application and the location where the application and any environmental documents or studies can be reviewed;

(e) A site plan on eight-and-one-half-by-14-inch paper, if applicable;

(f) The procedures and deadline for filing comments, requesting notice of any required hearings, and any appeal procedure;

(g) The date, time, place, and type of hearing, if applicable and scheduled at the time of notice;

(h) The identification of other permits not included in the application to the extent known;

(i) The identification of existing environmental documents that evaluate the proposed project;

(j) A statement of the preliminary determination, if one has been made, of those development regulations that will be used for project mitigation and of consistency with applicable City plans and regulations.

(5) Notice shall be provided in the following manner:

(a) Posted at the project site as provided in subsections (6) and (9) of this section;

(b) Mailed by first class mail as provided in subsection (7) of this section; and

(c) Published as provided in subsection (8) of this section.

(6) Posted notice for a proposal shall consist of one or more notice boards posted by the applicant within 14 days following the department’s determination of completeness as follows:

(a) A single notice board shall be posted for a project. This notice board may also be used for the posting of the notice of decision and notice of hearing and shall be placed by the applicant:

(i) At the midpoint of the site street frontage or as otherwise directed by the department for maximum visibility;

(ii) Five feet inside the street property line except when the board is structurally attached to an existing building; provided, that no notice board shall be placed more than five feet from the street property without approval of the department;

(iii) So that the top of the notice board is between seven to nine feet above grade; and

(iv) Where it is completely visible to pedestrians.

(b) Additional notice boards may be required when:

(i) The site does not abut a public road;

(ii) A large site abuts more than one public road; or

(iii) The department determines that additional notice boards are necessary to provide adequate public notice.

(c) Notice boards shall be:

(i) Maintained in good condition by the applicant during the notice period through the time of the final City decision on the proposal, including the expiration of any applicable appeal periods, and for decisions that are appealed, through the time of the final resolution of any appeal;

(ii) In place at least 28 days prior to the date of any required hearing for a Type 3 or 4 decision, or at least 14 days following the department’s determination of completeness for any Type 2 decision; and

(iii) Removed within 14 days after the end of the notice period.

(d) Removal of the notice board prior to the end of the notice period may be cause for discontinuance of City review until the notice board is replaced and remains in place for the specified time period.

(e) An affidavit of posting shall be submitted to the department by the applicant within 14 days following the department’s determination of completeness to allow continued processing of the application by the department.

(f) Notice boards shall be constructed and installed in accordance with this subsection, and any additional specifications promulgated by the department pursuant to Chapter 2.55 SMC, Rules of City Departments.

(7) Mailed notice for a proposal shall be sent by the department within 14 days after the department’s determination of completeness:

(a) By first class mail to owners of record of property in an area within 1,000 feet of the site and, if the site lies within an erosion hazards near sensitive water bodies overlay, to owners of record of property within a 2,000-foot-wide column centered at the site and extending directionally with the natural drainage of the basin to the perimeter of the overlay or to the Lake Sammamish shoreline, as determined by the director; provided, that such area shall be expanded as necessary to send mailed notices to at least 20 different property owners;

(b) To any utility that is intended to serve the site;

(c) To the State Department of Transportation, if the site adjoins a state highway;

(d) To the affected tribes;

(e) To any agency or community group that the department may identify as having an interest in the proposal;

(f) Be considered supplementary to posted notice and be deemed satisfactory despite the failure of one or more owners to receive mailed notice; and

(g) For preliminary plats only, to all cities within one mile of the proposed preliminary plat.

(8) Notice of a proposed action shall be published by the department within 14 days after the department’s determination of completeness in the official City newspaper.

(9) Posted Notice for Approved Formal Subdivision Engineering Plan, Clearing or Grading Permits Subject to SEPA, or Building Permits Subject to SEPA. Posted notice for approved formal subdivision engineering plans, clearing or grading permits subject to SEPA, or building permits subject to SEPA shall be a condition of the plan or permit approval and shall consist of a single notice board posted by the applicant at the project site, prior to construction as follows:

(a) Notice boards shall comport with the size and placement provisions identified for construction signs in SMC 21A.45.070(3);

(b) Notice boards shall include the following information:

(i) Permit number and description of the project;

(ii) Projected completion date of the project;

(iii) A contact name and phone number for both the department and the applicant; and

(iv) Hours of construction, if limited as a condition of the permit;

(c) Notice boards shall be maintained in the same manner as identified in subsection (6) of this section;

(d) Notice boards shall remain in place until final construction approval is granted. Early removal of the notice board may preclude authorization of final construction approval. (Ord. O2016-415 § 4 (Att. C); Ord. O2016-413 § 6 (Att. E); Ord. O99-29 § 1)


20.05.070 Vesting.

(1) Applications for Type 1, 2, 3 and 4 land use decisions, except those that seek variance from or exception to land use regulations and substantive and procedural SEPA decisions shall be considered under the zoning and other land use control ordinances in effect on the date a complete application is filed meeting all of the requirements of this chapter. The department’s issuance of a notice of complete application as provided in this chapter, or the failure of the department to provide such a notice as provided in this chapter, shall cause an application to be conclusively deemed to be vested as provided herein.

(2) Supplemental information required after vesting of a complete application shall not affect the validity of the vesting for such application.

(3) Vesting of an application does not vest any subsequently required permits, nor does it affect the requirements for vesting of subsequent permits or approvals. (Ord. O2009-249 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


20.05.080 Applications – Modifications to proposal. 

(1) Modifications required by the City to a pending application shall not be deemed a new application.

(2) An applicant-requested modification occurring either before or after issuance of the permit shall be deemed a new application when such modification would result in a substantial change in a project’s review requirements, as determined by the department. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


20.05.085 Reasonable accommodation.

(1) Purpose and Intent. The Federal Fair Housing Act (FFHA) requires that reasonable accommodations be made in rules, policies, practices, or services, when such accommodations may be necessary to afford persons with disabilities equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. The community development director is therefore authorized to make accommodations in the provisions of this code as applied to dwellings occupied or to be occupied by persons with disabilities as defined in the Federal Fair Housing Act, when the director determines that such accommodations reasonably may be necessary in order to comply with such Act.

(2) Applicability. The director may grant reasonable accommodation to individuals with disabilities as defined by the Fair Housing Amendments Act (FHAA), 42 U.S.C. 3602(h), or the Washington Law Against Discrimination (WLAD), Chapter 49.60 RCW.

(3) Procedure. If modification of a standard or regulation in the Sammamish Municipal Code is sought, the director shall make a written determination within 45 days and either grant, grant with modifications, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation in accordance with the following:

(a) Application. Requests for reasonable accommodation by any eligible person or entity described in subsection (1) of this section shall be submitted on an application form provided by the community development department, or in the form of a letter, to the director of community development and shall contain the following information:

(i) The applicant’s name, address, email, and telephone number.

(ii) Address of the property for which the request is being made.

(iii) The property owner’s name, address and telephone number and the owner’s written consent.

(iv) The current actual use of the property.

(v) The basis for the claim that the individual that resides or will reside at the property is considered disabled under the Acts.

(vi) The provision, regulation or policy from which reasonable accommodation is being requested.

(vii) Why the reasonable accommodation is necessary to make the specific property accessible to the individual.

(viii) Copies of emails, correspondence, pictures, plans or background information reasonably necessary to reach a decision regarding the need for the accommodation.

(b) No fee shall be charged to the applicant for a response to a reasonable accommodation request.

(c) The director shall determine what adverse land use impacts, including cumulative impacts, if any, would result from granting the proposed accommodation. This determination shall take into account the size, shape and location of the dwelling unit and lot; the traffic and parking conditions on adjoining and neighboring streets; vehicle usage to be expected from the residents, staff and visitors; and any other circumstances determined to be relevant.

(d) A grant of reasonable accommodation permits a dwelling to be inhabited only according to the terms and conditions of the applicant’s proposal and the director’s decision. If it is determined that the accommodation has become unreasonable because circumstances have changed or adverse land use impacts have occurred that were not anticipated, the director shall rescind or modify the decision to grant reasonable accommodation.

(e) Appeals of reasonable accommodation decisions made by the director must be filed within 21 days of the decision issuance date. (Ord. O2016-408 § 1 (Att. A))


20.05.090 Notice of decision or recommendation – Appeals.

(1) The department shall provide notice in a timely manner of its final decision or recommendation on permits requiring Type 2, 3 and 4 land use decisions and Type 1 decisions subject to SEPA, including the threshold determination, if any, the dates for any public hearings, and the procedures for administrative appeals, if any. Notice shall be provided to the applicant, to the Department of Ecology, and to agencies with jurisdiction if required by Chapter 20.15 SMC, to the Department of Ecology and Attorney General as provided in Chapter 90.58 RCW, and to any person who, prior to the decision or recommendation, had requested notice of the decision or recommendation or submitted comments. The notice shall also be provided to the public as provided in SMC 20.05.060.

(2) Except for shoreline permits that are appealable to the State Shorelines Hearings Board, all notices of appeal to the hearing examiner of Type 2 land use decisions made by the director shall be filed within 21 calendar days from the date of issuance of the notice of decision as provided in SMC 20.10.080. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


20.05.100 Permit issuance. 

(1) Final decisions by the City on all permits and approvals subject to the procedures of this chapter should be issued within 120 days from the date the applicant is notified by the department pursuant to this chapter that the application is complete; provided, that the following shorter time periods should apply for the type of land use permit indicated:

	New residential building permits	90 days

	Residential remodels	40 days

	Residential appurtenances, such as decks and garages

 

Residential appurtenances that require substantial site review	 

15 days

 

 

40 days

	SEPA exempt clearing and grading	45 days

	SEPA clearing and grading	90 days

	Health department review (for projects pending a final department review and/or permit)	40 days

The following periods shall be excluded from this 120-day period:

(a) Any period of time during which the applicant has been requested by the department, hearing examiner or council to correct plans, perform required studies or provide additional information, including road variances and variances required under Chapter 9.04 KCC as adopted by SMC Title 13. The period shall be calculated from the date of notice to the applicant of the need for additional information (“request for revision”) until either the City advises the applicant that the additional information satisfies the City’s request or 14 days after the date the information has been provided, whichever is the earlier date. If the City determines that the correction, study, or other information submitted by the applicant is insufficient, it shall notify the applicant of the deficiencies, and the procedures of this section shall apply as if a new request for revision had been made.

(i) The department shall set a reasonable deadline for submittal by the applicant of corrections, studies, or other information in response to a request for revision, and shall provide written notification of the deadline to the applicant. The deadline may not exceed 90 days from the date of the request for revision; provided, that an extension of such deadline may be granted upon written request by the applicant providing satisfactory justification for an extension or upon the applicant’s agreement to and compliance with an approved schedule with specific target dates for submitting the full revisions, corrections or other information requested.

(ii) Applications may be canceled for inactivity if an applicant fails to provide, by such deadline, an adequate response substantively addressing code requirements identified in the written request for revision.

(iii) When granting a request for a deadline extension, the department shall give consideration to the number of days between receipt by the department of a written request for a deadline extension and the mailing to the applicant of the department’s decision regarding that request.

(b) The period of time, as set forth in SMC 20.15.060, during which an environmental impact statement is being prepared following a determination of significance pursuant to Chapter 43.21C RCW.

(c) A period of no more than 90 days for an open record appeal hearing by the hearing examiner on a Type 2 land use decision, and no more than 60 days for a closed record appeal by the county council on a Type 3 land use decision appealable to the county council, except when the parties to an appeal agree to extend these time periods.

(d) Any period of time during which an applicant fails to post the property, if required by this chapter, following the date notice is required until an affidavit of posting is provided to the department by the applicant.

(e) Any time extension mutually agreed upon by the applicant and the department.

(2) The time limits established in this section shall not apply if a proposed development:

(a) Requires an amendment to the Comprehensive Plan or a development regulation, or modification or waiver of a development regulation as part of a demonstration project;

(b) Requires approval of a new fully contained community as provided in RCW 36.70A.350, master planned resort as provided in RCW 36.70A.360, or the siting of an essential public facility as provided for RCW 36.70A.200; or

(c) Is substantially revised by the applicant, when such revisions will result in a substantial change in a project’s review requirements, as determined by the department, in which case the time period shall start from the date at which the revised project application is determined to be complete.

(3) Permits or approvals subject to the procedures of this chapter may be denied if the applicant is unable to present satisfactory proof of ownership of the property or development site as required by SMC 20.05.040(1)(r).

(4) If the department is unable to issue its final decision within the time limits established by this section, it shall provide written notice of this fact to the project applicant. The notice shall include a statement of reasons why the time limits have not been met and an estimated date for issuance of the notice of final decision. Within 14 days of the date of such notice, a copy of the notice shall be provided to the public in the manner set forth in SMC 20.05.060(5). (Ord. O2016-415 § 5 (Att. D); Ord. O2016-413 § 7 (Att. F); Ord. O2009-253 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O99-29 § 1)


20.05.110 Semi-annual report.

Beginning January 1, 2000, and continuing semi-annually thereafter, the director shall prepare a report to the City council detailing the length of time required to process applications for Type 1, 2, 3, and 4 land use decisions in the previous period, categorized both on average and by type of permit. The report shall provide commentary on department operations and identify any need for clarification of City policy or development regulations or process. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


20.05.120 Citizen’s guide.

The director shall issue a citizen’s guide to permit processing including making an appeal or participating in a hearing. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


Chapter 20.10 HEARING EXAMINER

Sections:

20.10.010    Chapter purpose.

20.10.020    Office created.

20.10.030    Appointment and terms.

20.10.040    Removal.

20.10.050    Qualifications.

20.10.060    Pro tem examiners.

20.10.070    Jurisdiction of the hearing examiner.

20.10.080    Appeal to examiner – Filing.

20.10.090    Dismissal of untimely appeals.

20.10.100    Expeditious processing.

20.10.110    Time limits.

20.10.120    Condition, modification and restriction examples.

20.10.130    Quasi-judicial powers.

20.10.140    Freedom from improper influence.

20.10.150    Public hearing.

20.10.160    Consolidation of hearings.

20.10.170    Prehearing conference.

20.10.180    Notice.

20.10.190    Rules and conduct of hearings.

20.10.200    Examiner findings.

20.10.210    Additional examiner findings – Reclassifications.

20.10.220    Additional examiner findings – Preliminary plats.

20.10.230    Additional examiner findings and recommendations – School capacities.

20.10.240    Written recommendation or decision.

20.10.250    Judicial review of final decisions of the hearing examiner.

20.10.260    Reconsideration of final action.

20.10.270    Citizen’s guide.

20.10.280    Semi-annual report.

20.10.290    Site-specific land use map amendment.


20.10.010 Chapter purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide a system of considering and applying regulatory devices that will best satisfy the following basic needs:

(1) The need to separate the application of regulatory controls to the land from planning; 

(2) The need to better protect and promote the interests of the public and private elements of the community; 

(3) The need to expand the principles of fairness and due process in public hearings. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


20.10.020 Office created. 

The office of hearing examiner is created. The examiner shall act on behalf of the City council in considering and applying adopted City policies and regulations as provided herein. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


20.10.030 Appointment and terms.

The City council shall appoint the examiner to serve in said office for a term of four years. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


20.10.040 Removal. 

The examiner may be removed from office at any time by the affirmative vote of not less than four members of the City council for just cause. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


20.10.050 Qualifications. 

The examiner shall be appointed solely with regard to his or her qualifications for the duties of the office and shall have such training or experience as will qualify him or her to conduct administrative or quasi-judicial hearings on regulatory enactments and to discharge the other functions conferred upon him or her, and shall hold no other appointive or elective public office or position in the City government except as provided herein. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


20.10.060 Pro tem examiners.

The City council may appoint qualified persons to serve as hearing examiner pro tempore, as needed, to expeditiously hear pending applications and appeals. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


20.10.070 Jurisdiction of the hearing examiner.

(1) The examiner shall receive and examine available information, conduct open record public hearings, prepare records and reports thereof, and issue final decisions, including findings and conclusions, based on the issues and evidence in the record, which shall be appealable to superior court as provided by SMC 20.10.250, in the following cases:

(a) Appeals from the decisions of the director for short subdivisions, including those variance decisions of the City engineer made pursuant to the public works standards as adopted in Chapter 14A.01 SMC with regard to circulation in the subject short subdivisions;

(b) Appeals of all Type 2 land use decisions with the exception of appeals of shoreline permits including shoreline variances and conditional uses that are appealable to the State Shoreline Hearings Board;

(c) Appeals from notices and orders and stop work orders issued pursuant to SMC Title 23;

(d) Appeals from decisions regarding the abatement of a nonconformance;

(e) Type 3 and Type 4 decisions;

(f) Appeals from public safety seizures and intended forfeitures, when properly designated by the chief law enforcement officer of the department as provided in RCW 69.50.505;

(g) Appeals from the department’s final decisions regarding transportation concurrency, mitigation payment system and intersection standards provisions of SMC Title 14A;

(h) Other applications or appeals that the City council may prescribe by ordinance.

(2) The examiner’s decision may be to grant or deny the application or appeal, or the examiner may grant the application or appeal with such conditions, modifications, and restrictions as the examiner finds necessary to make the application or appeal compatible with the environment and carry out applicable state laws and regulations, including Chapter 43.21C RCW and the regulations, policies, objectives, and goals of the interim comprehensive plan or neighborhood plans, the development code, the subdivision code, and other official laws, policies and objectives of the City of Sammamish. (Ord. O2018-466 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2000-63 § 6; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


20.10.080 Appeal to examiner – Filing.

(1) Except as otherwise provided herein, all appeals to the examiner shall be filed with the City department issuing the original decision with a copy provided by the department to the hearing examiner. Except as otherwise provided herein, an appeal, together with the required appeal fee, shall be filed within 21 calendar days from the date of issuance of such decisions. 

(2) Department staff shall:

(a) Be available within a reasonable time to persons wishing to file an appeal subsequent to an agency ruling, and to respond to queries concerning the facts and process of the City decision; and

(b) Make available within a reasonable time a complete set of files detailing the facts of the department ruling in question to persons wishing to file an appeal, subsequent to an agency ruling. If a department is unable to comply with these provisions, the hearing examiner may authorize amendments to an appeal to reflect information not made available to an appellant within a reasonable time due to a failure by the department to meet the foregoing requirements. The appeal shall identify the decision being appealed and the alleged errors in that decision. Further, the appeal shall state specific reasons why the decision should be reversed or modified, the harm suffered or anticipated by the appellant, and the relief sought. The scope of an appeal shall be based principally on matters or issues raised in the appeal. Failure to timely file an appeal or appeal fee deprives the examiner of jurisdiction to consider the appeal. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


20.10.090 Dismissal of untimely appeals. 

On its own motion or on the motion of a party, the examiner shall dismiss an appeal for untimeliness or lack of jurisdiction. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


20.10.100 Expeditious processing. 

(1) Hearings shall be scheduled by the examiner to ensure that final decisions are issued within the time periods provided in SMC 20.05.100. During periods of time when the volume of permit activity is high, the City shall retain one or more pro tem examiners to ensure that the 120-day time period for final decisions is met.

(2) Appeals shall be processed by the examiner as expeditiously as possible, giving appropriate consideration to the procedural due process rights of the parties. Unless a longer period is agreed to by the parties, or the examiner determines that the size and scope of the project is so compelling that a longer period is required, a prehearing conference or a public hearing shall occur within 45 days from the date the office of the hearing examiner is notified that a complete statement of appeal has been filed. In such cases where the examiner has determined that the size and scope warrant such an extension, the reason for the deferral shall be stated in the examiner’s recommendation or decision. The time period may be extended by the examiner at the examiner’s discretion for not more than 30 days. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


20.10.110 Time limits.

In all matters where the examiner holds a hearing on applications, the hearing shall be completed and the examiner’s written report and recommendations issued within 21 days from the date the hearing opens, excluding any time required by the applicant or the department to obtain and provide additional information requested by the hearing examiner and necessary for final action on the application consistent with applicable laws and regulations. In every appeal heard by the examiner pursuant to SMC 20.10.070, the appeal process, including a written decision, shall be completed within 90 days from the date the examiner’s office is notified of the filing of a notice of appeal pursuant to SMC 20.10.080. When reasonably required to enable the attendance of all necessary parties at the hearing, or the production of evidence, or to otherwise assure that due process is afforded and the objectives of this chapter are met, these time periods may be extended by the examiner at the examiner’s discretion for an additional 30 days. With the consent of all parties, the time periods may be extended indefinitely. In all such cases, the reason for such deferral shall be stated in the examiner’s recommendation or decision. Failure to complete the hearing process within the stated time shall not terminate the jurisdiction of the examiner.

“Days” shall be calendar days unless specified otherwise. “Days” in SMC 20.10.240 shall be working days. (Ord. O2013-352 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O99-29 § 1)


20.10.120 Condition, modification and restriction examples.

The examiner is authorized to impose conditions, modifications, and restrictions, including but not limited to setbacks, screenings in the form of landscaping or fencing, covenants, easements, street improvements, dedications of additional street right-of-way, and performance bonds as authorized by City ordinances. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


20.10.130 Quasi-judicial powers.

The examiner may also exercise administrative powers and such other quasi-judicial powers as may be granted by City ordinance. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


20.10.140 Freedom from improper influence.

Individual councilmembers, City officials, or any other person shall not interfere with or attempt to interfere with the examiner in the performance of his or her designated duties. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


20.10.150 Public hearing. 

(1) When it is found that an application meets the filing requirements of the responsible City department, it shall be accepted and a date assigned for public hearing.

(2) When it is found that an appeal meets the filing requirements of the responsible City department, it shall be accepted and a date assigned for an appeal hearing. (Ord. O2017-435 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O99-29 § 1)


20.10.160 Consolidation of hearings. 

Whenever a project application includes more than one City permit, approval, or determination for which a public hearing is required or for which an appeal is provided pursuant to this chapter, the hearings and any such appeals may be consolidated into a single proceeding before the hearing examiner pursuant to SMC 20.05.020. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


20.10.170 Prehearing conference.

(1) A prehearing conference may be called by the examiner pursuant to this chapter upon the request of a party or on the examiner’s own motion. A prehearing conference shall be held in every appeal brought pursuant to this chapter if timely requested by any party. The prehearing conference shall be held at such time as ordered by the examiner, but not less than 14 days prior to the scheduled hearing on not less than seven days’ notice to those who are then parties of record to the proceeding. The purpose of a prehearing conference shall be to identify, to the extent possible, the facts in dispute, issues, laws, parties, and witnesses in the case. In addition the prehearing conference is intended to establish a timeline for the presentation of the case. The examiner shall establish rules for the conduct of prehearing conferences.

(2) Any party who does not attend the prehearing conference, or anyone who becomes a party of record after notice of the prehearing conference has been sent to the parties, shall nevertheless be entitled to present testimony and evidence to the examiner at the hearing. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


20.10.180 Notice.

(1) Notice of the time and place of any hearing on an application before the hearing examiner set pursuant to this chapter shall be provided in the following manner:

(a) Published by the department in the official City newspaper no less than 30 calendar days prior to the scheduled hearing date; and

(b) Posted at the project site as provided in SMC 20.05.060(6) and (9) no less than 30 days prior to the scheduled hearing date; and

(c) Mailed by first class mail at least 14 calendar days prior to the scheduled hearing date to all persons who would be entitled to receive notice under SMC 20.05.060(7) and to all persons who commented or requested notice of the hearing; and

The hearing notice required by this section may be combined with the notice of decision or recommendation required by SMC 20.05.090, as applicable.

(2) Notice of the time and place of any appeal hearing before the hearing examiner pursuant to this chapter shall be mailed to all parties of record by first class mail at least 30 calendar days prior to the scheduled hearing date.

(3) If testimony cannot be completed prior to adjournment on the date set for a public hearing or appeal hearing, the examiner shall announce prior to adjournment the time and place said hearing will be continued. A matter should be heard, to the extent practicable, on consecutive days until it is concluded. (Ord. O2017-435 § 2 (Att. B); Ord. O2016-415 § 6 (Att. E); Ord. O99-29 § 1)


20.10.190 Rules and conduct of hearings.

(1) The examiner shall adopt rules for the conduct of hearings and for any mediation process consistent with this chapter. The rules shall be reviewed by the City council, and remain in effect during this review. Any modifications made by the council by motion shall be incorporated by the hearing examiner, and shall become effective 10 days after adoption of the motion. Such rules shall be published and available upon request to all interested parties. The examiner shall have the power to issue summons and subpoena to compel the appearance of witnesses and production of documents and materials, to order discovery, to administer oaths, and to preserve order. 

(2) To avoid unnecessary delay and to promote efficiency of the hearing process, the examiner shall limit testimony, including cross examination, to that which is relevant to the matter being heard, in light of adopted City policies and regulations, and shall exclude evidence and cross examination that is irrelevant, cumulative or unduly repetitious. The examiner may establish reasonable time limits for the presentation of direct oral testimony, cross examination, and argument. Any written submittals will be admitted only when authorized by the examiner under pertinent and promulgated administrative rules. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


20.10.200 Examiner findings.

When the examiner renders a decision or recommendation, he or she shall make and enter findings of fact and conclusions from the record that support the decision, said findings and conclusions shall set forth and demonstrate the manner in which the decision or recommendation is consistent with, carries out, and helps implement applicable state laws and regulations and the regulations, policies, objectives, and goals of the interim comprehensive plan, the development code, and other official laws, policies, and objectives of the City of Sammamish, and that the recommendation or decision will not be unreasonably incompatible with or detrimental to affected properties and the general public. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


20.10.210 Additional examiner findings – Reclassifications. 

When the examiner issues a decision regarding an application for a reclassification of property or for a shoreline environment redesignation, the decision shall include additional findings that support the conclusion that at least one of the following circumstances applies:

(1) The property is potentially zoned for the reclassification being requested and conditions have been met that indicate the reclassification is appropriate; or

(2) The adopted interim comprehensive plan or zoning specifies that the property shall be subsequently considered through an individual reclassification application; or

(3) The applicant has demonstrated with substantial evidence that:

(a) Since the last previous area zoning of the subject property, authorized public improvements, permitted private development or other conditions or circumstances affecting the subject property have undergone substantial and material change not anticipated or contemplated in the plan or zoning;

(b) The impacts from the changed conditions or circumstances affect the subject property in a manner and to a degree different than other properties in the vicinity such that area rezoning is not appropriate; and

(c) The requested reclassification is required in the public interest. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


20.10.220 Additional examiner findings – Preliminary plats.

When the examiner makes a decision regarding an application for a proposed preliminary plat, the decision shall include additional findings as to whether:

(1) Appropriate provisions are made for the public health, safety, and general welfare and for such open spaces, drainage ways, streets or roads, alleys, other public ways, transit stops, potable water supplies, sanitary wastes, parks and recreation, playgrounds, schools and school grounds and all other relevant facts, including sidewalks and other planning features that assure safe walking conditions for students who only walk to and from school; and

(2) The public use and interest will be served by the platting of such subdivision and dedication. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


20.10.230 Additional examiner findings and recommendations – School capacities.

Whenever the examiner in the course of conducting hearings or reviewing preliminary plat applications or actualization of potential multifamily zoning, receives documentation that the public schools in the district where the development is proposed would not meet the standards set out in SMC 21A.60.140 if the development were approved, the examiner shall remand to the department to require or recommend phasing or provision of the needed facilities and sites as appropriate to address the deficiency, or deny the proposal if required by the provisions of this chapter. The examiner shall prepare findings to document the facts that support the action taken. The examiner shall recommend such phasing as may be necessary to coordinate the development of the housing with the provision of sufficient school facilities, or in the alternative shall require the provision of the needed facilities. An offer of payment of a school impact fee as required by ordinance shall not be a substitute for such phasing, but the fee is still assessable. The examiner shall recommend a payment schedule for the fee to coordinate the payment with the phasing of an impact mitigation fee if such provision or payment is satisfactory to the district. The examiner must determine independently that the conditions of approval and assessable fees will provide for adequate schools. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


20.10.240 Written recommendation or decision. 

(1) Within 10 days of the conclusion of a hearing or rehearing, the examiner shall render a written recommendation or decision and shall transmit a copy thereof to all persons of record. The examiner’s decision shall identify the applicant and/or the owner by name and address.

(2) Decisions of the examiner in cases identified in SMC 20.10.070 shall be final and reviewable pursuant to SMC 20.10.250(1). (Ord. O2009-249 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


20.10.250 Judicial review of final decisions of the hearing examiner.

(1) Decisions of the examiner in cases identified in SMC 20.10.070 shall be a final and conclusive action unless within 21 calendar days from the date of issuance of the examiner’s decision an aggrieved person files an appeal in superior court, state of Washington, for the purpose of review of the action taken; provided, no development or related action may occur during the 21-day appeal period; provided further, that the 21-day appeal period from examiner decisions on appeals of threshold determinations or the adequacy of a final EIS shall not commence until final action on the underlying proposal. 

(2) Prior to filing an appeal of a final decision for a conditional use permit or special use permit, requested by a party that is licensed or certified by the Washington State Department of Social and Health Services or the Washington State Department of Corrections, an aggrieved party (other than a county, city or town) must comply with the mediation requirements of Chapter 35.63 RCW (Chapter 119, Laws of 1998). The time limits for appealing a final decision are tolled during the mediation process. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


20.10.260 Reconsideration of final action. 

(1) Any final action by the hearing examiner may be reconsidered by the examiner, if:

(a) The action was based in whole or in part on erroneous facts or information;

(b) The action when taken failed to comply with existing laws or regulations applicable thereto; or

(c) An error of procedure occurred that prevented consideration of the interests of persons directly affected by the action. 

(2) The examiner shall reconsider a final decision pursuant to the rules of the hearing examiner.

(3) Authority of the examiner to reconsider does not affect the finality of a decision when made. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


20.10.270 Citizen’s guide.

The department shall issue a citizen’s guide on the office of hearing examiner including making an appeal or participating in a hearing. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


20.10.280 Semi-annual report.

The hearing examiner shall prepare a semi-annual report to the City council detailing the length of time required for hearings in the previous six months, categorized both on average and by type of proceeding. The report shall provide commentary on examiner operations and identify any need for clarification of City policy or development regulations. The semi-annual report shall be presented to the council by March 1st and September 1st of each year. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


20.10.290 Site-specific land use map amendment.

Upon initiation of a site-specific land use map amendment to the interim comprehensive plan pursuant to SMC 20.30.050, the hearing examiner shall conduct a public hearing to consider the report and recommendation of the department and to take testimony and evidence relating to the proposed amendment. The hearing examiner may consolidate hearings pursuant to SMC 20.10.160 to the extent practical. Following the public hearing, the hearing examiner shall complete a report within 30 days that contains written findings and conclusions regarding the proposed amendment’s qualification for annual review consideration and consistency or lack of consistency with the applicable review criteria. An annual report containing all site specific land use map amendment reports that have been completed shall be compiled by the hearing examiner and submitted to the council by January 15th of the following year. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


Chapter 20.15 STATE ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY ACT PROCEDURES

Sections:

20.15.010    Definitions and abbreviations.

20.15.020    Lead agency.

20.15.030    Purpose and general requirements.

20.15.040    Categorical exemptions and threshold determinations.

20.15.050    Planned actions.

20.15.060    Environmental impact statements and other environmental documents.

20.15.070    Comments and public notice.

20.15.080    Use of existing environmental documents.

20.15.090    Substantive authority.

20.15.100    SEPA/GMA integration.

20.15.110    Ongoing actions.

20.15.120    Responsibility as consulted agency.

20.15.130    Appeals.

20.15.140    Department procedural rules.


20.15.010 Definitions and abbreviations. 

(1) The City of Sammamish adopts by reference the definitions contained in WAC 197-11-700 through 197-11-799. In addition, the following definitions are adopted for this chapter:

(a) “City council” means the Sammamish City council.

(b) “Department” means the City of Sammamish department of community development.

(c) “Director” means the director of the department of community development.

(2) The following abbreviations are used in this chapter:

(a) SEPA – State Environmental Policy Act.

(b) DNS – Determination of nonsignificance.

(c) DS – Determination of significance.

(d) EIS – Environmental impact statement. (Ord. O2009-251 § 1; Ord. O2003-132 § 9)


20.15.020 Lead agency.

The procedures and standards regarding lead agency responsibility contained in WAC 197-11-050 and 197-11-922 through 197-11-948 are adopted, subject to the following: 

(1) The department shall serve as the lead agency and the director shall serve as the responsible official for all SEPA activity by the City of

Sammamish. (Ord. O2009-251 § 1; Ord. O2003-132 § 9)


20.15.030 Purpose and general requirements. 

The procedures and standards regarding the timing and content of environmental review specified in WAC 197-11-055 through 197-11-100 are adopted subject to the following:

(1) Pursuant to WAC 197-11-055(4), the department shall adopt rules and regulations pursuant to Chapter 2.55 SMC establishing a process for environmental review at the conceptual stage of permit applications that require detailed project plans and specifications (i.e., building permits and PUDs). This process shall not become effective until it has been reviewed by the council.

(2) The optional provision of WAC 197-11-060(3)(c) is adopted.

(3) Under WAC 197-11-100, the applicant shall prepare the initial environmental checklist, unless the lead agency specifically elects to prepare the checklist. The lead agency shall make a reasonable effort to verify the information in the environmental checklist and shall have the authority to determine the final content of the environmental checklist.

(4) The director may set reasonable deadlines for the submittal of information, studies, or documents necessary for, or subsequent to, threshold determinations. Failure to meet such deadlines shall cause the application to be deemed withdrawn, and plans or other data previously submitted for review may be returned to the applicant together with any unexpended portion of the application review fees. (Ord. O2009-251 § 1; Ord. O2003-132 § 9)


20.15.040 Categorical exemptions and threshold determinations. 

(1) The City of Sammamish adopts the standards and procedures specified in WAC 197-11-300 through 197-11-390 and 197-11-800 through 197-11-890 for determining categorical exemptions and making threshold determinations subject to the following:

(a) The following exempt threshold levels are hereby established pursuant to WAC 197-11-800(1)(c) for the exemptions in WAC 197-11-800(1)(b):

(i) The construction or location of any residential structures of up to 20 dwelling units;

(ii) The construction of an office, school, commercial, recreational, service, or storage building with up to 12,000 square feet of gross floor area, and with associated parking facilities designed for up to 40 automobiles;

(iii) The construction of a parking lot designed for up to 20 automobiles;

(iv) Any fill or excavation of up to 500 cubic yards throughout the total lifetime of the fill or excavation.

(b) The determination of whether a proposal is categorically exempt shall be made by the department.

(c) The construction of an individual battery charging station or an individual battery exchange station.

(2) The mitigated DNS provision of WAC 197-11-350 shall be enforced as follows:

(a) If the department issues a mitigated DNS, conditions requiring compliance with the mitigation measures that were specified in the application and environmental checklist shall be deemed conditions of any decision or recommendation of approval of the action.

(b) If at any time the proposed mitigation measures are withdrawn or substantially changed, the responsible official shall review the threshold determination and, if necessary, may withdraw the mitigated DNS and issue a DS. (Ord. O2016-408 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2011-300 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2009-251 § 1; Ord. O2003-132 § 9)


20.15.050 Planned actions.

The procedures and standards of WAC 197-11-164 through 197-11-172 are adopted regarding the designation of planned actions. (Ord. O2009-251 § 1; Ord. O2003-132 § 9)


20.15.060 Environmental impact statements and other environmental documents. 

The procedures and standards for preparation of environmental impact statements and other environmental documents pursuant to WAC 197-11-400 through 197-11-460 and 197-11-600 through 197-11-640 are adopted, subject to the following:

(1) Pursuant to WAC 197-11-408(2)(a), all comments on determinations of significance and scoping notices shall be in writing, except where a public meeting on EIS scoping occurs pursuant to WAC 197-11-410(1)(b).

(2) Pursuant to WAC 197-11-420, 197-11-620, and 197-11-625, the department shall be responsible for preparation and content of EISs and other environmental documents. The department shall contract with consultants as necessary for the preparation of environmental documents. The department may consider the opinion of the applicant regarding the qualifications of the consultant but the department shall retain sole authority for selecting persons or firms to author, co-author, provide special services, or otherwise participate in the preparation of required environmental documents.

(3) Consultants or subconsultants selected by the City to prepare environmental documents for a private development proposal shall not: act as agents for the applicant in preparation or acquisition of associated underlying permits; have a financial interest in the proposal for which the environmental document is being prepared; perform any work or provide any services for the applicant in connection with or related to the proposal.

(4) The department may establish and maintain one or more lists of qualified consultants who are eligible to receive contracts for preparation of environmental documents. Separate lists may be maintained to reflect specialized qualifications or expertise. When the department requires consultant services to prepare environmental documents, the department shall select a consultant from the lists and negotiate a contract for such services. Pursuant to Chapter 2.55 SMC, the department shall promulgate administrative rules that establish processes to: create and maintain a qualified consultant list; select consultants from the list; remove consultants from the list; provide a method by which applicants may request a reconsideration of selected consultants based upon costs, qualifications, or timely production of the environmental document; and waive the consultant selection requirements of this chapter.

(5) All costs of preparing the environmental document shall be borne by the applicant. Pursuant to Chapter 2.55 SMC, the department may promulgate administrative rules that establish a deposit mechanism for consultant payment purposes, define consultant payment schedules, prescribe procedures for treating interest from deposited funds, and develop other procedures necessary to implement this chapter.

(6) In the event an applicant decides to suspend or abandon the project, the applicant must provide formal written notice to the department and consultant. The applicant shall continue to be responsible for all monies expended by the division or consultants to the point of receipt of notification to suspend or abandon, or other obligations or penalties under the terms of any contract let for preparation of the environmental documents.

(7) The department shall only publish an environmental impact statement (EIS) when it believes that the EIS adequately discloses: the significant direct, indirect, and cumulative adverse impacts of the proposal and its alternatives; mitigation measures proposed and committed to by the applicant, and their effectiveness in significantly mitigating impacts; mitigation measures that could be implemented or required; and unavoidable significant adverse impacts. Unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant, a final environmental impact statement shall be issued by the department within 270 days following the issuance of a DS for the proposal, except for public projects and nonproject actions, unless the department determines at the time of issuance of the DS that a longer time period will be required because of the extraordinary size of the proposal or the scope of the environmental impacts resulting therefrom; provided, that the additional time shall not exceed 90 days unless agreed to by the applicant.

(8) The following periods shall be excluded from the 270-day time period for issuing a final environmental impact statement:

(a) Any time period during which the applicant has failed to pay required environmental review fees to the department; 

(b) Any period of time during which the applicant has been requested to provide additional information required for preparation of the environmental impact statement; and

(c) Any period of time during which the applicant has not authorized the department to proceed with preparation of the environmental impact statement. (Ord. O2009-251 § 1; Ord. O2003-132 § 9)


20.15.070 Comments and public notice. 

(1) The procedures and standards of WAC 197-11-500 through 197-11-570 are adopted regarding public notice and comments.

(2) For purposes of WAC 197-11-510, public notice shall be required as provided in this title. Publication of notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the area where the proposal is located also shall be required for all nonproject actions and for all other proposals that are subject to the provisions of this chapter but are not classified as land use permit decisions in this title.

(3) The responsible official may require further notice if deemed necessary to provide adequate public notice of a pending action. Failure to require further or alternative notice shall not be a violation of any notice procedure. (Ord. O2009-251 § 1; Ord. O2003-132 § 9)




20.15.080 Use of existing environmental documents. 

The procedures and standards of WAC 197-11-600 through 197-11-640 are adopted regarding use of existing environmental documents. (Ord. O2009-251 § 1; Ord. O2003-132 § 9)


20.15.090 Substantive authority.

(1) The procedures and standards of WAC 197-11-650 through 197-11-660 regarding substantive authority and mitigation, and WAC 197-11-158, regarding reliance on existing plans, laws and regulations, are adopted. 

(2) For the purposes of RCW 43.21C.060 and WAC 197-11-660(a), the following policies, plans, rules and regulations, and all amendments thereto, are designated as potential bases for the exercise of the City of Sammamish’s substantive authority under SEPA, subject to the provisions of RCW 43.21C.240 and subsection (3) of this section:

(a) The policies of the State Environmental Policy Act, RCW 43.21C.020.

(b) The City’s comprehensive plan, and surface water management program basin plans, as specified in Chapters 24.15 and 24.20 SMC.

(c) The Sammamish development code, as adopted in SMC Title 21A.

(d) The City’s shoreline management master plan, as adopted in SMC Title 25.

(e) The King County surface water runoff policy, as adopted by reference in Chapter 9.04 KCC as adopted by SMC Title 13.

(f) The City’s public works standards and transportation regulations, as adopted in SMC Title 14A.

(g) The City’s noise ordinance, Chapter 8.15 SMC.

(3) Substantive SEPA authority to condition or deny new development proposals or other actions shall be used only in cases where specific adverse environmental impacts are not addressed by regulations as set forth below, or unusual circumstances exist. In cases where the City has adopted the following regulations to systematically avoid or mitigate adverse impacts (Chapter 21A.25 SMC, Development Standards – Density and Dimensions; Chapter 21A.30 SMC, Development Standards – Design Requirements; Chapter 21A.35 SMC, Development Standards – Landscaping and Irrigation; Chapter 21A.40 SMC, Development Standards – Parking and Circulation; Chapter 21A.45 SMC, Development Standards – Signs; Chapter 21A.50 SMC, Environmentally Sensitive Areas; Chapter 21A.55 SMC, Development Standards – Communication Facilities; Chapter 21A.60 SMC, Development Standards – Adequacy of Public Facilities and Services), those standards and regulations will normally constitute adequate mitigation of the impacts of new development. Unusual circumstances related to a site or to a proposal, as well as environmental impacts not mitigated by the foregoing regulations, will be subject to site-specific or project-specific SEPA mitigation. 

(4) Any decision to approve, deny, or approve with conditions pursuant to RCW 43.21C.060 shall be contained in the responsible official’s decision document. The written decision shall contain facts and conclusions based on the proposal’s specific adverse environmental impacts (or lack thereof) as identified in an environmental checklist, EIS, threshold determination, other environmental document including a department’s staff report and recommendation to a decision maker, or findings made pursuant to a public hearing authorized or required by law or ordinance. The decision document shall state the specific plan, policy or regulation that supports the SEPA decision and, if mitigation beyond existing development regulations is required, the specific adverse environmental impacts and the reasons why additional mitigation is needed to comply with SEPA.

(5) This chapter shall not be construed as a limitation on the authority of the City to approve, deny, or condition a proposal for reasons based upon other statutes, ordinances, or regulations. (Ord. O2018-466 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2009-251 § 1; Ord. O2003-132 § 9)


20.15.100 SEPA/GMA integration. 

The procedures and standards regarding the timing and content of environmental review specified in WAC 197-11-210 through 197-11-235 are hereby adopted. (Ord. O2009-251 § 1; Ord. O2003-132 § 9)


20.15.110 Ongoing actions.

Unless otherwise provided herein, the provisions of Chapter 197-11 WAC shall be applicable to all elements of SEPA compliance, including the modification or supplementation of an EIS, initiated after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. O2009-251 § 1; Ord. O2003-132 § 9)


20.15.120 Responsibility as consulted agency.

All requests from other agencies that the City of Sammamish consult on threshold investigations, the scope process, EISs, or other environmental documents shall be submitted to the department. The department shall be responsible for coordination with other affected City officials and for compiling and transmitting the City’s response to such requests for consultation. (Ord. O2009-251 § 1; Ord. O2003-132 § 9)


20.15.130 Appeals.

(1) Appeals of threshold determinations or the adequacy of a final EIS are procedural SEPA appeals that are conducted by the hearing examiner pursuant to the provisions of SMC 20.10.070, subject to the following:

(a) Only one appeal of each threshold determination shall be allowed on a proposal.

(b) As provided in RCW 43.21C.075(3)(d), the decision of the responsible official shall be entitled to substantial weight.

(c) An appeal of a DS must be filed within 14 calendar days following issuance of the DS.

(d) An appeal of a DNS for actions classified as land use permit decisions in SMC 20.05.020 must be filed within 21 calendar days following notice of the decision as provided in SMC 20.05.090. For actions not classified as land use permit decisions in SMC 20.05.020, no administrative appeal of a DNS is permitted.

(e) Administrative appeals of the adequacy of a final EIS are permitted for actions classified as Type 2, 3 or 4 land use permit decisions in SMC 20.05.020, except Type 1 decisions for which the department has issued a threshold determination. Such appeals must be filed within 21 calendar days following notice of the decision or recommendation as provided in SMC 20.05.090.

(f) The hearing examiner shall make a final decision on all procedural SEPA determinations. The hearing examiner’s decision may be appealed to superior court as provided in SMC 20.10.250(1).

(2) The hearing examiner’s consideration of procedural SEPA appeals shall be consolidated in all cases with substantive SEPA appeals, if any, involving decisions to condition or deny an application pursuant to RCW 43.21C.060 and with the public hearing or appeal, if any, on the proposal, except for appeals of a DS.

(3) Administrative appeals of decisions to condition or deny applications pursuant to RCW 43.21C.060 shall be consolidated in all cases with administrative appeals, if any, on the merits of a proposal.

(4) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (1) through (3) of this section, the department may adopt procedures under which an administrative appeal shall not be provided if the director finds that consideration of an appeal would be likely to cause the department to violate a compliance, enforcement, or other specific mandatory order or specific legal obligation. The director’s determination shall be included in the notice of the SEPA determination, and the director shall provide a written summary upon which the determination is based within five days of receiving a written request. Because there would be no administrative appeal in such situations, review may be sought before a court of competent jurisdiction under RCW 43.21C.075 and applicable regulations, in connection with an appeal of the underlying governmental action. (Ord. O2009-251 § 1; Ord. O2003-132 § 9)


20.15.140 Department procedural rules. 

(1) The department may prepare rules and regulations pursuant to Chapter 2.55 SMC for the implementation of SEPA, Chapter 197-11 WAC, and this chapter.

(2) The rules and regulations prepared by the department shall not become effective until approved by council motion. (Ord. O2009-251 § 1; Ord. O2003-132 § 9)


Chapter 20.20 LAND USE MEDIATION PROGRAM

Sections:

20.20.010    Introduction.

20.20.020    Definitions.

20.20.030    When mediation is available.

20.20.040    Notice of availability of mediation.

20.20.050    Repealed.

20.20.060    Request for mediation – Responses.

20.20.070    Attendance – Representation.

20.20.080    When mediation may occur.

20.20.090    Time of mediation.

20.20.100    Waiver of hearing and review time limits.

20.20.110    Selection of mediator.

20.20.120    Costs of mediation.

20.20.130    Notice of mediation.

20.20.140    Authority of the mediator.

20.20.150    Use of experts.

20.20.160    General order of mediation.

20.20.170    Agreements resulting from mediation.


20.20.010 Introduction.

(1) Purpose. Mediation is an entirely voluntary process by which two or more parties and/or interested persons, with the assistance of an impartial person (the mediator), attempt to reach a full or partial agreement on a disputed matter. Persons participate in the mediation process only if, and only to the extent, they choose to do so. A participant is bound by the outcome of the mediation process only if that person, or his or her duly authorized representative, approves the mediated agreement (see SMC 20.20.170).

In appropriate cases, mediation may assist in the resolution of land use issues at a substantial savings in time and money to the parties, interested persons, the City of Sammamish, and the general public. Mediation is also available as an alternative to a formal appeal hearing to resolve other disputes between individuals and the City of Sammamish.

(2) Interpretation. These rules shall be interpreted to facilitate and encourage use of the mediation process at the earliest practical time following the identification of a conflict or dispute that the affected parties or persons are unable to resolve through direct negotiation. (Ord. O2000-72 § 1(A))


20.20.020 Definitions.

(1) “Interested person” is any person who receives written notice of a proposed land use action under the requirements of the SMC, or has requested of the responsible City official or the community development director notification of proceedings or copies of orders, reports, recommendations, or decisions issued in the particular case, or who participates in a hearing by providing evidence, comment, or argument, or who participates in a neighborhood meeting (see SMC 20.20.050). The term does not include a person whose only communication is a signature on a petition or a mechanically or electronically reproduced form, or who has made a standing request for notices or documents encompassing a type of case or hearings that relate to a geographic area. 

(2) “Party” means the applicant, proponent, or petitioner; the owner(s) of property subject to a hearing; the responsible City official; or any other City official with jurisdiction or review authority over a proposal or proceeding who has notified the community development director in writing requesting to be a party to the proceeding.

A property owner who has authorized another individual to act as an agent for the development of a parcel of property is not a party unless he or she requests the community development director to be designated as such. Persons joining in or concurring with an appeal or petition are not parties unless they have separately filed the requisite documents and fees for an appeal or petition.

(3) “Person” includes individuals, corporations, partnerships, other formal associations, and governmental agencies.

(4) “Responsible City official” means the City of Sammamish official who has primary responsibility for coordinating the review of an application or appeal, or who issued the decision or recommendation, or took the action, which is the subject of the proceeding. (Ord. O2000-72 § 1(B))


20.20.030 When mediation is available.

(1) As to any application for a land use permit or an appeal of a land use action that is or could become the subject of a public hearing, the responsible City official, the City council, or the community development director may at their own discretion or at the request of any party or interested person request mediation (see SMC 20.20.060). Mediation shall occur only when it is requested or accepted by at least one party and by one additional party or interested person with an opposing position. When the issue proposed for mediation involves the disposition or other action to be taken on an application, mediation shall occur only if the affected applicant agrees to be a participant in the mediation process.

(2) Any objection to an inconsistency between a mediation proposed to be conducted pursuant to these rules and a procedural requirement of the Sammamish Municipal Code shall be raised with the community development director within 10 calendar days of the receipt of information that would apprise a reasonable person of such inconsistency. Objections not raised within 10 calendar days shall be deemed waived. (Ord. O2000-72 § 1(C))


20.20.040 Notice of availability of mediation.

The City of Sammamish shall take reasonable steps to advise all persons who file applications or appeals that are within the jurisdiction of the hearing examiner that mediation of disputes is available. A “notice of availability of mediation” shall be contained in or attached to application and appeal forms that are provided by the City of Sammamish and shall be contained in the initial mailing to surrounding property owners and the posted notice of every land use application within the jurisdiction of the City. A similar notice also shall be incorporated in the first notice issued by the responsible City official announcing the scheduled date of any public hearing for which mediation is available to resolve disputed issues. (Ord. O2000-72 § 1(D))


20.20.050 Neighborhood meetings for plat applications.

Repealed by Ord. O2004-151. (Ord. O2000-72 § 1(E))


20.20.060 Request for mediation – Responses.

(1) Request.

(a) Method. Any party or interested person may request mediation. The request shall be in writing, unless made orally at a prehearing conference or hearing. A request for mediation should be made promptly following the determination that the disputed issues for which mediation is proposed cannot be resolved by direct negotiation between or among the affected parties and interested persons. A request for mediation made after a hearing has commenced will normally be granted only if all parties to the proceeding agree to participate in the mediation.

(b) Cost Allocation and Tender. Unless otherwise agreed by the parties to the mediation, the opposing sides to a dispute shall each pay an equal share of the cost of mediation. A request for mediation shall be accompanied by a tender to the City of Sammamish of not less than one-third of the anticipated cost for a half-day mediation. Until such time as mediation costs may be set by ordinance, it is expected that the cost of a half-day mediation will be $450.00. Therefore, the minimum amount required to be tendered with a request for mediation shall be $150.00.

The cost of mediation is not a fee to be paid to the City of Sammamish. The tender shall be delivered to the City of Sammamish solely for transmittal to the mediator if the request for mediation is accepted. The funds tendered, or any unexpended balance thereof, shall be returned in proportionate shares to the person(s) from whom received if the request for mediation is not accepted or if the full amount tendered is not expended. 

A request for mediation may propose an alternative allocation of the cost of mediation. If an alternative cost allocation is accepted, any excess of the mediation cost tendered will be promptly returned to the party making the request for mediation.

(c) Substance of Request. The request for mediation shall identify with reasonable specificity the application or appeal to which it applies, the scope of the mediation proposed (including a statement of the particular issues or questions to be addressed), and an estimate of the time likely to be required to conduct and complete the mediation proposed. The request for mediation may propose inclusion of matters or issues that are beyond the scope of the pending hearing, so long as those additional matters are reasonably related to the matters in dispute and are within the control of the parties who will participate in the mediation.

(d) To Whom Transmitted. If made in writing, the request shall be transmitted to all other parties to the proceeding, and also may be addressed to any current or prospective interested persons known to the party making the request. A copy of the request shall also be filed with the community development director.

(2) Response to Request for Mediation.

(a) Substance of Response. A response to a request for mediation may be made in the form of an agreement to participate in the mediation as proposed, or may propose either a more limited or an expanded mediation. The response may also propose a different allocation of the expense of mediation, time limits for the conduct of mediation, or other conditions.

(b) Counter-Proposals. Any response other than an agreement to participate in the mediation substantially as proposed by the person making the request shall be considered a counter-proposal and responded to in the same manner as an initial request for mediation.

(c) Tender of Cost. A positive response to a request for mediation shall be accompanied by a tender to the City of Sammamish of the respondent’s share, if any, of the cost of a half-day mediation.

(d) Response Not Required. No party or interested person is obliged to respond to a request for mediation. If there is no response made to a request for mediation within seven calendar days, the request shall be deemed refused. No inferences shall be drawn from a refusal to participate in mediation or a failure to respond to a request for mediation. Requests to mediate and responses thereto shall be privileged and not admissible into evidence under the same rules as apply to settlement negotiations.

(e) To Whom Transmitted. Any response to a request for mediation shall be transmitted to the person who requested the mediation, to any other persons to whom that request was addressed, and to any other persons the respondent proposes to be a participant in the mediation. A copy of the response shall also be filed with the office of the hearing examiner.

(f) Technical Deficiencies Not a Bar. Failure of a request for mediation or a response to strictly comply with this rule shall not be a bar to mediation if the intent of the affected persons is clear and the costs of mediation are provided for adequately. (Ord. O2000-72 § 1(F))


20.20.070 Attendance – Representation.

(1) A party to the mediation shall be present in person or represented by a person or persons who have the requisite authority to enter into an agreement that implements or binds the party to the results of the mediation. A request to mediate, or acceptance of such request, shall constitute an agreement to attend in person or be represented at the mediation by an individual or individuals who shall possess the authority to enter into a binding agreement with respect to any matters within the scope of the issues agreed to be mediated.

(2) Parties to a mediation may participate directly or through a designated representative. Two or more parties or interested persons who share substantially similar interests or concerns with respect to the matter being mediated may participate through a single representative designated or approved by them unless the mediator determines that individual participation will facilitate the making of a mediated agreement. (Ord. O2000-72 § 1(G))


20.20.080 When mediation may occur.

(1) As a Matter of Right. Mediation is available as a matter of right upon agreement by all parties to the proceeding to address through mediation all issues in dispute. Mediation shall also be approved as a matter of right upon agreement by all parties to mediate any one or more (but not all) issues in dispute; provided, that the agreement to engage in mediation is executed and filed with the community development director 14 or more days prior to the scheduled opening of the hearing.

(2) At the Community Development Director’s Discretion. Mediation may be approved by the community development director if any party, and any one or more other parties or interested persons with an opposing position, agree to mediate any substantial issue in dispute. In acting upon a request to approve a partial mediation, the community development director shall consider, to the extent applicable, the following factors:

(a) Whether the issue(s) to be mediated affects primarily the private interests of the parties to the proposed mediation or is a matter of public interest;

(b) If the persons seeking mediation appear to represent substantially all of the persons likely to be affected by or interested in the matters proposed for mediation;

(c) Will the proposed mediation, if successful, be likely to expedite final action on the underlying application or appeal;

(d) Are the costs to the proposed parties to the mediation, as well as to other parties and interested persons, likely to be reduced if the mediation occurs;

(e) The timeliness of the request for mediation and the effect that granting the request would have on previously established schedules of other parties, interested persons, and the office of the hearing examiner;

(f) The probability of participation by City staff in the mediation process, if such participation appears necessary to accomplish the purpose of the proposed mediation; and

(g) Such other facts or circumstances as bear upon the purposes and objectives of the office of the hearing examiner and these rules. (Ord. O2000-72 § 1(H))


20.20.090 Time of mediation.

Mediation should normally be accomplished within a half day, and rarely exceed a full day, unless additional information or expertise that is not available that day is identified by the mediator as necessary to a successful mediation. Unless otherwise agreed by all parties to the mediation, as well as all parties to the pending proceeding and the community development director, the mediation session shall occur within 21 calendar days of the execution of the agreement to mediate or the date of approval of the mediation by the community development director, whichever is later, and the entire process shall be concluded within 30 calendar days of its commencement. (Ord. O2000-72 § 1(I))


20.20.100 Waiver of hearing and review time limits.

A request by a party for mediation, or agreement by a party to participate in mediation, shall constitute an agreement by such party (or parties) to stay all time limits applicable to the affected permit review and hearing processes from the date of the first proposal to mediate until the first business day following the receipt by the community development director of the mediator’s report. If any party to the proceeding, who is not a participant in the proposed mediation, does not agree to a similar waiver of time limits, the community development director may deny or limit the proposed mediation to assure that applicable time limits for action on the affected application or appeal are not exceeded. (Ord. O2000-72 § 1(J))


20.20.110 Selection of mediator.

(1) Selection by the Parties. A mediator shall be selected by the parties to the mediation.

(2) List of Available Mediators. Solely as a convenience to the public at large, the community development director will maintain a list of mediators who appear to be qualified by training or experience to conduct mediation of matters that are within the jurisdiction of the hearing examiner. Any person who desires to be on the list shall submit a resume or other statement of qualifications to the community development director. Inclusion of a person on the list of mediators maintained by the community development director shall not constitute a warranty or representation by the City of Sammamish that such person is in fact qualified to conduct mediation in a particular proceeding or type of proceeding. The parties to the mediation shall be the sole judges of the qualifications of the person whom they select as a mediator, whether that person is or is not on the list maintained by the community development director.

The approval of the person selected as a mediator by the community development director is not required. In no event, however, shall a current employee of the City of Sammamish or any person who is currently or contemporaneously acting as an agent or contractor for the City be designated as a mediator. (Ord. O2000-72 § 1(K))


20.20.120 Costs of mediation.

The City of Sammamish shall have no responsibility for the payment of the costs of mediation, except for the transfer of funds deposited with the City of Sammamish with a request for mediation or a response. The City of Sammamish shall pay the costs, if any, allocable to a responsible City official that participates in the mediation and has agreed, in writing, to pay a specified proportion or amount of the costs of mediation. (Ord. O2000-72 § 1(L))


20.20.130 Notice of mediation.

(1) Notice to Parties to the Mediation. It is the responsibility of the parties to the mediation and the mediator to assure that all parties to the mediation and the community development director have reasonable notice of the time and place of the mediation session.

(2) Notice to All Other Parties and Interested Persons. Upon receipt of notice by the community development director that a mediator has been selected and of the time and place set for the mediation session, the community development director shall give notice to all other parties and known interested persons, if any, that a mediation session has been scheduled. The notice by the community development director shall give the names of the parties to the mediation.

(3) Notice of Outcome. At the conclusion of the mediation, the community development director shall give notice to all parties and known interested persons of the outcome of the mediation. (Ord. O2000-72 § 1(M))


20.20.140 Authority of the mediator.

(1) The mediator shall have the authority to:

(a) Schedule, recess, adjourn, and terminate mediation sessions;

(b) Keep order;

(c) Request information of the parties, experts or other persons who are present, and ask questions to clarify issues and positions;

(d) Request the presence of additional persons; and

(e) Generally conduct the mediation in a manner designed to resolve the controverted matters. 

(2) Resolutions to the matters in controversy may be proposed by the mediator, but no decision may be imposed by the mediator on participants. (Ord. O2000-72 § 1(N))


20.20.150 Use of experts.

The mediator may determine, with or without request by a party, that a mediated agreement would be facilitated by the receipt of expert information during the mediation process. If requested by the mediator, the parties to the mediation shall make available expert reports, or arrange for the attendance of their anticipated expert witnesses to provide information at the mediation. Alternatively, one or more independent experts on issues relevant to the mediation may be identified by the mediator for that purpose. Experts provided by a party shall be compensated by that party; responsibility for payment of any independent experts shall be assigned in a manner determined by the mediator and agreed to by those parties to the mediation who will be obliged by that determination to contribute to the cost. No expert, whether provided by a party or independent, shall participate in the mediation with respect to any matter outside the scope of his or her expertise. (Ord. O2000-72 § 1(O))


20.20.160 General order of mediation.

(1) Unless otherwise determined by the mediator, the order of proceedings at the mediation shall be:

(a) Introduction by mediator.

(b) Introduction of participants.

(c) Opening statements of interest and position by each participant. After hearing initial statements of the interests of all parties to the mediation, the mediator may encourage the designation of a single representative by parties who share substantially similar interests or concerns (see SMC 20.20.070).

(d) Questions by the mediator to clarify issues, interests, and positions.

(e) Identification of issues to be discussed.

(f) Discussion of identified issues and other efforts to reach agreement. This may include individual caucuses by the mediator with the parties to the mediation in separate sessions, the written or oral conveyance of proposals by the mediator to other parties to the mediation, the transmittal of responses, and the making of suggestions or proposals by the mediator to the parties separately or jointly.

(g) Identification of matters agreed upon.

(h) Clarification of agreement by mediator.

(i) Written documentation of agreement prepared by the mediator.

(j) Signature to agreement by the parties to the mediation who agree thereto.

(k) Transmittal of report by the mediator to the community development director and responsible City official.

(2) The foregoing order of proceedings may be modified at any time by agreement of the parties or order of the mediator. (Ord. O2000-72 § 1(P))


20.20.170 Agreements resulting from mediation.

(1) Execution and Notice. All agreements resulting from mediation shall be reduced to writing by the mediator and signed by the persons who have agreed thereto or their authorized representatives. Fully executed copies shall be filed by the mediator with the responsible City official and the community development director.

(2) Effect of Agreement.

(a) Appeals. If the mediated agreement resolves all issues of all parties to an appeal, the mediated agreement shall include a stipulation and waiver of notice authorizing entry of an order dismissing the appeal. An order of dismissal incorporating the mediated agreement shall be promptly entered by the hearing examiner.

If the agreement is not executed by all parties to an appeal, the agreement shall be binding only upon those parties who have agreed thereto. For appeals not fully resolved, the mediator may, with the consent of the parties to the mediation, prepare and file a recommended prehearing order that may be adopted or modified by the hearing examiner to govern future proceedings. 

(b) Applications and Other Matters. With respect to matters other than appeals for which a hearing examiner is required to make findings and conclusions concerning the public health, safety, and welfare as defined by applicable laws and ordinances, the mediated agreement shall be considered as a joint recommendation to the community development director by the parties to the mediation. The mediated agreement shall be accorded substantial weight in resolving issues between or among the parties to the mediated agreement, and shall be applied to the agreeing parties unless it would be clearly erroneous to do so.

Except for an agreement by an applicant to withdraw or modify an application, a mediated agreement shall not be used to obviate the need for, nor limit the scope of, any public hearing required by law. Mediation is not a substitute for the lawful exercise of discretion by the City council in performing its legislative and quasi-judicial responsibilities, nor for the performance of the duties and responsibilities of the City of Sammamish hearing examiner and responsible City officials. 

(c) Effect on Other Parties and Persons. An agreement arrived at through mediation may be considered by a hearing examiner with respect to parties or persons who did not agree to the mediated agreement only as evidence that the mediated resolution of the disputed matter may be feasible or reasonable. The evidentiary use of the agreement does not preclude any party or interested person who is not bound by the agreement from introducing other evidence and argument that disputes the reasonableness or feasibility of the agreement or supports an alternative resolution of the dispute. (Ord. O2000-72 § 1(Q))


Title 21 HISTORIC PRESERVATION

Chapters:

21.10    Protection and Preservation of Landmarks


Chapter 21.10 PROTECTION AND PRESERVATION OF LANDMARKS

Sections:

21.10.010    Findings and declaration of purpose.

21.10.020    Definitions.

21.10.030    Landmarks commission created – Membership and organization.

21.10.040    Designation criteria.

21.10.050    Nomination procedure.

21.10.060    Designation procedure.

21.10.070    Certificate of appropriateness procedure.

21.10.080    Evaluation of economic impact.

21.10.090    Appeal procedure.

21.10.100    Penalty for violation of SMC 21.10.060.

21.10.110    Special valuation for historic properties.

21.10.120    Historic resources – Review process.

21.10.130    Administrative rules.

21.10.140    Severability.


21.10.010 Findings and declaration of purpose.

(1) The Sammamish City council finds that:

(a) The protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of buildings, sites, districts, structures and objects of historical, cultural, architectural, engineering, geographic, ethnic and archaeological significance located in the City of Sammamish, and the collection, preservation, exhibition and interpretation of historic and prehistoric materials, artifacts, records and information pertaining to historic preservation and archaeological resource management are necessary in the interest of prosperity, promote civic pride and benefit the general welfare of the residents of the City of Sammamish.

(b) Such cultural and historic resources are a significant part of the heritage, education and economic base of the City of Sammamish, and the economic, cultural and aesthetic well-being of the county cannot be maintained or enhanced by disregarding its heritage and by allowing the unnecessary destruction or defacement of such resources.

(c) Present historic preservation programs and activities are inadequate for ensuring present and future generations of the City of Sammamish residents and visitors a genuine opportunity to appreciate and enjoy our heritage.

(d) King County has the experience and personnel qualified to administer a preservation program and that the City desires to make use of the County’s expertise.

(2) The purposes of this chapter are to:

(a) Designate, preserve, protect, enhance and perpetuate those sites, buildings, districts, structures and objects which reflect significant elements of the City’s, state’s and nation’s cultural, aesthetic, social, economic, political, architectural, ethnic, archaeological, engineering, historic and other heritage;

(b) Foster civic pride in the beauty and accomplishments of the past;

(c) Stabilize and improve the economic values and vitality of landmarks;

(d) Protect and enhance the City’s tourist industry by promoting heritage-related tourism;

(e) Promote the continued use, exhibition and interpretation of significant historical or archaeological sites, districts, buildings, structures, objects, artifacts, materials and records for the education, inspiration and welfare of the people of the City of Sammamish;

(f) Promote and continue incentives for ownership and utilization of landmarks;

(g) Assist, encourage and provide incentives to public and private owners for preservation, restoration, rehabilitation and use of landmark buildings, sites, districts, structures and objects;

(h) Assist, encourage and provide technical assistance to public agencies, public and private museums, archives and historic preservation associations and other organizations involved in historic preservation and archaeological resource management. (Ord. O2008-240 § 1)


21.10.020 Definitions.

The following words and terms shall, when used in this chapter, be defined as follows unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:

(1) “Alteration” is any construction, demolition, removal, modification, excavation, restoration or remodeling of a landmark.

(2) “Building” is a structure created to shelter any form of human activity, such as a house, barn, church, hotel or similar structure. “Building” may refer to an historically related complex, such as a courthouse and jail or a house and barn.

(3) “Certificate of appropriateness” is written authorization issued by the commission or its designee permitting an alteration to a significant feature of a designated landmark.

(4) “Commission” is the City of Sammamish landmarks commission.

(5) “Community landmark” is an historic resource which has been designated pursuant to SMC 21.10.060, but which may be altered or changed without application for or approval of a certificate of appropriateness.

(6) “Council” is the Sammamish City council.

(7) “Designation” is the act of the commission determining that an historic resource meets the criteria established by this chapter.

(8) “Designation report” is a report issued by the commission after a public hearing setting forth its determination to designate a landmark and specifying the significant feature or features thereof.

(9) “Director” is the director of the Sammamish department of community development or his or her designee.

(10) “District” is a geographically definable area, urban or rural, possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures, or objects united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development. A district may also comprise individual elements separated geographically but linked by association or history.

(11) “Historic preservation officer” is the King County historic preservation officer or his or her designee.

(12) “Historic resource” is a district, site, building, structure or object significant in national, state or local history, architecture, archaeology, and culture.

(13) “Historic resource inventory” is an organized compilation of information on historic resources considered to be significant according to the criteria listed in SMC 21.10.040. The historic resource inventory is maintained by the historic preservation officer and is updated from time to time to include newly eligible resources and to reflect changes to resources.

(14) “Incentives” are such compensation, rights or privileges or combination thereof, which the council, or other local, state or federal public body or agency, by virtue of applicable present or future legislation, may be authorized to grant or obtain for the owner or owners of designated landmarks. Examples of economic incentives include but are not limited to tax relief, conditional use permits, rezoning, street vacation, planned unit development, transfer of development rights, facade easements, gifts, preferential leasing policies, private or public grants-in-aid, beneficial placement of public improvements, or amenities, or the like.

(15) “Interested person of record” is any individual, corporation, partnership or association which notifies the commission or the council in writing of its interest in any matter before the commission.

(16) “Landmark” is an historic resource designated as a landmark pursuant to SMC 21.10.060.

(17) “Nomination” is a proposal that an historic resource be designated a landmark.

(18) “Object” is a material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical, or scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable yet related to a specific setting or environment.

(19) “Owner” is a person having a fee simple interest, a substantial beneficial interest of record or a substantial beneficial interest known to the commission in an historic resource. Where the owner is a public agency or government, that agency shall specify the person or persons to receive notices under this chapter.

(20) “Person” is any individual, partnership, corporation, group or association.

(21) “Person in charge” is the person or persons in possession of a landmark including, but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, an assignee of rents, a receiver, executor, trustee, lessee, tenant, agent, or any other person directly or indirectly in control of the landmark.

(22) “Preliminary determination” is a decision of the commission determining that an historic resource which has been nominated for designation is of significant value and is likely to satisfy the criteria for designation.

(23) “Significant feature” is any element of a landmark which the commission has designated pursuant to this chapter as of importance to the historic, architectural or archaeological value of the landmark.

(24) “Site” is the location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historic occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself maintains an historical or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing structures.

(25) “Structure” is any functional construction, such as a bridge or trestle, made usually for purposes other than creating human shelter. (Ord. O2008-240 § 1)


21.10.030 Landmarks commission created – Membership and organization.

(1) The King County landmarks commission established pursuant to Chapter 20.62 KCC is hereby designated and empowered to act as the landmarks commission for the City of Sammamish pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

(2) The special member of the King County landmarks commission provided for in KCC 20.60.030 shall be appointed by the mayor subject to confirmation of the City council. Such special member shall have a demonstrated interest and competence in historic preservation. Such appointment shall be made for a three-year term. Such special member shall serve until his or her successor is duly appointed and confirmed. In the event of a vacancy, an appointment shall be made to fill the vacancy in the same manner and with the same qualifications as if at the beginning of the term, and the person appointed to fill the vacancy shall hold the position for the remainder of the unexpired term. Such special member may be reappointed, but may not serve more than two consecutive three-year terms. Such special member shall be deemed to have served one full term if such special member resigns at any time after appointment or if such special member serves more than two years of an expired term. The special members of the commission shall serve without compensation except for out-of-pocket expenses incurred connected with commission meetings or programs. The City of Sammamish shall reimburse such expenses incurred by such special member.

(3) The commission shall not conduct any public hearings required under this chapter with respect to properties located within the City of Sammamish until its rules and regulations, including procedures consistent with this chapter, have been filed with the City clerk. (Ord. O2008-240 § 1)


21.10.040 Designation criteria.

(1) An historic resource may be designated as a City of Sammamish landmark if it is more than 40 years old or, in the case of a landmark district, contains resources that are more than 40 years old, and possesses integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling and association, and:

(a) Is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of national, state or local history; or

(b) Is associated with the lives of persons significant in national, state or local history; or

(c) Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, style or method of design or construction, or that represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction; or

(d) Has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory or history; or

(e) Is an outstanding work of a designer or builder who has made a substantial contribution to the field of construction or design.

(2) An historic resource may be designated a community landmark through the designation process in SMC 21.10.060 because it is an easily identifiable visual feature of a neighborhood or the City and contributes to the distinctive quality or identity of such neighborhood or City or because of its association with significant historical events or historic themes, association with important or prominent persons, or recognition by local citizens for substantial contribution to the community. An improvement or site qualifying for designation solely by virtue of satisfying criteria set out in this section shall be designated a community landmark and shall not be subject to the provisions of SMC 21.10.070.

(3) Cemeteries, birthplaces, or graves of historical figures, properties owned by religious institutions or used for religious purposes, structures that have been moved from their original locations, reconstructed historic buildings, properties primarily commemorative in nature, and properties that have achieved significance within the past 40 years shall not be considered eligible for designation. However, such a property shall be eligible for designation if it is:

(a) An integral part of districts that meet the criteria set out in SMC 21.10.020; or

(b) A religious property deriving primary significance from architectural or artistic distinction or historical importance; or

(c) A building or structure removed from its original location but which is significant primarily for its architectural value, or which is the surviving structure most importantly associated with a historic person or event; or

(d) A birthplace, grave or residence of a historical figure of importance if there is no other appropriate site or building directly associated with his or her productive life; or

(e) A cemetery that derives its primary significance from graves of persons of importance, from age, from distinctive design features, or from association with historic events; or

(f) A reconstructed building when accurately executed in a suitable environment and presented in a dignified manner or as part of a restoration master plan, and when no other building or structure with the same association has survived; or

(g) A property commemorative in intent if design, age, tradition, or symbolic value has invested it with its own historical significance; or

(h) A property achieving significance within the past 40 years, if it is of exceptional importance. (Ord. O2008-240 § 1)


21.10.050 Nomination procedure.

(1) Any person, including the historic preservation officer and any member of the commission, may nominate an historic resource for designation as a landmark or community landmark. The procedures set forth in this section and SMC 21.10.060 may be used to amend existing designations or to terminate an existing designation based on changes which affect the applicability of the criteria for designation set forth in SMC 21.10.040. The nomination or designation of an historic resource as a landmark shall constitute nomination or designation of the land which is occupied by the historic resource unless the nomination provides otherwise. Nominations shall be made on official nomination forms provided by the City of Sammamish department of community development or the historic preservation officer, shall be filed with the department, and shall include all data required by the historic preservation officer.

(2) Upon receipt by the department of any nomination for designation, the department shall forward the nomination to the historic preservation officer, who shall consult with the person or persons submitting the nomination, and the owner, and prepare any amendments to or additional information on the nomination deemed necessary by the historic preservation officer. The historic preservation officer may refuse to accept any nomination for which inadequate information is provided by the person or persons submitting the nomination. It is the responsibility of the person or persons submitting the nomination to perform such research as is necessary for consideration by the commission. The historic preservation officer may assume responsibility for gathering the required information or appoint an expert or experts to carry out this research in the interest of expediting the consideration.

(3) When the historic preservation officer is satisfied that the nomination contains sufficient information and complies with the commission’s regulations for nomination, the historic preservation officer shall forward the nomination to the historic preservation officer and the landmarks commission for consideration. The historic preservation officer shall give notice in writing, certified mail/return receipt requested, to the owner of the property or object, to the person submitting the nomination and interested persons of record that a preliminary or a designation determination on the nomination will be made by the commission. The notice shall include:

(a) The date, time, and place of hearing;

(b) The address and description of the historic resource and the boundaries of the nominated resource;

(c) A statement that, upon a designation or upon a preliminary determination of significance, the certificate of appropriateness procedure set out in SMC 21.10.070 will apply;

(d) A statement that, upon a designation or a preliminary determination of significance, no significant feature may be changed without first obtaining a certificate of appropriateness from the commission, whether or not a building or other permit is required. A copy of the provisions of SMC 21.10.070 shall be included with the notice;

(e) A statement that all proceedings to review the action of the commission at the hearing on a preliminary determination or a designation will be based on the record made at such hearing and that no further right to present evidence on the issue of preliminary determination or designation is afforded pursuant to this chapter.

(4) The historic preservation officer shall, after mailing the notice required herein, promptly provide the commission with copies of the nomination and all supporting information to the commission. No nomination shall be considered by the commission less than 30 nor more than 45 calendar days after notice setting the hearing date has been mailed except where the historic preservation officer or members of the commission have reason to believe that immediate action is necessary to prevent destruction, demolition or defacing of an historic resource, in which case the notice setting the hearing shall so state. (Ord. O2008-240 § 1)


21.10.060 Designation procedure.

(1) The commission may approve, deny, amend or terminate the designation of a historic resource as a landmark or community landmark only after a public hearing. At the designation hearing, the commission shall receive evidence and hear argument only on the issues of whether the historic resource meets the criteria for designation of landmarks or community landmarks as specified in SMC 21.10.040 and merits designation as a landmark or community landmark; and the significant features of the landmark. The hearing may be continued from time to time at the discretion of the commission. If the hearing is continued, the commission may make a preliminary determination of significance if the commission determines, based on the record before it, that the historic resource is of significant value and likely to satisfy the criteria for designation in SMC 21.10.040. The preliminary determination shall be effective as of the date of the public hearing at which it is made. Where the commission makes a preliminary determination, it shall specify the boundaries of the nominated resource, the significant features thereof and such other description of the historic resource as it deems appropriate. Within five working days after the commission has made a preliminary determination, the historic preservation officer shall file a written notice of the action with the director and mail copies of the notice, certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner, the person submitting the nomination and interested persons of record. The notice shall include:

(a) A copy of the commission’s preliminary determination; and

(b) A statement that while proceedings pursuant to this chapter are pending, or six months from the date of the notice, whichever is shorter, and thereafter if the designation is approved by the commission, the certificate of appropriateness procedures in SMC 21.10.070 shall apply to the described historic resource whether or not a building or other permit is required. A copy of SMC 21.10.070 shall be enclosed with the notice.

(c) The final decision of the commission shall be made after the close of the public hearing or at the next regularly scheduled public meeting of the commission thereafter.

(2) Whenever the commission approves the designation of a historic resource under consideration for designation as a landmark, it shall, within 14 calendar days of the public meeting at which the decision is made, issue a written designation report, which shall include:

(a) The boundaries of the designated resource and such other description of the resource sufficient to identify its ownership and location;

(b) The significant features and such other information concerning the historic resource as the commission deems appropriate;

(c) Findings of fact and reasons supporting the designation with specific reference to the criteria for designation in SMC 21.10.040; and

(d) A statement that no significant feature may be changed, whether or not a building or other permit is required, without first obtaining a certificate of appropriateness from the commission in accordance with SMC 21.10.070, a copy of which shall be included in the designation report. The requirements of this subsection shall not apply to historic resources designated as community landmarks.

(3) Whenever the commission rejects the nomination of a historic resource under consideration for designation as a landmark, it shall, within 14 calendar days of the public meeting at which the decision is made, issue a written decision including findings of fact and reasons supporting its determination that the criteria in SMC 21.10.040 have not been met. If a historic resource has been nominated as a landmark and the commission designates the historic resource as a community landmark, the designation shall be treated as a rejection of the nomination for King County landmark status and the foregoing requirement for a written decision shall apply. Nothing contained herein shall prevent renominating any historic resource that is rejected under this subsection as a county landmark at a future time; provided, that no renomination shall occur unless a minimum of one year has passed since the prior decision of the commission.

(4) A copy of the commission’s designation report or decision rejecting a nomination shall be delivered or mailed to the owner, to interested persons of record and to the director within five working days after it is issued. If the commission rejects the nomination and it has made a preliminary determination of significance with respect to the nomination, it shall include in the notice to the director a statement that SMC 21.10.070 no longer applies to the subject historic resources.

(5) If the commission approves, or amends a landmark designation, the provisions of SMC 21.10.070 shall apply as approved or amended. A copy of the commission’s designation report or designation amendment shall be recorded with the King County records, elections and licensing services division, or its successor agency, together with a legal description of the designated resource and notification that SMC 21.10.070 and 21.10.100 apply. If the commission terminates the designation of a historic resource, SMC 21.10.070 shall no longer apply to the historic resource. (Ord. O2008-240 § 1)


21.10.070 Certificate of appropriateness procedure.

(1) At any time after a designation report and notice has been filed with the director and for a period of six months after notice of a preliminary determination of significance has been mailed to the owner and filed with the director, a certificate of appropriateness must be obtained from the commission before any alterations may be made to the significant features of the landmark identified in the preliminary determination report or thereafter in the designation report. This requirement shall apply whether or not the proposed alteration requires a building or other permit. The designation report shall supersede the preliminary determination report upon issuance.

(2) Ordinary repairs and maintenance which do not alter the appearance of a significant feature and do not utilize substitute materials do not require a certificate of appropriateness. Repairs to or replacement of utility systems do not require a certificate of appropriateness; provided, that such work does not alter an exterior significant feature.

(3) (a) There shall be three types of certificates of appropriateness, as follows:

(i) Type I, for restorations and major repairs which utilize in-kind materials.

(ii) Type II, for alterations in appearance, replacement of historic materials and new construction.

(iii) Type III, for demolition, moving and excavation of archaeological sites.

(b) The historic preservation officer may approve Type I certificates of appropriateness administratively without public hearing, subject to procedures adopted by the commission. Alternatively the historic preservation officer may refer applications for Type I certificates of appropriateness to the commission for decision. The commission shall establish and adopt an appeals procedure concerning Type I decisions made by the historic preservation officer.

(c) Type II and III certificates of appropriateness shall be decided by the commission and the following general procedures shall apply to such commission actions:

(i) Application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be made by filing an application for such certificate with the historic preservation officer on forms provided by the commission.

(ii) If an application is made to the director for a permit for any action which affects a landmark, the director shall promptly refer such application to the historic preservation officer, and such application shall be deemed an application for a certificate of appropriateness if accompanied by the additional information required to apply for such certificate. The director may continue to process such permit application, but shall not issue any such permit until the time has expired for filing with the director the notice of denial of a certificate of appropriateness or a certificate of appropriateness has been issued pursuant to this chapter.

(iii) After the commission has commenced proceedings for the consideration of any application for a certificate of appropriateness by giving notice of a hearing pursuant to subsection (3)(c)(iv) of this section, no other application for the same or a similar alteration may be made until such proceedings and all administrative appeals therefrom pursuant to this chapter have been concluded.

(iv) Within 45 calendar days after the filing of an application for a certificate of appropriateness with the commission or the referral of an application to the commission by the director except those decided administratively by the historic preservation officer pursuant to subsection (3)(b) of this section, the commission shall hold a public hearing thereon. The historic preservation officer shall mail notice of the hearing to the owner, the applicant, if the applicant is not the owner, and parties of record at the designation proceedings, not less than 10 calendar days before the date of the hearing. No hearing shall be required if the commission, the owner and the applicant, if the applicant is not the owner, agree in writing to a stipulated certificate approving the requested alterations thereof. This agreement shall be ratified by the commission in a public meeting and reflected in the commission meeting minutes. If the commission grants a certificate of appropriateness, such certificate shall be issued within 10 days and the historic preservation officer shall promptly file a copy of such certificate with the director.

(v) If the commission denies the application for a certificate of appropriateness, in whole or in part, it shall so notify the owner, the person submitting the application and interested persons of record setting forth the reasons why approval of the application is not warranted. (Ord. O2008-240 § 1)


21.10.080 Evaluation of economic impact.

(1) At the public hearing on any application for a Type II or Type III certificate of appropriateness, or Type I if referred to the commission by the historic preservation officer, the commission shall, when requested by the property owner, consider evidence of the economic impact on the owner of the denial or partial denial of a certificate. In no case may a certificate be denied, in whole or in part, when it is established that the denial or partial denial will, when available incentives are utilized, deprive the owner of a reasonable economic use of the landmark and there is no viable and reasonable alternative which would have less impact on the features of significance specified in the preliminary determination report or the designation report.

(2) To prove the existence of a condition of unreasonable economic return, the owner must establish and the commission must find both of the following:

(a) The landmark is incapable of earning a reasonable economic return without making the alterations proposed. This finding shall be made by considering and the applicant shall submit to the commission evidence establishing each of the following factors:

(i) The current level of economic return on the landmark as considered in relation to the following:

(A) The amount paid for the landmark, the date of purchase, and party from whom purchased, including a description of the relationship, if any, between the owner and the person from whom the landmark was purchased;

(B) The annual gross and net income, if any, from the landmark for the previous five years; itemized operating and maintenance expenses for the previous five years; and depreciation deduction and annual cash flow before and after debt service, if any, during the same period;

(C) The remaining balance on any mortgage or other financing secured by the landmark and annual debt service, if any, during the prior five years;

(D) Real estate taxes for the previous four years and assessed value of the landmark according to the two most recent assessed valuations;

(E) All appraisals obtained within the previous three years by the owner in connection with the purchase, financing or ownership of the landmark;

(F) The fair market value of the landmark immediately prior to its designation and the fair market value of the landmark (in its protected status as a designated landmark) at the time the application is filed;

(G) Form of ownership or operation of the landmark, whether sole proprietorship, for-profit or not-for-profit corporation, limited partnership, joint venture, or both;

(H) Any state or federal income tax returns on or relating to the landmark for the past two years.

(ii) The landmark is not marketable or able to be sold when listed for sale or lease. The sale price asked, and offers received, if any, within the previous two years, including testimony and relevant documents shall be submitted by the property owner. The following also shall be considered:

(A) Any real estate broker or firm engaged to sell or lease the landmark;

(B) Reasonableness of the price or lease sought by the owner;

(C) Any advertisements placed for the sale or lease of the landmark.

(iii) The unfeasibility of alternative uses that can earn a reasonable economic return for the landmark as considered in relation to the following:

(A) A report from a licensed engineer or architect with experience in historic restoration or rehabilitation as to the structural soundness of the landmark and its suitability for restoration or rehabilitation;

(B) Estimates of the proposed cost of the proposed alteration and an estimate of any additional cost that would be incurred to comply with the recommendation and decision of the commission concerning the appropriateness of the proposed alteration;

(C) Estimated market value of the landmark in the current condition after completion of the proposed alteration; and, in the case of proposed demolition, after renovation of the landmark for continued use;

(D) In the case of proposed demolition, the testimony of an architect, developer, real estate consultant, appraiser or other real estate professional experienced in historic restoration or rehabilitation as to the economic feasibility of rehabilitation or reuse of the existing landmark;

(E) The unfeasibility of new construction around, above, or below the historic resource;

(F) Potential economic incentives and/or funding available to the owner through federal, state, county, City or private programs.

(iv) The owner has the present intent and the secured financial ability, demonstrated by appropriate documentary evidence, to complete the alteration.

(3) Notwithstanding the foregoing enumerated factors, the property owner may demonstrate other appropriate factors applicable to economic return.

(4) Upon reasonable notice to the owner, the commission may appoint an expert or experts to provide advice and/or testimony concerning the value of the landmark, the availability of incentives and the economic impacts of approval, denial or partial denial of a certificate of appropriateness.

(5) Any adverse economic impact caused intentionally or by willful neglect shall not constitute a basis for granting a certificate of appropriateness. (Ord. O2008-240 § 1)


21.10.090 Appeal procedure.

(1) Any person aggrieved by a decision of the commission designating or rejecting a nomination for designation of a landmark or issuing or denying a certificate of appropriateness may appeal such decision in writing to the hearing examiner, within 21 calendar days of mailing of notice of such designation or rejection of nomination, or of such issuance or denial or approval of a certificate of appropriateness. The written notice of appeal shall be filed with the historic preservation officer and the City clerk and shall be accompanied by a statement setting forth the grounds for the appeal, the appropriate fee, supporting documents, and argument.

(2) If, after examination of the written appeal and the record, the hearing examiner determines that:

(a) An error in fact may exist in the record, it shall remand the proceeding to the commission for reconsideration; or

(b) The decision of the commission is based on an error in law, it may modify or reverse the decision of the commission.

(3) The hearing examiner’s decision shall be based solely upon the record of the proceedings.

(4) The hearing examiner shall take final action on any appeal from a decision of the commission by adoption of a resolution, and shall enter findings of fact and conclusions of law based upon the record which support its action. The council may adopt all or portions of the commission’s findings and conclusions.

(5) The action of the hearing examiner sustaining, reversing, modifying or remanding a decision of the commission shall be final unless within 20 calendar days from the date of the action an aggrieved person obtains a writ of certiorari from the superior court of King County, state of Washington, for the purpose of review of the action taken. (Ord. O2008-240 § 1)


21.10.100 Penalty for violation of SMC 21.10.060.

Any person violating or failing to comply with the provisions of SMC 21.10.060 shall incur a civil penalty consistent with SMC Title 23; provided, however, that no penalty shall be imposed for any violation or failure to comply which occurs during the pendency of legal proceedings filed in any court challenging the validity of the provision or provisions of this chapter, as to which such violations or failure to comply is charged. (Ord. O2008-240 § 1)


21.10.110 Special valuation for historic properties.

(1) There is hereby established and implemented a special valuation for historic properties as provided in Chapter 84.26 RCW.

(2) The King County landmarks commission is hereby designated as the local review board for the purposes related to Chapter 84.26 RCW, and is authorized to perform all functions required by Chapter 84.16 RCW and Chapter 254-20 WAC.

(3) All City of Sammamish landmarks designated and protected under this chapter shall be eligible for special valuation in accordance with Chapter 84.26 RCW. (Ord. O2008-240 § 1)


21.10.120 Historic resources – Review process.

(1) Upon receipt of an application for a development proposal located on or adjacent to a City of Sammamish historic resource, the application shall be circulated to the historic preservation officer. The City of Sammamish shall not approve any development proposal or otherwise issue any authorization to alter, demolish, or relocate or otherwise adversely affect any historic resource identified in the City of Sammamish historic resource inventory, pursuant to the requirements of this chapter until after the review and recommendation of the historic preservation officer is received and considered. The standards in Chapters 21A.25 and 21A.35 SMC shall be expanded when necessary, to preserve the aesthetic, visual and historic integrity of the historic resource from the impacts of development on the same or adjacent properties.

(a) The historic preservation officer may recommend that the director continue to process the development proposal application, but not issue any development permits or issue a SEPA threshold determination until receiving a recommendation from the historic preservation officer. In no event shall review of the proposal by the historic preservation officer delay permit processing or issuance beyond any period required by law. Permit applications for changes to landmark properties shall not be considered complete unless accompanied by a certificate of appropriateness pursuant to SMC 21.10.070.

(b) On known archaeological sites, before any disturbance of the site, including but not limited to test boring, site clearing, construction, grading or revegetation, the Washington State Department of Archaeology and Historic Preservation (DAHP), and the historic preservation officer, and appropriate Native American tribal organizations must be notified and state permits obtained, if required by law. The historic preservation officer may recommend that a professional archaeological survey be conducted to identify site boundaries, resources and mitigation alternatives prior to any site disturbance and that a technical report be provided to the historic preservation officer, DAHP and appropriate tribal organizations. The historic preservation officer may recommend approval, disapproval or permit conditions, including professional archeological surveys, to mitigate adverse impacts to known archeological sites. (Ord. O2008-240 § 1)


21.10.130 Administrative rules.

The director may promulgate administrative rules and regulations pursuant to Chapter 20.05 SMC, to implement the provisions and requirements of this chapter. (Ord. O2008-240 § 1)


21.10.140 Severability.

If any provision of this chapter or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter or the application of the provision to other persons or circumstances is not affected. (Ord. O2008-240 § 1)


Title 21A DEVELOPMENT CODE

Chapters:

21A.05    Authority, Purpose, Interpretation and Administration

21A.10    Zones, Maps and Designations

21A.15    Technical Terms and Land Use Definitions

21A.20    Permitted Uses

21A.25    Development Standards – Density and Dimensions

21A.30    Development Standards – Design Requirements

21A.35    Development Standards – Landscaping and Irrigation

21A.37    Development Standards – Trees

21A.40    Development Standards – Parking and Circulation

21A.45    Signage

21A.50    Environmentally Critical Areas

21A.55    Wireless Communication Facilities

21A.60    Development Standards – Adequacy of Public Facilities and Services

21A.65    Development Standards – Animals, Home Occupation, Home Industry

21A.70    Nonconformance, Temporary Uses, and Re-Use of Facilities

21A.75    Residential Density Incentives

21A.80    Transfer of Development Rights

21A.85    Low Impact Development

21A.90    Application Requirements – Notice Methods

21A.95    Commercial Site Development Permits

21A.97    Development Permit Fees

21A.100    Review Procedures – Notice Requirements

21A.105    School Impact Fees

21A.110    Decision Criteria

21A.115    Enforcement


Chapter 21A.05 AUTHORITY, PURPOSE, INTERPRETATION AND ADMINISTRATION

Sections:

21A.05.010    Title.

21A.05.020    Authority to adopt code.

21A.05.030    Purpose.

21A.05.040    Conformity with this title required.

21A.05.050    Minimum requirements.

21A.05.055    Interpretation – Applicability and intent.

21A.05.060    Interpretation – General.

21A.05.070    Interpretation – Standard industrial classification.

21A.05.080    Interpretation – Zoning maps.

21A.05.085    Interpretation – Public request – Acknowledgement – Notice.

21A.05.090    Administration and review authority.

21A.05.095    Review.

21A.05.100    Classification of right-of-way.

21A.05.110    Drawings.


21A.05.010 Title. 

This title shall be known as the City of Sammamish development code, hereinafter referred to as “this title.” (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.05.020 Authority to adopt code.

The City of Sammamish development code is adopted by City of Sammamish ordinance, pursuant to Article XI, Section 11 of the Washington State Constitution. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.05.030 Purpose.

The general purposes of this title are:

(1) To encourage land use decision making in accordance with the public interest and applicable laws of the state of Washington;

(2) To protect the general public health, safety, and welfare;

(3) To implement the City of Sammamish interim comprehensive plan’s policies and objectives through land use regulations;

(4) To provide for the economic, social, and aesthetic advantages of orderly development through harmonious groupings of compatible and complementary land uses and the application of appropriate development standards;

(5) To provide for adequate public facilities and services in conjunction with development; and

(6) To promote general public safety by regulating development of lands containing physical hazards and to minimize the adverse environmental impacts of development. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.05.040 Conformity with this title required.

(1) No use or structure shall be established, substituted, expanded, constructed, altered, moved, maintained, or otherwise changed except in conformance with this title.

(2) Creation of or changes to lot lines shall conform with the use provisions, dimensional and other standards, and procedures of this title and SMC Title 19, Subdivisions.

(3) All land uses and development authorized by this title shall comply with all other regulations and/or requirements of this title as well as any other applicable local, state, or federal law. Where a difference exists between this title and other City regulations, the more restrictive requirements shall apply.

(4) Where more than one part of this title applies to the same aspect of a proposed use or development, the more restrictive requirement shall apply.

(5) Temporary uses or activities, conducted during an emergency event, or training exercises conducted at emergency sites, designated pursuant to an emergency management plan, shall not be subject to the provisions of this title. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.05.050 Minimum requirements.

In interpretation and application, the requirements set forth in this title shall be considered the minimum requirements necessary to accomplish the purposes of this title. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.05.055 Interpretation – Applicability and intent.

(1) Intent. This chapter and Chapter 21A.100 SMC establish the procedure by which the City of Sammamish will render a formal interpretation of a development regulation. The purpose of such an interpretation includes clarifying conflicting or ambiguous provisions in the City’s development regulations.

(2) Applicability. This chapter and Chapter 21A.100 SMC authorize the director to issue interpretations on regulations related to controls placed on development or land use activities by the City, including but not limited to zoning ordinances, critical areas ordinances, shoreline master program requirements, official controls, subdivision ordinances, and binding site plan ordinances, together with any amendments thereto. Nothing in this chapter and Chapter 21A.100 SMC shall prevent interpretations related to the applicability of specific regulatory requirements contained within the Sammamish Municipal Code to individual projects. Further, nothing in this chapter or Chapter 21A.100 SMC shall preclude the director or hearing examiner from interpreting a regulatory requirement during the course of a public hearing. (Ord. O2009-248 § 1)


21A.05.060 Interpretation – General.

(1) In case of inconsistency or conflict, regulations, conditions, or procedural requirements that are specific to an individual land use shall supersede regulations, conditions, or procedural requirements of general application.

(2) A land use includes the necessary structures to support the use unless specifically prohibited or the context clearly indicates otherwise.

(3) In case of any ambiguity, difference of meaning, or implication between the text and any heading, caption, or illustration, the text and the permitted use tables in Chapter 21A.20 SMC shall control. All applicable requirements shall govern a use whether or not they are cross-referenced in a text section or land use table.

(4) Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, words in the present tense shall include past and future tense, and words in the singular shall include the plural, or vice versa. Except for words and terms defined in this title, all words and terms used in this title shall have their customary meanings.

(5) A written interpretation by the director of the provisions of the Sammamish Municipal Code clarifies conflicting or ambiguous wording, or the scope or intent of the provisions of the code. The written interpretation shall control application of the code sections discussed in it to any specific land use application. Written interpretations issued for regulatory requirements that have been legislatively modified, repealed, or otherwise substantially changed, shall be considered null and void.

(6) Any written interpretation shall not be applied retroactively, unless specifically required by the terms of the interpretation. (Ord. O2009-248 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.05.070 Interpretation – Standard industrial classification. 

(1) All references to the standard industrial classification (SIC) are to the titles and descriptions found in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1987 Edition, prepared by the United States Office of Management and Budget that is hereby adopted by reference. The SIC is used, with modifications to suit the purposes of this title, to list and define land uses authorized to be located in the various zones consistent with the Comprehensive Plan land use map.

(2) The SIC categorizes each land use under a general two-digit major group number, or under a more specific three- or four-digit industry group or industry number. A use shown on a land use table with a two-digit number includes all uses listed in the SIC for that major group. A use shown with a three-digit or four-digit number includes only the uses listed in the SIC for that industry group or industry. 

(3) An asterisk (*) in the SIC number column of a land use table means that the SIC definition for the specific land use identified has been modified by this title. The definition may include one or more SIC subclassification numbers, or may define the use without reference to the SIC. 

(4) The director shall determine whether a proposed land use not specifically listed in a land use table or specifically included within a SIC classification is allowed in a zone. The director’s determination shall be based on whether or not permitting the proposed use in a particular zone is consistent with the purposes of this title and the zone’s purpose as set forth in Chapter 21A.10 SMC, by considering the following factors:

(a) The physical characteristics of the use and its supporting structures, including but not limited to scale, traffic and other impacts, and hours of operation;

(b) Whether or not the use complements or is compatible with other uses permitted in the zone; and

(c) The SIC classification, if any, assigned to the business or other entity that will carry on the primary activities of the proposed use. (Ord. O2009-248 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.05.080 Interpretation – Zoning maps. 

Where uncertainties exist as to the location of any zone boundaries, the following rules of interpretation, listed in priority order, shall apply:

(1) Where boundaries are indicated as paralleling the approximate centerline of the street right-of-way, the zone shall extend to each adjacent boundary of the right-of-way. Non-road-related uses by adjacent property owners, if allowed in the right-of-way, shall meet the same zoning requirements regulating the property owner’s lot;

(2) Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following lot lines, the actual lot lines shall be considered the boundaries;

(3) Where boundaries are indicated as following lines of ordinary high water, or government meander line, the lines shall be considered to be the actual boundaries. If these lines should change the boundaries shall be considered to move with them; and

(4) If none of the rules of interpretation described in subsections (1) through (3) of this section apply, then the zoning boundary shall be determined by map scaling. (Ord. O2009-248 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.05.085 Interpretation – Public request – Acknowledgement – Notice.

(1) A person may request a code interpretation by submitting a request in accordance with this chapter. The director may also issue a code interpretation on the director’s own initiative.

(2) A request for a code interpretation must be submitted in writing to the director.

(3) A code interpretation request must:

(a) Be in writing and shall be clearly labeled “Request for Code Interpretation.” Failure to satisfy this requirement relieves the director of any obligation to acknowledge or otherwise process the request;

(b) Identify the person seeking the code interpretation and provide an address to which correspondence regarding the requested code interpretation should be mailed;

(c) Identify the specific section or sections of the City of Sammamish’s development regulations for which an interpretation is requested;

(d) Identify the parcel or site, if the code interpretation request involves a particular parcel of property or site;

(e) Identify the code enforcement action, if the code interpretation request involves a code enforcement case;

(f) Be accompanied by the fee required as set forth by the adopted fee resolution; and

(g) Be limited to a single subject, which may require interpretation of one or more code sections.

(4) (a) Within 21 days after receiving a code interpretation request, the director shall acknowledge receipt of the request. The director shall mail the acknowledgment to the person submitting the request at the address provided in the request. The acknowledgment shall include the following information, as applicable:

(i) If the director determines that the code interpretation request does not contain the information required under this section, the director shall identify in the acknowledgment the deficiencies in the code interpretation request. In such a situation, the director is under no obligation to process the code interpretation request until a code interpretation request complying with this chapter is submitted;

(ii) If the director determines that the code interpretation request is ambiguous or unclear, the director may request that the person making the request clarify the request. The director is under no obligation to process the code interpretation request until an adequately clarified code interpretation request is submitted;

(iii) If the director determines that the code interpretation request presents substantially the same issue as is pending before an adjudicatory body, such as the City hearing examiner, the City council when acting as a quasi-judicial body, any other quasi-judicial agency or any local, state or federal court, the director shall so state in the acknowledgment. The director is then under no obligation to further process the code interpretation request; and

(iv) If a code interpretation is requested regarding an issue that the director has previously addressed through a code interpretation, the director is not obligated to issue another code interpretation and shall so state in the acknowledgment required by this section and shall identify the previous code interpretation.

(b) If the director determines that the code interpretation request relates to a particular parcel of property, the director shall cause notice of the code interpretation request to be given to the taxpayer of record for the subject parcel.

(c) If the code interpretation request relates to a specific development project pending before the City, the director shall cause notice of the code interpretation request to be given to all parties of record for that project, including the applicant.

(d) If the code interpretation is initiated by the City, the director shall cause notice of the code interpretation to be posted on the City’s website and at City Hall in addition to any other notice required by this section.

(e) The notice required under this section must include a copy of any code interpretation request and a copy of the director’s acknowledgment. Notice to property taxpayers, applicants, or persons requesting an interpretation may be by United States mail or other appropriate method of delivery. (Ord. O2009-248 § 1)


21A.05.090 Administration and review authority. 

(1) The examiner shall have authority to hold public hearings and make decisions and recommendations on reclassifications, subdivisions and other development proposals, and appeals, as set forth in Chapter 21A.100 SMC.

(2) The director shall have the authority to grant, condition or deny applications for variances and conditional use permits, unless a public hearing is required as set forth in Chapter 21A.100 SMC, in which case this authority shall be exercised by the hearing examiner.

(3) The director shall have the authority to issue a written code interpretation in accordance with the review procedures contained within this chapter and Chapter 21A.100 SMC. The director shall issue such interpretations as he or she deems necessary, or upon the request of any person, in cases of any ambiguity, difference of meaning, unclear procedural requirements, or other unclear regulatory requirements of the SMC.

(4) An interpretation related to a development proposal must be requested prior to the date of expiration of any applicable administrative appeal period for a land use decision on the application to which the request relates.

(5) The department shall have authority to grant, condition, or deny commercial and residential building permits, grading and clearing permits, and temporary use permits in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 21A.100 SMC.

(6) Except for other agencies with authority to implement specific provisions of this title, the department shall have the sole authority to issue official interpretations of this title, pursuant to Chapter 2.55 SMC. (Ord. O2009-248 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.05.095 Review.

(1) Decision Basis. In issuing an interpretation consistent with this chapter, the director may consider the following:

(a) The purpose and intent statements of the chapters in question;

(b) Consistency with other regulatory requirements governing the same or a similar situation;

(c) The legislative direction of the City council, if any, provided with the adoption the code sections in question;

(d) The policy direction provided by the Sammamish Comprehensive Plan, or other adopted policy documents, as amended; 

(e) Relevant judicial actions related to the interpretation;

(f) Expected result or effect of the interpretation; and

(g) Previous implementation of the regulatory requirements governing the situation.

(2) Content. Consistent with the requirements of Chapter 21A.100 SMC, the director shall provide facts, findings, and conclusions supporting the interpretation. At a minimum these shall include the following:

(a) A brief summary of the issue that requires an interpretation by the director;

(b) The context of the interpretation, if not included or implied from the summary;

(c) Citation of the decision basis from subsection (1) of this section; and

(d) The interpretation, signature, and date. (Ord. O2009-248 § 1)


21A.05.100 Classification of right-of-way. 

(1) Except when such areas are specifically designated on the zoning map as being classified in one of the zones provided in this title, land contained in rights-of-way for streets or alleys, or railroads shall be considered unclassified.

(2) Within street or alley rights-of-way, uses shall be limited to street purposes as defined by law.

(3) Within railroad rights-of-way, allowed uses shall be limited to tracks, signals, or other operating devices, movement of rolling stock, utility lines and equipment, and facilities accessory to and used directly for the delivery and distribution of services to abutting property.

(4) Where such right-of-way is vacated, the vacated area shall have the zone classification of the adjoining property with which it is first merged. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.05.110 Drawings.

The City staff is hereby authorized to incorporate drawings as necessary for the purpose of illustrating concepts and regulatory standards contained in this title; provided, that the adopted provisions of the code shall control over such drawings. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


Chapter 21A.10 ZONES, MAPS AND DESIGNATIONS

Sections:

21A.10.010    Zones and map designations established.

21A.10.020    Zone and map designation purpose.

21A.10.030    Urban residential zone.

21A.10.040    Neighborhood business zone.

21A.10.050    Community business zone.

21A.10.060    Office zone.

21A.10.070    Map designation – Special district overlay.

21A.10.080    Zoning maps and boundaries.


21A.10.010 Zones and map designations established.

In order to accomplish the purposes of this title the following zoning designations and zoning map symbols are established:

	Zoning Designations	Map Symbol

	Urban Residential	R (base density in dwellings per acre)

	Neighborhood Business	NB

	Community Business	CB

	Office	O

	Special District Overlay	-SO (suffix to zone’s map symbol)

(Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.10.020 Zone and map designation purpose.

The purpose statements for each zone and map designation set forth in the following sections shall be used to guide the application of the zones and designations to all lands in City of Sammamish. The purpose statements also shall guide interpretation and application of land use regulations within the zones and designations and any changes to the range of permitted uses within each zone through amendments to this title. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.10.030 Urban residential zone.

(1) The purpose of the urban residential (R) zone is to implement comprehensive plan goals and policies for housing quality, diversity, and affordability and to efficiently use urban residential land, public services, and energy. These purposes are accomplished by: 

(a) Providing, in the R-1 through R-8 zones, for a mix of predominantly single detached dwelling units and other development types, with a variety of densities and sizes in locations appropriate for urban densities;

(b) Providing, in the R-12 or R-18 zone, for a mix of predominantly apartment and townhouse dwelling units and other development types, with a variety of densities and sizes in locations appropriate for urban densities;

(c) Allowing only those accessory and complementary nonresidential uses that are compatible with urban residential communities; and

(d) Establishing density designations to facilitate advanced area-wide planning for public facilities and services, and to protect environmentally sensitive sites from overdevelopment.

(2) Use of this zone is appropriate in urban areas or activity centers, designated by the comprehensive plan or community plans as follows:

(a) The R-1 zone on or adjacent to lands with area-wide environmental constraints where development is required to cluster away from sensitive areas, on lands designated urban separators or wildlife habitat network where development is required to cluster away from the axis of the corridor, or in well-established subdivisions of the same density, which are served at the time of development by public or private facilities and services adequate to support planned densities;

(b) The R-4 through R-8 zones on urban lands that are predominantly environmentally unconstrained and are served at the time of development, by adequate public sewers, water supply, streets, and other needed public facilities and services; and

(c) The R-12 or R-18 zone in urban areas, urban or community activity centers or urban neighborhood centers, that are served at the time of development by adequate public sewers, water supply, streets, and other needed public facilities and services. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.10.040 Neighborhood business zone. 

(1) The purpose of the neighborhood business (NB) zone is to provide convenient daily retail and personal services for a limited service area and to minimize impacts of commercial activities on nearby properties and in urban areas on properties with the land use designation of commercial outside of center, to provide for limited residential development. These purposes are accomplished by:

(a) Limiting nonresidential uses to those retail or personal services that can serve the everyday needs of a surrounding urban residential area;

(b) Allowing for mixed use (housing and retail/service) developments and for townhouse developments as a sole use on properties in the urban area with the land use designation of commercial outside of center.

(2) Use of this zone is appropriate in urban neighborhood business centers, designated by the comprehensive plan, on sites that are served at the time of development by adequate public sewers when located in urban areas or adequate on-site sewage disposal, water supply, streets and other needed public facilities and services. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.10.050 Community business zone.

(1) The purpose of the community business (CB) zone is to provide convenience and comparison retail and personal services for local service areas that exceed the daily convenience needs of adjacent neighborhoods but that cannot be served conveniently by larger activity centers, and to provide retail and personal services in locations within activity centers that are not appropriate for extensive outdoor storage or auto-related and industrial uses. These purposes are accomplished by: 

(a) Providing for limited small-scale offices as well as a wider range of the retail, professional, governmental and personal services than are found in neighborhood business areas;

(b) Allowing for mixed use (housing and retail/service) developments; and 

(c) Excluding commercial uses with extensive outdoor storage or auto-related and industrial uses.

(2) Use of this zone is appropriate in urban and community centers that are designated by the adopted City of Sammamish comprehensive plan and community plans and that are served at the time of development by adequate public sewers, water supply, streets, and other needed public facilities and services. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.10.060 Office zone.

(1) The purpose of the office (O) zone is to provide for pedestrian and transit-oriented high-density employment uses together with limited complementary retail and urban density residential development in locations within activity centers where the full range of commercial activities is not desirable. These purposes are accomplished by:

(a) Allowing for uses that will take advantage of pedestrian-oriented site and street improvement standards;

(b) Providing for higher building heights and floor area ratios than those found in community centers;

(c) Reducing the ratio of required parking to building floor area;

(d) Allowing for on-site convenient daily retail and personal services for employees and residences; and

(e) Excluding auto-oriented, outdoor or other retail sales and services that do not provide for the daily convenience needs of on-site and nearby employees or residents.

(2) Use of this zone is appropriate in activity centers designated by the adopted City of Sammamish comprehensive plan that are served at the time of development by adequate public sewers, water supply, streets, and other needed public facilities and services. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.10.070 Map designation – Special district overlay. 

The purpose of the special district overlay designation (-SO) suffix to zone’s map symbol is to carry out comprehensive plan and community, subarea or neighborhood plan policies that identify special opportunities for achieving public benefits by allowing or requiring alternative uses and development standards that differ from the general provisions of this title. Special district overlays are generally applied to a group of individual properties or entire community, subarea or neighborhood planning areas and are designated primarily through the area zoning process. Regardless of the form in which a special district overlay is adopted, the -SO suffix shall be shown on the official zoning map. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.10.080 Zoning maps and boundaries.

(1) The location and boundaries of the zones defined by this chapter shall be shown and delineated on zoning maps adopted by ordinance.

(2) Changes in the boundaries of the zones, including application or amendment of interim zoning, shall be made by ordinance adopting or amending a zoning map.

(3) Zoning maps are available for public review at the City of Sammamish offices during regular business hours. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


Chapter 21A.15 TECHNICAL TERMS AND LAND USE DEFINITIONS

Sections:

21A.15.005    Scope of chapter.

21A.15.007    Abandoned vehicle.

21A.15.009    Accessible electric vehicle charging station.

21A.15.010    Accessory living quarters.

21A.15.015    Accessory use, commercial.

21A.15.020    Accessory use, residential.

21A.15.027    Adjustment factor.

21A.15.035    Adult use facility.

21A.15.040    Agricultural product sales.

21A.15.050    Airport/heliport.

21A.15.052    AKART.

21A.15.055    Alley.

21A.15.056    Alteration.

21A.15.057    Alternative water sources.

21A.15.060    Amusement arcades.

21A.15.062    Anadromous fish.

21A.15.063    Ancillary structure.

21A.15.065    Animal, small.

21A.15.067    Antenna.

21A.15.068    Antenna array.

21A.15.069    Antenna support structure.

21A.15.070    Applicant.

21A.15.072    Application rate.

21A.15.073    Artist studio.

21A.15.074    Attached WCF.

21A.15.075    Auction house.

21A.15.078    Barn.

21A.15.080    Base flood.

21A.15.085    Base flood elevation.

21A.15.086    Base station.

21A.15.087    Battery charging station.

21A.15.088    Battery electric vehicle (BEV).

21A.15.089    Battery exchange station.

21A.15.090    Bed and breakfast guesthouse.

21A.15.095    Beehive.

21A.15.097    Berm.

21A.15.098    Best available science.

21A.15.100    Billboard.

21A.15.110    Biologist.

21A.15.112    Bioretention.

21A.15.115    Book, stationery, video, and art supply store.

21A.15.120    Broadleaf tree.

21A.15.122    Buffer.

21A.15.125    Building.

21A.15.135    Building envelope.

21A.15.140    Building facade.

21A.15.145    Building, hardware, and garden materials store.

21A.15.150    Bulk gas storage tank.

21A.15.155    Bulk retail.

21A.15.160    Campground.

21A.15.165    Capacity, school.

21A.15.170    Capital facilities plan, school.

21A.15.172    Catastrophic collapse.

21A.15.175    Cattery.

21A.15.180    Cemetery, columbarium or mausoleum.

21A.15.181    Certified Arborist.

21A.15.182    Channel relocation and stream meander areas.

21A.15.183    Charging levels.

21A.15.185    Church, synagogue, or temple.

21A.15.190    Classrooms, school.

21A.15.195    Clearing.

21A.15.200    Code interpretation.

21A.15.205    Cogeneration.

21A.15.207    Collective garden.

21A.15.208    Collocation.

21A.15.209    Combined antenna.

21A.15.210    Communication facility, major.

21A.15.215    Communication facility, minor.

21A.15.217    Community identification sign.

21A.15.220    Community residential facility (CRF).

21A.15.223    Commuter parking lot.

21A.15.225    Compensatory storage.

21A.15.227    Concealed WCF.

21A.15.230    Conditional use permit.

21A.15.235    Conference center.

21A.15.240    Conservation easement.

21A.15.245    Repealed.

21A.15.247    Construction and trades.

21A.15.250    Construction cost per student, school.

21A.15.251    Conversion factor.

21A.15.252    Cooperative.

21A.15.253    Critical aquifer recharge area.

21A.15.254    Critical areas.

21A.15.255    Recodified.

21A.15.260    Critical facility.

21A.15.262    Daily care.

21A.15.265    Daycare.

21A.15.267    DBH.

21A.15.270    Deciduous.

21A.15.275    Density credit, transfer (TDC).

21A.15.280    Department.

21A.15.285    Department and variety store.

21A.15.287    Designated accessible space.

21A.15.290    Destination resort.

21A.15.295    Developer or applicant.

21A.15.297    Development.

21A.15.300    Development activity.

21A.15.310    Development proposal.

21A.15.315    Development proposal site.

21A.15.317    Development regulation.

21A.15.318    Development right.

21A.15.320    Repealed.

21A.15.325    Director.

21A.15.330    Dormitory.

21A.15.333    Drip line.

21A.15.335    Drop box facility.

21A.15.340    Drug store.

21A.15.345    Dwelling unit.

21A.15.350    Dwelling unit, attached accessory.

21A.15.351    Dwelling unit, detached accessory.

21A.15.355    Dwelling unit, apartment.

21A.15.365    Dwelling unit, single detached.

21A.15.370    Dwelling unit, townhouse.

21A.15.375    Earth station.

21A.15.380    Effective radiated power.

21A.15.383    Electric scooters and motorcycles.

21A.15.384    Electric vehicle.

21A.15.385    Electric vehicle charging station.

21A.15.386    Electric vehicle charging station – Restricted.

21A.15.387    Electric vehicle charging station – Public.

21A.15.388    Electric vehicle infrastructure.

21A.15.389    Electric vehicle parking space.

21A.15.390    Electrical substation.

21A.15.392    Emergency.

21A.15.395    Energy resource recovery facility.

21A.15.400    Enhancement.

21A.15.405    Equipment, heavy.

21A.15.410    Erosion.

21A.15.415    Erosion hazard areas.

21A.15.417    Erosion hazard near sensitive water body overlay.

21A.15.418    Eutrophic.

21A.15.420    Evergreen.

21A.15.425    Examiner.

21A.15.427    Existing corridor.

21A.15.428    Existing grade.

21A.15.429    FAA.

21A.15.430    Fabric shop.

21A.15.435    Facilities standard.

21A.15.440    Factory-built commercial building.

21A.15.445    Fairground.

21A.15.450    Family.

21A.15.452    Farmers’ market.

21A.15.453    FCC.

21A.15.455    Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) floodway.

21A.15.456    Feasible.

21A.15.457    Feed lines.

21A.15.460    Feed store.

21A.15.465    Fence.

21A.15.467    Financial guarantee.

21A.15.468    Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas.

21A.15.469    Fish and wildlife habitat corridors.

21A.15.469.1    Flag.

21A.15.469.2    Flag, government.

21A.15.470    Flood fringe.

21A.15.475    Flood hazard areas.

21A.15.480    Flood insurance rate map.

21A.15.485    Flood insurance study for King County.

21A.15.490    Flood protection elevation.

21A.15.495    Floodplain.

21A.15.500    Floodproofing.

21A.15.505    Floodway, zero-rise.

21A.15.510    Florist shop.

21A.15.515    Flush-mounted.

21A.15.520    Forest practice.

21A.15.525    Forest product sales.

21A.15.530    Forest research.

21A.15.532    Frequently flooded areas.

21A.15.535    Furniture and home furnishings store.

21A.15.540    General business service.

21A.15.545    Geologist.

21A.15.550    Geotechnical engineer.

21A.15.555    Golf course.

21A.15.560    Grade span.

21A.15.565    Grading.

21A.15.570    Grazing area.

21A.15.575    Groundcover.

21A.15.580    Hazardous household substance.

21A.15.585    Hazardous substance.

21A.15.586    Hazardous trees.

21A.15.590    Heavy equipment and truck repair.

21A.15.595    Helistop.

21A.15.596    High voltage electrical transmission tower.

21A.15.597    Historic resource.

21A.15.600    Hobby, toy, and game shop.

21A.15.605    Home business.

21A.15.610    Repealed.

21A.15.612    Homeless encampment.

21A.15.615    Household pets.

21A.15.620    Hydroelectric generation facility.

21A.15.623    Hypereutrophic.

21A.15.625    Impervious surface.

21A.15.630    Improved public roadways.

21A.15.635    Individual transportation and taxi.

21A.15.637    Infiltration rate.

21A.15.640    Interim recycling facility.

21A.15.641    Interlocal agreement.

21A.15.642    Irrigation efficiency.

21A.15.645    Jail.

21A.15.655    Jewelry store.

21A.15.658    Joint use driveway.

21A.15.660    Kennel.

21A.15.662    Kitchen or kitchen facility.

21A.15.663    Lake management plan.

21A.15.664    Lakes.

21A.15.665    Landfill.

21A.15.667    Landscape water features.

21A.15.670    Landscaping.

21A.15.675    Landslide.

21A.15.680    Landslide hazard areas.

21A.15.681    Recodified.

21A.15.683    Least visually obtrusive profile.

21A.15.685    Level of service (LOS), traffic.

21A.15.690    Light equipment.

21A.15.691    Lighting fixtures, security or flood.

21A.15.692    Linear activity or development.

21A.15.693    Liquor and Cannabis Board (LCB).

21A.15.695    Livestock.

21A.15.700    Livestock, large.

21A.15.705    Livestock, small.

21A.15.710    Livestock sales.

21A.15.715    Loading space.

21A.15.725    Lot.

21A.15.726    Lot coverage.

21A.15.726.1    Lot line, front yard.

21A.15.727    Lot line, rear yard.

21A.15.728    Lot line, side yard.

21A.15.730    Lot line, interior.

21A.15.731    Low impact development.

21A.15.732    Maintenance.

21A.15.733    Managing agency.

21A.15.734    Marijuana or marihuana.

21A.15.734.1    Marijuana concentrates.

21A.15.735    Marijuana processor.

21A.15.736    Marijuana producer.

21A.15.737    Marijuana-infused products.

21A.15.738    Marijuana retailer.

21A.15.739    Marina.

21A.15.740    Master telecommunications plan.

21A.15.741    Material error.

21A.15.742    Medium-speed electric vehicle.

21A.15.743    Mesotrophic.

21A.15.744    Microclimate.

21A.15.745    Microwave.

21A.15.750    Repealed.

21A.15.751    Mitigation bank.

21A.15.752    Mitigation banking.

21A.15.755    Mobile home.

21A.15.760    Mobile home park.

21A.15.765    Monitoring.

21A.15.770    Monuments, tombstones, and gravestones sales.

21A.15.775    Motor vehicle, boat, and mobile home dealer.

21A.15.782    Mulch.

21A.15.790    Native vegetation.

21A.15.794    Repealed.

21A.15.795    Repealed.

21A.15.796    Neighborhood electric vehicle.

21A.15.797    Net buildable area.

21A.15.798    Nonelectric vehicle.

21A.15.799    Nonconcealed WCF.

21A.15.800    Nonconformance.

21A.15.810    Non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER).

21A.15.815    Noxious weed.

21A.15.817    Off-street required parking lot.

21A.15.818    Oligotrophic.

21A.15.820    Open-work fence.

21A.15.825    Ordinary high water mark.

21A.15.830    Outdoor performance center.

21A.15.832    Overspray.

21A.15.835    Park.

21A.15.840    Park service area.

21A.15.845    Parking lot aisle.

21A.15.850    Parking lot unit depth.

21A.15.855    Parking space.

21A.15.860    Parking space angle.

21A.15.862    Partially developed.

21A.15.865    Party of record.

21A.15.870    Peak hour.

21A.15.875    Permanent school facilities.

21A.15.880    Personal medical supply store.

21A.15.885    Pet shop.

21A.15.886    Phosphorus.

21A.15.887    Phosphorus concentration.

21A.15.888    Phosphorus loading.

21A.15.890    Photographic and electronic shop.

21A.15.895    Plant associations of infrequent occurrence.

21A.15.896    Plant factor.

21A.15.897    Plug-in hybrid electric vehicle (PHEV).

21A.15.898    Repealed.

21A.15.899    Potable water.

21A.15.900    Private.

21A.15.905    Private storm water management facility.

21A.15.910    Professional office.

21A.15.915    Public agency.

21A.15.920    Public agency animal control facility.

21A.15.925    Public agency archive.

21A.15.930    Public agency or utility office.

21A.15.935    Public agency or utility yard.

21A.15.936    Public agency or utility yard, satellite.

21A.15.940    Public agency training facility.

21A.15.942    Qualified professional.

21A.15.945    Radio frequency.

21A.15.946    Radio frequency emissions.

21A.15.947    Rapid charging station.

21A.15.948    Reasonable alternative.

21A.15.950    Reasonable use.

21A.15.955    Receiving site.

21A.15.960    Recreational vehicle (RV).

21A.15.965    Recreational vehicle parks.

21A.15.970    Recyclable material.

21A.15.972    Reference evapotranspiration (Eto).

21A.15.975    Regional storm water management facility.

21A.15.980    Regional utility corridor.

21A.15.982    Religious organization.

21A.15.985    Relocatable facilities cost per student.

21A.15.990    Relocatable facility.

21A.15.1000    Restoration.

21A.15.1005    Retail, comparison.

21A.15.1010    Retail, convenience.

21A.15.1011    Retaining wall.

21A.15.1011.1    Riparian.

21A.15.1012    Runoff.

21A.15.1015    Salmonid.

21A.15.1020    School bus base.

21A.15.1025    School district.

21A.15.1030    School district support facility.

21A.15.1035    Schools, elementary, and middle/junior high.

21A.15.1040    Schools, secondary or high school.

21A.15.1045    Seismic hazard areas.

21A.15.1050    Self-service storage facility.

21A.15.1055    Sending site.

21A.15.1060    Senior citizen.

21A.15.1062    Senior citizen assisted housing.

21A.15.1065    Repealed.

21A.15.1070    Setback.

21A.15.1071    Setback, structure.

21A.15.1072    Setback, single detached dwelling unit.

21A.15.1073    Setback, detached accessory dwelling unit.

21A.15.1075    Shelters for temporary placement.

21A.15.1085    Sign.

21A.15.1086    Sign, A-frame.

21A.15.1090    Sign, awning.

21A.15.1095    Repealed.

21A.15.1096    Sign, community banner.

21A.15.1097    Sign, commercial.

21A.15.1100    Repealed.

21A.15.1101    Repealed.

21A.15.1105    Sign, directional.

21A.15.1110    Sign, freestanding.

21A.15.1115    Sign, fuel price.

21A.15.1117    Repealed.

21A.15.1120    Sign, incidental.

21A.15.1125    Sign, indirectly illuminated.

21A.15.1130    Sign, monument.

21A.15.1131    Sign, noncommercial.

21A.15.1135    Sign, off-premises directional.

21A.15.1140    Sign, on-premises.

21A.15.1144    Sign, permanent.

21A.15.1145    Sign, permanent residential development identification.

21A.15.1146    Sign, pole.

21A.15.1148    Repealed.

21A.15.1150    Sign, portable.

21A.15.1155    Sign, projecting.

21A.15.1159    Sign, temporary.

21A.15.1160    Repealed.

21A.15.1165    Sign, wall.

21A.15.1166    Sign, window.

21A.15.1170    Site.

21A.15.1172    Site area.

21A.15.1175    Site cost per student.

21A.15.1177    SITUS file.

21A.15.1190    Source-separated organic material.

21A.15.1195    Special use permit.

21A.15.1200    Specialized instruction school.

21A.15.1205    Specified sexual activities.

21A.15.1207    Sponsor.

21A.15.1210    Sporting goods store.

21A.15.1215    Sports club.

21A.15.1220    Stable.

21A.15.1225    Standard of service, school districts.

21A.15.1230    Steep slope hazard areas.

21A.15.1235    Stream functions.

21A.15.1240    Streams.

21A.15.1245    Street.

21A.15.1250    Street frontage.

21A.15.1255    Structure.

21A.15.1260    Student factor.

21A.15.1265    Submerged land.

21A.15.1270    Substantial improvement.

21A.15.1271    TDR certificate.

21A.15.1272    TDR certificate of intent.

21A.15.1273    TDR program.

21A.15.1274    TDR sending site application.

21A.15.1275    Temporary use permit.

21A.15.1276    Temporary WCF.

21A.15.1277    Theater.

21A.15.1278    Theatrical production services.

21A.15.1280    Tightline sewer.

21A.15.1282    Total phosphorus.

21A.15.1285    Trails.

21A.15.1288    Transfer of development rights (TDR).

21A.15.1290    Transfer station.

21A.15.1295    Transit bus base.

21A.15.1305    Transitional housing facilities.

21A.15.1310    Transmission equipment.

21A.15.1315    Transmission line booster station.

21A.15.1320    Transmission support structure.

21A.15.1325    Transmitter building.

21A.15.1330    Transportation system management (TSM).

21A.15.1332    Tree, heritage.

21A.15.1332.1    Tree, landmark.

21A.15.1333    Tree, significant.

21A.15.1334    Trophic state index.

21A.15.1334.1    Trophic status.

21A.15.1335    Ultimate roadway section.

21A.15.1337    Underground storage tanks.

21A.15.1345    Use.

21A.15.1350    Utility facility.

21A.15.1352    Vactor waste.

21A.15.1353    Vactor waste receiving facility.

21A.15.1355    Variance.

21A.15.1360    Vegetation.

21A.15.1365    Vocational school.

21A.15.1375    Warehousing and wholesale trade.

21A.15.1380    Wastewater treatment facility.

21A.15.1382    Water budget.

21A.15.1385    Water-dependent use.

21A.15.1386    Water-enjoyment use.

21A.15.1387    Water-oriented use.

21A.15.1388    Water-related use.

21A.15.1390    Repealed.

21A.15.1395    Wetland edge.

21A.15.1400    Repealed.

21A.15.1405    Wetland functions.

21A.15.1410    Wetland, isolated.

21A.15.1415    Wetlands.

21A.15.1416    Wetlands of local significance.

21A.15.1420    Wetpond.

21A.15.1425    Wildlife shelter.

21A.15.1426    Wireless communication facility.

21A.15.1427    Wireless communications.

21A.15.1428    Wireless right-of-way use agreement.

21A.15.1430    Work release facility.

21A.15.1432    Wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle.

21A.15.1435    Yard or organic waste processing facility.


21A.15.005 Scope of chapter. 

This chapter contains definitions of technical and procedural terms used throughout the code and definitions of land uses listed in tables in Chapter 21A.20 SMC. The definitions in this chapter supplement the Standard Industrial Classification Manual (SIC). See Chapter 21A.05 SMC for rules on interpretation of the code, including use of these definitions. Development standards are found in Chapters 21A.25 through 21A.85 SMC. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.007 Abandoned vehicle. 

“Abandoned vehicle” means any vehicle left upon the property of another without the consent of the owner of such property for a period of 24 hours or longer, except that a vehicle shall not be considered abandoned if its owner or operator is unable to remove it from the place where it is located and so notifies law enforcement officials and requests assistance. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.009 Accessible electric vehicle charging station.

“Accessible electric vehicle charging station” means an electric vehicle charging station where the battery charging station equipment is located within accessible reach of the barrier-free access aisle (minimum 36-inch width) and the electric vehicle. (Ord. O2011-300 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.010 Accessory living quarters.

“Accessory living quarters” means living quarters in an accessory building for the use of the occupant or persons employed on the premises, or for temporary use of guests of the occupant. Such quarters have no kitchen and are not otherwise used as a separate dwelling unit. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.015 Accessory use, commercial.

“Accessory use, commercial” means:

(1) A use that is subordinate and incidental to a commercial use, including, but not limited to, the following uses:

(a) Administrative offices;

(b) Employee exercise facilities;

(c) Employee food service facilities;

(d) Incidental storage of raw materials and finished products sold or manufactured on-site;

(e) Business owner or caretaker residence;

(f) Cogeneration facilities; and

(g) Ground maintenance facilities.

(2) Some accessory uses within the scope of this section may be defined separately to enable the code to apply different conditions of approval. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.020 Accessory use, residential.

“Accessory use, residential” means: 

(1) A use, structure, or activity that is subordinate and incidental to a residence on the same parcel including, but not limited to, the following uses: 

(a) Accessory living quarters and dwellings;

(b) Fallout/bomb shelters;

(c) Keeping household pets;

(d) On-site rental office; 

(e) Pools, private docks, piers;

(f) Antennas for private telecommunication services;

(g) Storage of yard maintenance equipment; 

(h) Storage of private vehicles, e.g., motor vehicles, boats, trailers or planes;

(i) Greenhouses;

(j) Garages.

(2) Some accessory uses within the scope of this section may be defined separately to enable the code to apply different conditions of approval. (Ord. O2009-249 § 1; Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.027 Adjustment factor.

“Adjustment factor” means a factor that, when applied to the reference evapotranspiration, adjusts for plant factors and irrigation efficiently. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.035 Adult use facility. 

“Adult use facility” means an enterprise predominantly involved in the selling, renting, or presenting for commercial purposes of books, magazines, motion pictures, films, video cassettes, cable television, live entertainment, performance, or activity distinguished or characterized by a predominant emphasis on the depiction, simulation, or relation to “specified sexual activities” as defined in this chapter for observation by patrons therein. Examples of such facilities include, but are not limited to, adult book or video stores and establishments offering panorams, peep shows, or topless or nude dancing. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.040 Agricultural product sales.

“Agricultural product sales” means the retail sale of items resulting from the practice of agriculture, including crops such as fruits, vegetables, grains, seed, feed, and plants, or animal products such as eggs, milk, and meat. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.050 Airport/heliport.

“Airport/heliport” means any runway, landing area, or other facility, excluding facilities for the primary use of the individual property owner that are classified as helistops, designed or used by public carriers or private aircraft for the landing and taking off of aircraft, including the following associated facilities:

(1) Taxiways;

(2) Aircraft storage and tie-down areas;

(3) Hangars;

(4) Servicing; and

(5) Passenger and air freight terminals. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.052 AKART.

“AKART” means all known, available, and reasonable methods of prevention, control, and treatment. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.055 Alley. 

“Alley” means an improved thoroughfare or right-of-way, whether public or private, usually narrower than a street, that provides vehicular access to an interior boundary of one or more lots, and is not designed for general traffic circulation. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.056 Alteration.

Any human activity that results or is likely to result in an impact upon the existing condition of a critical area is an “alteration” that is subject to specific limitations as specified for each critical area. Alterations include, but are not limited to, grading, filling, dredging, draining, channelizing, applying herbicides or pesticides or any hazardous substance, discharging pollutants, except storm water, grazing domestic animals, paving, constructing, applying gravel, modifying for surface water management purposes, cutting, topping, relocating or removing vegetation or any other human activity that results or is likely to result in an impact to existent vegetation, hydrology, fish or wildlife, or fish or wildlife habitat. Alterations do not include walking, fishing, or any other passive recreation or other similar activities. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 2; Ord. O2005-172 § 2; Ord. O99-29 § 1. Formerly 21A.50.200)


21A.15.057 Alternative water sources.

“Alternative water sources” means stored rainwater or treated or recycled wastewater of a quality suitable for uses such as landscape irrigation. Such water is not considered potable. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.060 Amusement arcades.

“Amusement arcades” means a building or part of a building in which five or more pinball machines, video games, or other such player-operated amusement devices (excluding juke boxes or gambling-related machines) are operated. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.062 Anadromous fish.

“Anadromous fish” are those that live part or the majority of their lives in saltwater, but return to freshwater to spawn. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-172 § 2)


21A.15.063 Ancillary structure.

“Ancillary structure” means, for the purposes of this chapter, any form of development associated with a wireless communications facility, including but not limited to: foundations, concrete slabs on grade, guy anchors, generators, and feed lines; however, specifically excluding base stations. (Ord. O2005-181 § 1)


21A.15.065 Animal, small.

“Animal, small” means any animal other than livestock or animals considered to be predatory or wild that are kept outside a dwelling unit all or part of the time. Animals considered predatory or wild, excluding those in zoo animal breeding facilities, shall be considered small animals when they are taken into captivity for the purposes of breeding, domestication, training, hunting, or exhibition. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.067 Antenna.

“Antenna” means any apparatus designed for the transmitting and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves, including but not limited to: telephonic, radio or television communications. Types of antenna elements include, but are not limited to: omnidirectional (whip) antennas, sectorized (panel) antennas, multi- or single-bay (FM and TV), yagi, or parabolic (dish) antennas. (Ord. O2005-181 § 1)


21A.15.068 Antenna array.

“Antenna array” means a single or group of antenna elements and associated mounting hardware, feed lines, or other appurtenances which share a common attachment device such as a mounting frame or mounting support structure for the sole purpose of transmitting or receiving electromagnetic waves. (Ord. O2005-181 § 1)


21A.15.069 Antenna support structure.

“Antenna support structure” means a vertical projection composed of metal or other material with or without a foundation that is designed for the express purpose of accommodating antennas at a desired height. Antenna support structures do not include any device used to attach antennas to an existing building, unless the device extends above the highest point of the building by more than 20 feet. Types of support structures include the following:

(1) Guyed antenna support structure. (A style of antenna support structure consisting of a single truss assembly composed of sections with bracing incorporated. The sections are attached to each other, and the assembly is attached to a foundation and supported by a series of wires that are connected to anchors placed in the ground or on a building.)

(2) Lattice antenna support structure. (A tapered style of antenna support structure that consists of vertical and horizontal supports with multiple legs and cross-bracing and metal crossed strips or bars to support antenna.)

(3) Monopole antenna support structure. (A style of freestanding antenna support structure consisting of a single shaft usually composed of two or more hollow sections that are in turn attached to a foundation. This type of antenna support structure is designed to support itself without the use of guy wires or other stabilization devices. These facilities are mounted to a foundation that rests on or in the ground or on a building’s roof.) (Ord. O2005-181 § 1)


21A.15.070 Applicant.

“Applicant” means a property owner or a public agency or public or private utility that owns a right-of-way or other easement or has been adjudicated the right to such an easement pursuant to RCW 8.12.090, or any person or entity designated or named in writing by the property or easement owner to be the applicant, in an application for a development proposal, permit or approval. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.072 Application rate.

“Application rate” means the depth of water applied to an area expressed in inches per hour. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.073 Artist studio.

“Artist studio” means an establishment providing a place solely for the practice or rehearsal of various performing or creative arts, including, but not limited to, acting, dancing, singing, drawing, painting, and sculpting. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.074 Attached WCF.

“Attached WCF” means an antenna or antenna array, including RF-to-lightwave converter equipment, that is secured to an existing building, structure (not including an antenna support structure), utility pole, cross country electrical distribution tower, with or without any accompanying new pole or device which attaches it to the building or structure, together with feed lines, and base station, which may be located either on the roof, inside or outside of the building or structure. (Ord. O2005-181 § 1)


21A.15.075 Auction house.

“Auction house” means an establishment where the property of others is sold by a broker or auctioneer to persons who attend scheduled sales periods or events. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.078 Barn.

“Barn” means a large agricultural building for storage of agricultural products and sheltering livestock. (Ord. O2009-249 § 1)


21A.15.080 Base flood.

“Base flood” means a flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, often referred to as the “100-year flood.” (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.085 Base flood elevation.

“Base flood elevation” means the water surface elevation of the base flood in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.086 Base station.

“Base station” means the wireless service provider’s specific electronic equipment used to transmit and receive radio signals located within and including cabinets, shelters, pedestals or other similar enclosures generally used to contain electronic equipment for said purpose. (Ord. O2005-181 § 1)


21A.15.087 Battery charging station.

“Battery charging station” means an electrical component assembly or cluster of component assemblies designed specifically to charge batteries within electric vehicles, which meets or exceeds applicable state and federal standards. (Ord. O2011-300 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.088 Battery electric vehicle (BEV).

“Battery electric vehicle (BEV)” means any vehicle that operates exclusively on electrical energy from an off-board source that is stored in the vehicle’s batteries, and produces zero tailpipe emissions or pollution when stationary or operating (see “Electric vehicle,” SMC 21A.15.384). (Ord. O2011-300 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.089 Battery exchange station.

“Battery exchange station” means a fully automated facility that will enable an electric vehicle with a swappable battery to enter a drive lane and exchange the depleted battery with a fully charged battery through a fully automated process, which meets or exceeds applicable state and federal standards. (Ord. O2011-300 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.090 Bed and breakfast guesthouse.

“Bed and breakfast guesthouse” means a dwelling unit or accessory building within which bedrooms are available for paying guests. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.095 Beehive.

“Beehive” means a structure designed to contain one colony of honey bees (Apis mellifera). (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.097 Berm. 

“Berm” means a constructed area of compacted earth. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.098 Best available science.

“Best available science” means the process used and information developed consistent with requirements in RCW 36.70A.172 and WAC 365-195-900 through 365-195-925. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-172 § 2)


21A.15.100 Billboard.

“Billboard” means a sign, including both the supporting structural framework and attached billboard faces, used principally for advertising a business activity, use, product, or service unrelated to the primary use or activity of the property on which the billboard is located; excluding off-premises directional, or temporary real estate signs. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.110 Biologist.

“Biologist” means a person who has earned at least a Bachelor of Science degree in the biological sciences from an accredited college or university or who has equivalent educational training and experience. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.112 Bioretention.

“Bioretention” means a flow control best management practice consisting of a shallow landscaped depression designed to temporarily store and promote infiltration of storm water runoff. Standards for bioretention design, including soil mix, plants, storage volume and feasibility criteria, are specified in Appendix C of the King County Surface Water Design Manual. (Ord. O2016-429 § 2 (Att. B); Ord. O2008-236 § 1)


21A.15.115 Book, stationery, video, and art supply store.

“Book, stationery, video, and art supply store” means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of books and magazines, stationery, records and tapes, video, and art supplies, including only uses located in SIC Industry Nos.:

(1) 5942 – Book stores;

(2) 5943 – Stationery stores;

(3) 5999 – Architectural supplies and artists’ supply and materials stores;

(4) 7841 – Video tape rental;

(5) 5735 – Record, compact disc, and prerecorded tape stores; and

(6) 5736 – Musical instrument stores. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.120 Broadleaf tree.

“Broadleaf tree” means a tree characterized by leaves that are broad in width and may include both deciduous and evergreen species. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.122 Buffer.

“Buffer” means a designated area contiguous to a steep slope or landslide hazard area intended to protect slope stability, attenuation of surface water flows and landslide hazards, or a designated area contiguous to a habitat conservation area, stream or wetland intended to protect the habitat, stream or wetland and be an integral part of the habitat, stream or wetland ecosystem. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 2; Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.125 Building.

“Building” means any structure having a roof. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.135 Building envelope.

“Building envelope” means area of a lot that delineates the limits of where a building may be placed on the lot. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.140 Building facade.

“Building facade” means that portion of any exterior elevation of a building extending from the grade of the building to the top of the parapet wall or eaves, for the entire width of the building elevation. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.145 Building, hardware, and garden materials store. 

“Building, hardware, and garden materials store” means an establishment engaged in selling lumber and other building materials, feed, or lawn and garden supplies, including, but not limited to, uses located in SIC Major Group No. 52, Building materials, hardware, garden supply; excluding mobile home dealers. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.150 Bulk gas storage tank.

“Bulk gas storage tank” means a tank from which illuminating, heating, or liquefied gas is distributed by piping directly to individual users. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.155 Bulk retail.

“Bulk retail” means an establishment offering the sale of bulk goods to the general public, including limited sales to wholesale customers. These establishments offer a variety of lines of merchandise including but not limited to food, building, hardware and garden materials, dry goods, apparel and accessories, home furnishings, housewares, drugs, auto supplies, hobby, toys, games, photographic, and electronics. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.160 Campground.

“Campground” means an area of land developed for recreational use in temporary occupancy, such as tents or recreational vehicles without hook-up facilities. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.165 Capacity, school. 

“Capacity, school” means the number of students a school district’s facilities can accommodate district-wide, based on the district’s standard of service, as determined by the school district. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.170 Capital facilities plan, school. 

“Capital facilities plan, school” means a district’s facilities plan adopted by the school board consisting of:

(1) A forecast of future needs for school facilities based on the district’s enrollment projections;

(2) The long-range construction and capital improvements projects of the district;

(3) The schools under construction or expansion;

(4) The proposed locations and capacities of expanded or new school facilities;

(5) At least a six-year financing plan component, updated as necessary to maintain at least a six-year forecast period, for financing needed school facilities within projected funding levels, and identifying sources of financing for such purposes, including bond issues authorized by the voters and projected bond issues not yet authorized by the voters;

(6) Any other long-range projects planned by the district;

(7) The current capacity of the district’s school facilities based on the districts adopted standard of service, and a plan to eliminate existing deficiencies, if any, without the use of impact fees; and

(8) An inventory showing the location and capacity of existing school facilities. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.172 Catastrophic collapse. 

“Catastrophic collapse” means the collapse of the ground surface by overburden caving into underground voids created by mining. Catastrophic collapse does not include the effects from trough subsidence. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.175 Cattery. 

“Cattery” means a place where adult cats are temporarily boarded for compensation, whether or not for training. An adult cat is of either sex, altered or unaltered, that has reached the age of six months. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.180 Cemetery, columbarium or mausoleum. 

“Cemetery, columbarium or mausoleum” means land or structures used for interment of the dead or their remains. For purposes of the code, pet cemeteries are considered a subclassification of this use. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.181 Certified Arborist.

“Certified Arborist” means an individual that has successfully passed the Certified Arborist examination administered by the International Society of Arboriculture (ISA) and possesses a minimum of three years’ full-time experience working in the professional tree care industry. (Ord. O2015-395 § 1)


21A.15.182 Channel relocation and stream meander areas.

“Channel relocation and stream meander areas” means those areas subject to risk due to stream bank destabilization, rapid stream incision, stream bank erosion, and shifts in the location of stream channels. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.183 Charging levels.

“Charging levels” means the standardized indicators of electrical force or voltage at which an electric vehicle’s battery is recharged. Levels 1, 2, and 3 are the most common EV charging levels, and include the following specifications:

(1) Level 1 is considered slow charging.

(2) Level 2 is considered medium charging.

(3) Level 3 is considered fast or rapid charging. (Ord. O2011-300 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.185 Church, synagogue, or temple.

“Church, synagogue, or temple” means a place where religious services are conducted, including those uses located in SIC Industry No. 866 and including accessory uses in the primary or accessory buildings such as religious education, reading rooms, assembly rooms, and residences for nuns and clergy. This definition does not include facilities for training of religious orders. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.190 Classrooms, school.

“Classrooms, school” means educational facilities of the district required to house students for its basic educational program. The classrooms are those facilities the district determines are necessary to best serve its student population. Specialized facilities as identified by the district, including but not limited to gymnasiums, cafeterias, libraries, administrative offices, and child care centers, shall not be counted as classrooms. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.195 Clearing.

“Clearing” means the limbing, pruning, trimming, topping, cutting or removal of vegetation or other organic plant matter by physical, mechanical, chemical or other means. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.200 Code interpretation.

“Code interpretation” means a formal statement regarding the meaning or requirements of a particular provision in the City of Sammamish’s development regulations. (Ord. O2009-248 § 1)


21A.15.205 Cogeneration. 

“Cogeneration” means the sequential generation of energy and useful heat from the same primary source or fuel for industrial, commercial, or residential heating or cooling purposes. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.207 Collective garden.

“Collective garden” means any area or location where qualifying patients engage in the production, processing, transporting, and delivery of marijuana for medical use. (Ord. O2016-406 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2014-376 § 3 (Att. A))


21A.15.208 Collocation.

“Collocation” means the practice of installing and operating multiple wireless carriers, service providers, and/or radio common carrier licensees on the same antenna support structure or attached wireless communication facility using different and separate antenna, feed lines and radio frequency generating equipment. (Ord. O2005-181 § 1)


21A.15.209 Combined antenna.

“Combined antenna” means an antenna or an antenna array designed and utilized to provide multiple services or services for more than one wireless provider for the same or similar type of services. (Ord. O2005-181 § 1)


21A.15.210 Communication facility, major. 

“Communication facility, major” means a communication facility for transmission and reception of:

(1) UHF and VHF television signals; or 

(2) FM or AM radio signals. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.215 Communication facility, minor.

“Communication facility, minor” means a communication facility for transmission and reception of:

(1) Two-way and/or citizen band (CB) radio signals;

(2) Point-to-point microwave signals;

(3) Cellular radio signals;

(4) Signals through FM radio translators; or

(5) Signals through FM radio boosters under 10 watts effective radiated power (ERP). (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.217 Community identification sign.

“Community identification sign” means a sign identifying the location of a community or geographic area such as unincorporated activity centers or rural towns designated by the comprehensive plan or communities recognized and delineated by a recognized unincorporated area council. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.220 Community residential facility (CRF).

“Community residential facility (CRF)” means living quarters meeting applicable federal and state standards that function as a single housekeeping unit and provide supportive services, including but not limited to counseling, rehabilitation, and medical supervision; excluding drug and alcohol detoxification which is classified in SMC 21A.20.050 as health services. CRFs are further classified as follows:

(1) CRF-I – Seven to 10 residents and staff (Note: Single family is defined as six or fewer residents);

(2) CRF-II – 11 or more residents and staff.

If staffed by nonresident staff, each 24 staff hours per day equals one full-time residing staff member for purposes of subclassifying CRFs. (Ord. O2009-249 § 1; Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.223 Commuter parking lot. 

“Commuter parking lot” means vehicle parking specifically for the purpose of access to a public transit system or for users of carpools or vanpools. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.225 Compensatory storage.

“Compensatory storage” means new, excavated storage volume equivalent to any flood storage which is eliminated by building filling or grading within the floodplain. For the purpose of this definition, equivalent flood storage capacity is that which is replaced by equal volume between corresponding one-foot contour intervals that are hydraulically connected to the floodway through their entire depth. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.227 Concealed WCF.

“Concealed WCF,” sometimes referred to as a stealth or camouflaged facility, means the antenna or antenna array, antenna support structure, base station, and feed lines are not readily identifiable as such, and are designed to be aesthetically compatible with existing and proposed building(s) and uses on a site. Examples of concealed attached facilities include, but are not limited to, the following: painted antenna and feed lines to match the color of a building or structure, faux windows, dormers or other architectural features that blend with an existing or proposed building or structure. Examples of concealed antenna support structures that can have a secondary, obvious function include, but are not limited to, the following: church steeples, windmills, bell towers, clock towers, cupolas, light standards, utility poles, flagpoles with or without flags, or trees. (Ord. O2010-281 § 1; Ord. O2005-181 § 1)


21A.15.230 Conditional use permit. 

“Conditional use permit” means permit granted by the City to locate a permitted use on a particular property subject to conditions placed on the permitted use to ensure compatibility with nearby land uses. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.235 Conference center.

“Conference center” means an establishment developed primarily as a meeting facility, including only facilities for recreation, overnight lodging, and related activities provided for conference participants. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.240 Conservation easement.

“Conservation easement” is a legal agreement between a landowner and a land trust or government agency that permanently limits uses of the land in order to protect its nondevelopment values. It allows the landowner to continue to own and use the land, to sell it, or to pass it on to heirs. A conservation easement is placed on a sending site at the time development rights are sold from the property. The conservation easement typically prohibits any further development of the property but allows resource uses, such as farming and forestry, to continue. (Ord. O2011-297 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.245 Consolidation.

Repealed by Ord. O2012-321. (Ord. O2005-181 § 1)


21A.15.247 Construction and trades.

“Construction and trades” means establishments that provide services related to construction of buildings and infrastructure, and other improvements to property. Such establishments include SIC Major Group Nos. 15 – 17, and SIC Industry Group No. 078, Landscape and horticultural services. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.250 Construction cost per student, school.

“Construction cost per student, school” means the estimated cost of construction of a permanent school facility in the district for the grade span of school to be provided, as a function of the district’s facilities standard per grade span and taking into account the requirements of students with special needs. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.251 Conversion factor. 

“Conversion factor” means a number that converts the water budget allowance from acre-inches per acre per year to gallons per square foot per year or cubic feet per year. (Ord. O2016-406 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10. Formerly 21A.15.252)


21A.15.252 Cooperative.

“Cooperative” means an entity with up to four members located in the domicile of one of the members, registered with the Washington State Liquor and Cannabis Board, and meeting the requirements under Chapter 69.51A RCW where qualifying patients and designated providers share responsibility for acquiring and supplying the resources needed to produce and process marijuana for medical use of members of the cooperative. (Ord. O2016-406 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.253 Critical aquifer recharge area.

“Critical aquifer recharge areas” means those areas in the City of Sammamish with a critical recharging effect on aquifers used for potable water as defined by WAC 365-190-030(2). CARAs have prevailing geologic conditions associated with infiltration rates that create a high potential for contamination of groundwater resources or contribute significantly to the replenishment of groundwater. CARAs shall be classified based on the following criteria:

(1) Class 1 CARAs include those areas located within the mapped one- or five-year capture zone of a wellhead protection area.

(2) Class 2 CARAs include those areas located within the mapped 10-year capture zone of a wellhead protection area.

(3) Class 3 CARAs include those areas outside wellhead protection areas that are identified as high aquifer recharge potential areas based on characteristics of surficial geology and soil types. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 2)


21A.15.254 Critical areas.

“Critical areas” means those areas in the City that are erosion hazard areas, frequently flooded areas, landslide hazard areas, seismic hazard areas, critical aquifer recharge areas, wetlands, streams, and fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 2)


21A.15.255 Critical drainage area.

Recodified as 13.10.125 by Ord. O2019-486. (Ord. O2018-459 § 2 (Att. B); Ord. O2016-429 § 2 (Att. B); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.260 Critical facility.

“Critical facility” means a facility necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare and that is defined under the occupancy categories of “essential facilities,” “hazardous facilities,” and “special occupancy structures” in the Uniform Building Code. Critical facilities also include nursing homes, public roadway bridges, and sites for hazardous substance storage or production, not including the temporary storage of consumer products containing hazardous substances intended for household use or for retail sale on the site. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.262 Daily care.

“Daily care” means medical procedures, monitoring and attention that are necessarily provided at the residence of the patient by the primary provider of daily care on a 24-hour basis. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.265 Daycare.

“Daycare” means an establishment for group care of nonresident adults or children.

(1) Daycare shall include only SIC Industry No. 835, Child daycare services, SIC Industry No. 8322, Adult daycare centers, and the following:

(a) Adult daycare, such as adult day health centers or social daycare as defined by the Washington State Department of Social and Health Services; 

(b) Nursery schools for children under minimum age for education in public schools;

(c) Privately conducted kindergartens or pre-kindergartens when not a part of a public or parochial school; and

(d) Programs covering after-school care for school children.

(2) Daycare establishments are subclassified as follows:

(a) Daycare I – a maximum of 12 adults or children in any 24-hour period; and

(b) Daycare II – over 12 adults or children in any 24-hour period. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.267 DBH.

“DBH” means the diameter of a tree as measured at breast height (54 inches above the ground). (Ord. O2005-175 § 1)


21A.15.270 Deciduous. 

“Deciduous” means a plant species with foliage that is shed annually. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.275 Density credit, transfer (TDC). 

“Density credit, transfer (TDC)” means the ability to transfer potentially buildable dwelling units from an eligible sending site to an eligible receiving site as provided in this code. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.280 Department.

“Department” means the City’s department of community development. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.285 Department and variety store. 

“Department and variety store” means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of a variety of lines of merchandise, such as dry goods, apparel and accessories, home furnishings, housewares, including only uses located in SIC Major Group and Industry Nos.:

(1) 53 – General merchandise;

(2) 5947 – Gift, novelty, and souvenir shops; and

(3) 5948 – Luggage and leather goods stores. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.287 Designated accessible space.

“Designated accessible space” means a WAC 51-50-005 required accessible parking space designated for the exclusive use of parking vehicles with a State Disabled Parking Permit. (Ord. O2011-300 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.290 Destination resort.

“Destination resort” means an establishment for resource-based recreation and intended to utilize outdoor recreational opportunities, including related services, such as food, overnight lodging, equipment rentals, entertainment, and other conveniences for guests of the resort. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.295 Developer or applicant.

“Developer” or “applicant” means the person or entity who owns or holds purchase options or other development control over property for which development activity is proposed. (See Applicant, SMC 21A.15.070.) (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.297 Development.

“Development” means the construction or exterior expansion of structures or buildings; clearing or grading; paving, landscaping, or placing of obstructions; and any project of a permanent or temporary nature exterior to a building. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.300 Development activity.

“Development activity” means any residential construction or expansion of a building, structure or use, any change in use of a building or structure, or any change in the use of land that creates additional demand for school facilities. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.310 Development proposal. 

“Development proposal” means any activities requiring a permit or other approval from the City of Sammamish relative to the use or development of land. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.315 Development proposal site.

“Development proposal site” means the legal boundaries of the parcel or parcels of land for which an applicant has or should have applied for authority from the City of Sammamish to carry out a development proposal. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.317 Development regulation.

“Development regulation” means the controls placed on development or land use activities by the City, including but not limited to zoning ordinances, critical areas ordinances, shoreline master program requirements, official controls, subdivision ordinances, and binding site plan ordinances, together with any amendments thereto. A development regulation does not include a decision to approve a project permit application, as defined in RCW 36.70B.020, even though the decision may be expressed in an ordinance by the City. (Ord. O2009-248 § 1)


21A.15.318 Development right.

“Development right” is an interest in and the right under current law to use and/or subdivide a lot for any and all residential, commercial, and industrial purposes. (Ord. O2011-297 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.320 Direct traffic impact.

Repealed by Ord. O2018-466. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.325 Director.

“Director” means the director of the City of Sammamish department of community development or his/her designee. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.330 Dormitory.

“Dormitory” means a residential building that provides sleeping quarters, but not separate dwelling units, and may include common dining, cooking recreation, or bathing facilities. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.333 Drip line.

“Drip line” means an area encircling the base of a tree, the minimum extent of which is delineated by a vertical line extending from the outer limit of a tree’s branch tips down to the ground. (Ord. O2015-395 § 1)


21A.15.335 Drop box facility.

“Drop box facility” means a facility used for receiving solid waste and recyclable from off-site sources into detachable solid waste containers, including the adjacent areas necessary for entrance and exit roads, unloading and vehicle turnaround areas. Drop box facilities normally service the general public with loose loads and may also include containers for separated recyclables. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.340 Drug store.

“Drug store” means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of prescription drugs, nonprescription medicines, cosmetics and related supplies, including only uses located in SIC Industry Group and Industry Nos.:

(1) 591 – Drug stores and proprietary stores;

(2) 5993 – Tobacco stores and stands; and

(3) 5999 – Cosmetics stores. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.345 Dwelling unit.

“Dwelling unit” means one or more rooms designed for occupancy by a person or family for living and sleeping purposes, containing kitchen facilities and rooms with internal accessibility, for use solely by the dwelling’s occupants; dwelling units include but are not limited to bachelor, efficiency and studio apartments, factory-built housing, and mobile homes. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.350 Dwelling unit, attached accessory.

“Dwelling unit, attached accessory” means a separate, complete dwelling unit attached to or contained within the structure of the primary dwelling. (Ord. O2019-482 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.351 Dwelling unit, detached accessory.

“Dwelling unit, detached accessory” means a separate, complete dwelling unit contained within a separate structure that is accessory to the primary dwelling unit on the premises. (Ord. O2019-482 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.355 Dwelling unit, apartment.

“Dwelling unit, apartment” means a dwelling unit contained in a building consisting of two or more dwelling units that may be stacked, or one or more dwellings with nonresidential uses. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.365 Dwelling unit, single detached. 

“Dwelling unit, single detached” means a detached building containing one dwelling unit. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.370 Dwelling unit, townhouse. 

“Dwelling unit, townhouse” means a building containing one dwelling unit that occupies space from the ground to the roof, and is attached to one or more other townhouse dwellings by common walls. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.375 Earth station. 

“Earth station” means a communication facility that transmits and/or receives signals to and from an orbiting satellite using satellite dish antennas. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.380 Effective radiated power. 

“Effective radiated power” means the product of the antenna power input and the numerical antenna power gain. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.383 Electric scooters and motorcycles.

“Electric scooters and motorcycles” means any two- or three-wheeled vehicle that operates exclusively on electrical energy from an off-board source that is stored in the vehicle’s batteries and produces zero emissions or pollution when stationary or operating. (Ord. O2011-300 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.384 Electric vehicle.

“Electric vehicle” means any vehicle that operates, either partially or exclusively, on electrical energy from the grid, or an off-board source, that is stored on-board for motive purposes. “Electric vehicle” includes (but is not limited to): (1) a battery electric vehicle; (2) a plug-in hybrid electric vehicle; (3) a neighborhood electric vehicle; and (4) a medium-speed electric vehicle. (Ord. O2011-300 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.385 Electric vehicle charging station.

“Electric vehicle charging station” means a public or private parking space located together with battery charging station equipment that has as its purpose the transfer of electric energy (by conductive or inductive means) to a battery or other storage device in an electric vehicle. (Ord. O2011-300 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.386 Electric vehicle charging station – Restricted.

“Electric vehicle charging station – restricted” means an electrical charging station that is (1) privately owned and restricted access (e.g., single-family, assigned parking, etc.) or (2) publicly owned and restricted (fleet parking with no access to the public). (Ord. O2011-300 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.387 Electric vehicle charging station – Public.

“Electric vehicle charging station – public” means an electrical charging station that is (1) publicly owned and publicly available (e.g., park and ride lots, City Hall parking, other public lots) or privately owned and publicly available (e.g., shopping centers, apartment complexes, parking garages, etc.). (Ord. O2011-300 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.388 Electric vehicle infrastructure.

“Electric vehicle infrastructure” means structures, machinery, and equipment necessary and integral to support an electric vehicle, including battery charging stations and battery exchange stations. (Ord. O2011-300 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.389 Electric vehicle parking space.

“Electric vehicle parking space” means any marked parking space (public or private) that identifies the use to be for an electric vehicle. (Ord. O2011-300 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.390 Electrical substation.

“Electrical substation” means a site containing equipment for the conversion of high voltage electrical power transported through transmission lines into lower voltages transported through distribution lines and suitable for individual users. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.392 Emergency. 

“Emergency” means an occurrence during which there is imminent danger to the public health, safety, and welfare, or which poses an imminent risk to property, as a result of a natural or manmade catastrophe as so declared by the director. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.395 Energy resource recovery facility. 

“Energy resource recovery facility” means an establishment for recovery of energy in a usable form from mass burning or refuse-derived fuel incineration, pyrolysis, or any other means of using the heat of combustion of solid waste. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.400 Enhancement. 

“Enhancement” means an action that increases the functions and values of a stream, wetland, or other sensitive area or buffer. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.405 Equipment, heavy.

“Equipment, heavy” means high-capacity mechanical devices for moving earth or other materials, and mobile power units including, but not limited to:

(1) Carryalls;

(2) Graders;

(3) Loading and unloading devices;

(4) Cranes;

(5) Drag lines;

(6) Trench diggers;

(7) Tractors;

(8) Augers;

(9) Bulldozers;

(10) Concrete mixers and conveyers;

(11) Harvesters;

(12) Combines; or

(13) Other major agricultural equipment and similar devices operated by mechanical power as distinguished from manpower. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.410 Erosion. 

“Erosion” means the process by which soil particles are mobilized and transported by natural agents such as wind, rainsplash, frost action or surface water flow. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.415 Erosion hazard areas.

“Erosion hazard areas” means those areas in the City underlain by soils that are subject to severe erosion when disturbed. Such soils include, but are not limited to, those classified as having a severe or very severe erosion hazard according to the USDA Soil Conservation Service, the 1973 King County Soils Survey or any subsequent revisions or addition by or to these sources. These soils include the following when they occur on slopes 15 percent or steeper:

(1) The Alderwood gravelly sandy loam (AgD);

(2) The Alderwood and Kitsap soils (AkF);

(3) The Beausite gravelly sandy loam (BeD and BeF);

(4) The Everett gravelly sandy loam (EvD);

(5) The Kitsap silt loam (KpD);

(6) The Ovall gravelly loam (OvD and OvF);

(7) The Ragnar fine sandy loam (RaD); and

(8) The Ragnar-Indianola Association (RdE). (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 2; Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.417 Erosion hazard near sensitive water body overlay.

The “erosion hazard near sensitive water body overlay” means an area within the City where sloped areas posing erosion hazards, or contributing to erosion hazards, that drain directly to lakes or streams of high resource value that are particularly sensitive to the impacts of increased erosion and the resulting sediment loads from development. The department of community development shall maintain a map of the boundaries of the erosion hazard near sensitive water bodies overlay district.

The erosion hazard near sensitive water body overlay is divided into two areas:

(1) The No-Disturbance Area. The no-disturbance area shall be established on the sloped portion of the special district overlay to prevent damage from erosion. The upslope boundary of the no-disturbance area lies at the first obvious break in slope from the upland plateau over onto the valley walls. For the purposes of locating the first obvious break in slope, the first obvious break shall generally be located at the top of the erosion hazard area associated with the slope. The downslope boundary of the no-disturbance area is the extent of those areas designated as erosion or landslide hazard areas. The department shall maintain maps, supported by LIDAR (light detection and ranging) data or other suitable technology, of the approximate location of the no-disturbance areas, which shall be subject to field verification for new development proposals.

(2) Properties Draining to the No-Disturbance Area. Properties draining to the no-disturbance area are within the erosion hazard near sensitive water body overlay that drain to the no-disturbance area. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.418 Eutrophic.

“Eutrophic” means a trophic status characterized by moderately high algal productivity, more serious oxygen depletion in the bottom waters, some recreational use impairment, summer chlorophyll a concentration greater than 10 micrograms/liter, a summer Secchi depth of less than two meters, and a winter total phosphorus concentration greater than 20 micrograms/liter. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.420 Evergreen.

“Evergreen” means a plant species with foliage that persists and remains green year-round. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.425 Examiner. 

“Examiner” means the hearing examiner as established by Chapter 20.10 SMC. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.427 Existing corridor.

“Existing corridors” include areas that have been previously cleared of native vegetation, have historically been used for transportation or recreation purposes, have currently little or low-quality vegetation and habitat value, or that contain improvements such as graded or filled areas. Examples include but are not limited to utility corridors, road or railroad rights-of-way, roadbeds and rail beds. (Ord. O2005-172 § 2)


21A.15.428 Existing grade.

“Existing grade” means the existing elevation of land prior to any cuts and fills or other disturbances, which may, at the discretion of the director, be determined by a topographic survey or soil sampling. (Ord. O2019-482 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.429 FAA.

“FAA” means the Federal Aviation Administration. (Ord. O2005-181 § 1)


21A.15.430 Fabric shop. 

“Fabric shop” means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of sewing supplies and accessories, including only uses located in SIC Industry Nos.: 

(1) 5949 – Sewing, needlework, and piece goods stores; and

(2) Awning shops, banner shops, and flag shops found in 5999. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.435 Facilities standard. 

“Facilities standard” means the space required by grade span, and taking into account the requirements of students with special needs, which is needed in order to fulfill the educational goals of the school district as identified in the district’s capital facilities plan. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.440 Factory-built commercial building. 

“Factory-built commercial building” means any structure that is either entirely or substantially prefabricated or assembled at a place other than a building site, and designed or used for nonresidential human occupancy. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.445 Fairground. 

“Fairground” means a site permanently designated and improved for holding a county fair, as provided in Chapters 15.76 and 36.37 RCW, or for holding similar events, including, but not limited to:

(1) Carnivals;

(2) Circuses;

(3) Expositions;

(4) Animal shows; and

(5) Exhibitions and/or demonstrations of farm and home products with accompanying entertainment and amusements. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.450 Family.

“Family” means one or more persons (but not more than six unrelated persons) living together as a single housekeeping unit. For the purposes of this code, children with familial status within the meaning of Title 42 United States Code, Section 360(k) and persons with handicaps within the meaning of Title 42 United States Code, Section 360(h) will not be counted as unrelated persons. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.452 Farmers’ market.

“Farmers’ market” means an outdoor market held in public spaces which allows farmers and other vendors to sell produce and other locally produced products directly to the public. (Ord. O2010-279 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.453 FCC.

“FCC” means the Federal Communications Commission. (Ord. O2005-181 § 1)


21A.15.455 Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) floodway.

“Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) floodway” means the channel of the stream and that portion of the adjoining floodplain that is necessary to contain and discharge the base flood flow without increasing the base flood elevation more than one foot. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.456 Feasible.

“Feasible” means that an action, such as a development project, mitigation, or preservation requirement, meets all of the following conditions:

(1) The action can be accomplished with technologies and methods that have been used in the past in similar circumstances, or studies or tests have demonstrated in similar circumstances that such approaches are currently available and likely to achieve the intended results;

(2) The action provides a reasonable likelihood of achieving its intended purpose; and

(3) The action does not physically preclude achieving the project’s primary intended legal use. In cases where these guidelines require certain actions unless they are infeasible, the burden of proving infeasibility is on the applicant. In determining an action’s infeasibility, the reviewing agency may weigh the action’s relative public costs and public benefits, considered in the short- and long-term time frames. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.457 Feed lines.

“Feed lines” means cables used as the interconnecting media between the transmission/receiving base station and the antenna. (Ord. O2005-181 § 1)


21A.15.460 Feed store.

“Feed store” means an establishment engaged in retail sale of supplies directly related to the day to day activities of agricultural production. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.465 Fence. 

“Fence” means a barrier for the purpose of enclosing space or separating lots, composed of:

(1) Masonry or concrete walls, excluding retaining walls; or

(2) Wood, metal, or concrete posts connected by boards, rails, panels, wire or mesh. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.467 Financial guarantee.

“Financial guarantee” means a form of financial security posted to ensure timely and proper completion of improvements, to ensure compliance with the interim Sammamish development code, and/or to warranty materials, workmanship of improvements, and design. Financial guarantees include assignments of funds, cash deposit, and surety bonds, and or other forms of financial security acceptable to the director. For the purposes of this title, the terms performance guarantee, maintenance guarantee, and defect guarantee are considered subcategories of financial guarantee. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.468 Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas.

“Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas” means those areas that are essential for the preservation of critical habitat and species. All areas within the City of Sammamish meeting one or more of the following criteria are designated wildlife habitat conservation areas:

(1) Areas with which state or federally designated endangered, threatened, and sensitive species have a primary association.

(a) Federally designated endangered and threatened species are those fish and wildlife species identified by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and the National Marine Fisheries Service that are in danger of extinction or are threatened to become endangered. The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and the National Marine Fisheries Service should be consulted as necessary for current listing status;

(b) State-designated endangered, threatened, and sensitive species are those fish and wildlife species native to the coastal region of the Pacific Northwest identified by the State Department of Fish and Wildlife, that are in danger of extinction, threatened to become endangered, vulnerable, or declining and are likely to become endangered or threatened in a significant portion of their range within the state without cooperative management or removal of threats. State-designated endangered, threatened, and sensitive species are periodically recorded in WAC 232-12-014 (state endangered species), and WAC 232-12-011 (state threatened and sensitive species). The State Department of Fish and Wildlife maintains the most current listing and should be consulted as necessary for current listing status;

(2) Wetlands, streams, and lakes;

(3) State natural area preserves and natural resource conservation areas. Natural area preserves and natural resource conservation areas are defined, established, and managed by the State Department of Natural Resources; and

(4) Fish and wildlife habitat corridors as defined in SMC 21A.15.469. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 2)


21A.15.469 Fish and wildlife habitat corridors.

“Fish and wildlife habitat corridors” means those corridors set aside and protected for preserving connections between habitats on development proposal sites that contain Type F or Np streams and/or wetlands with a high habitat score greater than or equal to eight on the Washington State Wetland Rating System for Western Washington (Department of Ecology 2014 or as revised) that are located within 200 feet of an on-site or off-site Type F or Np stream and/or wetland with a high habitat score greater than or equal to eight on the Washington State Wetland Rating System for Western Washington. Fish and wildlife habitat corridors do not increase stream buffers, except as required to provide a connection between two features as described above. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.469.1 Flag.

“Flag” means a fabric sheet of square, rectangular or triangular shape which is mounted on a pole, cable or rope at one end. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.469.2 Flag, government.

“Flag, government” means any flag or badge or insignia of the United States, state of Washington, King County, City of Sammamish, or official historic plaque of any governmental jurisdiction or agency. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.470 Flood fringe.

“Flood fringe” means that portion of the floodplain outside of the zero-rise floodway that is covered by floodwaters during the base flood, generally associated with standing water rather than rapidly flowing water. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.475 Flood hazard areas.

“Flood hazard areas” means those areas in the City of Sammamish subject to inundation by the base flood and those areas subject to risk from channel relocation or stream meander including, but not limited to, streams, lakes, wetlands, and closed depressions. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.480 Flood insurance rate map.

“Flood insurance rate map” means the official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated some areas of flood hazard. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.485 Flood insurance study for King County.

“Flood insurance study for King County” means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles and the flood insurance rate map. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.490 Flood protection elevation. 

“Flood protection elevation” means an elevation that is one foot above the base flood elevation. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.495 Floodplain.

“Floodplain” means the total area subject to inundation by the base flood. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.500 Floodproofing.

“Floodproofing” means adaptations that will make a structure that is below the flood protection elevation substantially impermeable to the passage of water and resistant to hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads including the impacts of buoyancy. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.505 Floodway, zero-rise. 

“Floodway, zero-rise” means the channel of a stream and that portion of the adjoining floodplain which is necessary to contain and discharge the base flood flow without any measurable increase in flood height. A “measurable increase in base flood height” means a calculated upward rise in the base flood elevation, equal to or greater than .01 foot, resulting from a comparison of existing conditions and changed conditions directly attributable to development in the floodplain. This definition is broader than that of the FEMA floodway, but always includes the FEMA floodway. The boundaries of the 100-year floodplain, as shown on the flood insurance study for King County, are considered the boundaries of the zero-rise floodway unless otherwise delineated by a sensitive area special study. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.510 Florist shop.

“Florist shop” means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of flowers and plants, including only uses located in SIC Industry Nos.: 

(1) 5992 – Florists; and

(2) 5999 – Artificial flowers. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.515 Flush-mounted.

“Flush-mounted” means any antenna or antenna array attached directly to the face of the antenna support structure, structure, or building. Where a maximum flush-mounting distance is given, that distance shall be measured from the outside edge of the support structure or building to the inside edge of the antenna. (Ord. O2005-181 § 1)




21A.15.520 Forest practice.

“Forest practice” means any activity regulated by the Washington Department of Natural Resources in WAC Title 222 or Chapter 76.09 RCW for which a forest practice permit is required, together with:

(1) Fire prevention, detection and suppression; and

(2) Slash burning or removal. (Ord. O2009-249 § 1; Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.525 Forest product sales.

“Forest product sales” means the sale of goods produced, extracted, consumed, gathered or harvested from a forest including, but not limited to:

(1) Trees;

(2) Wood chips;

(3) Logs;

(4) Fuel wood;

(5) Cones;

(6) Christmas trees;

(7) Berries;

(8) Herbs; or

(9) Mushrooms. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.530 Forest research.

“Forest research” means the performance of scientific studies relating to botany, hydrology, silviculture, biology and other branches of science in relation to management of forest lands, including only uses located in SIC Industry Nos.:

(1) 8731 – Commercial physical and biological research;

(2) 8733 – Noncommercial research organizations; and

(3) 8734 – Testing laboratories. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.532 Frequently flooded areas.

“Frequently flooded areas” means those lands in the City in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year and those lands that provide important flood storage, conveyance, and attenuation functions, as determined by the City in accordance with WAC 365-190-080(3). Frequently flooded areas perform important hydrologic functions and may present a risk to persons and property. Frequently flooded areas include all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the City of Sammamish. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 2)


21A.15.535 Furniture and home furnishings store. 

“Furniture and home furnishings store” means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of household furniture and furnishings for the home, including only uses located in SIC Major Group and Industry Nos.:

(1) 57 – Home furniture, furnishings, and equipment stores, except Industry Group No. 573; and

(2) Baby carriages, cake decorating supplies, hot tubs, picture frames (ready-made), swimming pools (above-ground, not site-built), telephone stores and typewriter stores found in 5999. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.540 General business service.

“General business service” means an establishment engaged in providing services to businesses or individuals, with no outdoor storage or fabrication, including only uses located in SIC Major Group Nos.:

(1) 60 – Depository institutions;

(2) 61 – Nondepository credit institutions;

(3) 62 – Security and commodity brokers, dealers, exchanges, and services;

(4) 63 – Insurance carriers;

(5) 65 – Real estate, except 653 (Real estate agents and directors);

(6) 67 – Holding and other investment offices;

(7) 7299 – Miscellaneous personal services, not elsewhere classified;

(8) 73 – Business services, except Industry Group and Industry Nos.:

(a) 7312 – Outdoor advertising services; and

(9) 86 – Membership organizations, including administrative offices of organized religions found in 8661, but excluding churches and places of worship. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.545 Geologist. 

“Geologist” means a professional who holds a current geologist license from the Washington State Geologist Licensing Board. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.550 Geotechnical engineer.

“Geotechnical engineer” means a practicing geotechnical/civil engineer licensed as a professional civil engineer by the state of Washington who has at least four years of professional employment as a geotechnical engineer. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.555 Golf course.

“Golf course” means a recreational facility, under public or private ownership, designed and developed for golf activities with accessory uses including, but not limited to:

(1) A driving range;

(2) Miniature golf;

(3) Pro shops;

(4) Caddyshack buildings;

(5) Swimming pools, tennis courts and other related recreational facilities;

(6) Restaurants;

(7) Office and meeting rooms; and

(8) Related storage facilities. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.560 Grade span. 

“Grade span” means the categories into which a district groups its grades of students; i.e., elementary, middle or junior high school, and high school. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.565 Grading.

“Grading” means any excavation, filling, removing the duff layer or any combination thereof. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.570 Grazing area.

“Grazing area” means any open land area used to pasture livestock in which suitable forage is maintained over 80 percent of the area at all times of the year. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.575 Groundcover.

“Groundcover” means living plants designed to grow low to the ground (generally one foot or less) and intended to stabilize soils and protect against erosion. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.580 Hazardous household substance. 

“Hazardous household substance” means a substance as defined in RCW 70.105.010. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.585 Hazardous substance. 

“Hazardous substance” means a substance as defined in RCW 70.105.010. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.586 Hazardous trees.

“Hazardous trees” means those trees with a structural defect, combination of defects or disease resulting in a structural defect that, under the normal range of environmental conditions at the site, will result in the loss of a major structural component of the tree in a manner that will:

(1) Damage a residential structure or accessory structure, place of employment or public assembly or approved parking for a residential structure or accessory structure or place of employment or public assembly;

(2) Damage an approved road or utility facility; or

(3) Prevent emergency access in the case of medical hardship. (Ord. O2005-193 § 2)


21A.15.590 Heavy equipment and truck repair. 

“Heavy equipment and truck repair” means the repair and maintenance of self-powered, self-propelled or towed mechanical devices, equipment and vehicles used for commercial purposes, such as tandem axle trucks, graders, backhoes, tractor trailers, cranes, lifts, but excluding automobiles and pick-up trucks under 10,000 pounds, recreational vehicles, boats and their trailers. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.595 Helistop. 

“Helistop” means an area on a roof or on the ground used for the takeoff and landing of helicopters for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or cargo but not including fueling service, hangers, maintenance or overhaul facilities. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.596 High voltage electrical transmission tower.

“High voltage electrical transmission tower” means a structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of overhead support of high voltage transmission lines. For purposes of this term, “high voltage transmission lines” shall generally mean and refer to a 68 kV or greater electric transmission line. (Ord. O2010-281 § 2)


21A.15.597 Historic resource.

“Historic resource” means a district, site, building, structure or object significant in national, state or local history, architecture, archaeology, and culture. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.600 Hobby, toy, and game shop. 

“Hobby, toy, and game shop” means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of toys, games, hobby and craft kits, including only uses located in SIC Industry Nos.:

(1) 5945 – Hobby, toy and game shops; and 

(2) 5999 – Autograph and philatelist supply stores, coin shops, and stamps, philatelist-retail (except mail order). (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.605 Home business.

“Home business” means a business or profession which is incidental to the use of a residential dwelling unit by a resident of the dwelling unit. Home businesses do not include uses where the use of the premises as a dwelling unit is secondary to the operation of the business or profession. In no case shall the area used for a home business exceed 50 percent of the area of the residential dwelling unit.

The home business use definition does not include other residential accessory uses identified in Chapter 21A.20 SMC and defined in Chapter 21A.15 SMC, including but not limited to:

(1) Bed and breakfast guesthouses;

(2) Senior citizen assisted housing;

(3) Daycare 1; and

(4) Specialized instructional schools.

Home businesses are further subclassified as follows:

(5) Home business, Type 1 – conducted within a building permitted within a residential zone and that will not result in odors nor obvious visible or audible business activity outside of the building. Type 1 home businesses are generally indistinguishable from other dwelling units in the vicinity.

(6) Home business, Type 2 – conducted within a building permitted within a residential zone and that results in limited odors, and some obvious visible or audible business activity outside of the building. Type 2 home businesses may be characterized by the following types of activities: significantly increased deliveries beyond regular residential mail delivery activity; significantly increased client or customer visitation to the site; and/or visual or audible activity visible from adjacent properties or the street. Home businesses that cannot meet the standards established in SMC 21A.65.050(4) for Type 1 home businesses, are Type 2 home businesses and subject to the standards of SMC 21A.65.050(5). Home businesses engaged in a use that requires a federal or state license or permit, in addition to a business license, are Type 2 home businesses (example: home businesses engaged in the production of alcohol such that a liquor license is required). (Ord. O2012-327 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.610 Home occupation. 

Repealed by Ord. O2012-327. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.612 Homeless encampment.

“Homeless encampment” means a site for a group of homeless persons temporarily residing on a site, either out of doors or in a building. (Ord. O2014-372 § 2)


21A.15.615 Household pets. 

“Household pets” means small animals that are kept within a dwelling unit. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.620 Hydroelectric generation facility. 

“Hydroelectric generation facility” means an establishment for the generation of electricity using water sources. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.623 Hypereutrophic.

“Hypereutrophic” means a trophic status characterized by high algal productivity, intense algal blooms, fish kills due to oxygen depletion in the bottom waters, frequent recreational use impairment, summer chlorophyll a concentration greater than 10 micrograms/liter, a summer Secchi depth generally less than two meters, and a winter total phosphorus concentration greater than 30 micrograms/liter. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.625 Impervious surface.

“Impervious surface,” for purposes of this title, means a hard surface area that either prevents or retards the entry of water into the soil mantle as under natural conditions before development; or that causes water to run off the surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate of flow compared to the flow present under natural conditions prior to development. (Ord. O2016-429 § 2 (Att. B); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.630 Improved public roadways.

“Improved public roadways” means public road rights-of-way that have been improved with at least two travel lanes and are maintained by either the City of Sammamish or the state of Washington. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.635 Individual transportation and taxi. 

“Individual transportation and taxi” means an establishment engaged in furnishing individual or small group transportation by motor vehicle, including only uses located in SIC Industry Group and Industry Nos.:

(1) 412 – Taxicabs; and

(2) 4119 – Local passenger transportation, not elsewhere classified. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.637 Infiltration rate.

“Infiltration rate” means the rate of water entry into the soil expressed in inches per hour. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.640 Interim recycling facility.

“Interim recycling facility” means a site or establishment engaged in collection or treatment of recyclable materials, which is not the final disposal site, and including:

(1) Drop boxes;

(2) Source-separated, organic waste processing facilities; and

(3) Collection, separation and shipment of glass, metal, paper or other recyclables. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.641 Interlocal agreement.

“Interlocal agreement” is a legal contract between two or more local jurisdictions (cities and counties) that specifies the conditions under which development rights may be transferred (typically from an unincorporated county into an incorporated city). Interlocal agreements must be endorsed by the legislative bodies of both jurisdictions. (Ord. O2011-297 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.642 Irrigation efficiency. 

“Irrigation efficiency” means the coefficient of the amount of water beneficially used divided by the amount of water applied. This coefficient is derived from actual measurements and an evaluation of the general characteristics of the type of irrigation system and management practices proposed. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.645 Jail.

“Jail” means a facility operated by a governmental agency, designed, staffed and used for the incarceration of persons for the purposes of punishment, correction and rehabilitation following conviction of an offense. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.655 Jewelry store.

“Jewelry store” means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of a variety of jewelry products, including only uses located in SIC Industry Nos.:

(1) 5944 – Jewelry stores; and

(2) Gem stones and rock specimens found in 5999. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.658 Joint use driveway. 

“Joint use driveway” means a jointly owned and/or maintained vehicular access to two residential properties. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.660 Kennel. 

“Kennel” means a place where adult dogs are temporarily boarded for compensation, whether or not for training. An adult dog is one of either sex, altered or unaltered, that has reached the age of six months. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.662 Kitchen or kitchen facility.

“Kitchen or kitchen facility” means an area within a building intended for the preparation and storage of food and containing:

(1) An appliance for the refrigeration of food;

(2) An appliance for the cooking or heating of food; and

(3) A sink. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.663 Lake management plan.

“Lake management plan” means the plan (and supporting documents as appropriate) describing the lake management recommendations and requirements. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.664 Lakes.

“Lakes” means an open body of surface water, not including streams or rivers, that is 20 acres or greater in total area. (Ord. O2005-193 § 2)


21A.15.665 Landfill. 

“Landfill” means a disposal site or part of a site at which refuse is deposited. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.667 Landscape water features. 

“Landscape water features” means a pond, pool or fountain used as a decorative component of a development. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.670 Landscaping.

“Landscaping” means live vegetative materials required for a development. Said materials provided along the boundaries of a development site are referred to as perimeter landscaping. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.675 Landslide.

“Landslide” means episodic downslope movement of a mass including, but not limited to, soil, rock or snow. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.680 Landslide hazard areas.

“Landslide hazard areas” means those areas in the City of Sammamish potentially subject to risk of mass movement due to a combination of geologic, topographic, and hydrologic factors. These areas are typically susceptible to landslides because of a combination of factors including: bedrock, soil, slope gradient, slope aspect, geologic structure, groundwater, or other factors. Landslide hazard areas include the following:

(1) Areas of historic failures, such as:

(a) Those areas delineated by the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Natural Resources Conservation Service as having a “severe” limitation for building site development;

(b) Areas designated as quaternary slumps, earthflows, mudflows, or landslides on maps published by the U.S. Geological Survey or Department of Natural Resources;

(2) Areas that have shown movement during the Holocene epoch, from 10,000 years ago to the present, or which are underlain by mass wastage debris from that epoch;

(3) Any area with all three of the following characteristics:

(a) Slopes steeper than 15 percent; and

(b) Hillsides intersecting geologic contacts with a relatively permeable sediment overlying a relatively impermeable sediment or bedrock; and

(c) Springs or groundwater seepage;

(4) Areas with a slope of 40 percent or steeper and with a vertical relief of 10 or more feet except areas composed of consolidated rock. A slope is delineated by establishing its toe and top, as defined in SMC 21A.15.1230, and measured by averaging the inclination over at least 10 feet of vertical relief;

(5) Slopes that are parallel or subparallel to planes of weakness (such as bedding planes, joint systems, and fault planes) in subsurface materials;

(6) Slopes having gradients steeper than 80 percent subject to rock fall during seismic shaking;

(7) Areas potentially unstable because of rapid stream incision, stream bank erosion or undercutting by wave action; and

(8) Landslide hazard areas do not include those areas composed of slopes greater than 40 percent that were created from a previously non-landslide hazard area through legal grading activity and that are confirmed to be stable by a qualified professional. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 2; Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.681 Landslide hazard drainage area.

Recodified as 13.10.365 by Ord. O2019-486. (Ord. O2016-429 § 2 (Att. B))


21A.15.683 Least visually obtrusive profile.

“Least visually obtrusive profile” means the design of a wireless communication facility intended to present a visual profile that is the minimum profile necessary for the facility to properly function. (Ord. O2005-181 § 1)


21A.15.685 Level of service (LOS), traffic.

“Level of service (LOS), traffic” means the City’s defined performance standards for its adopted concurrency intersections, road corridors, and road segments, as defined in the City’s Comprehensive Plan and development regulations. (Ord. O2019-484 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. O2018-466 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.690 Light equipment.

“Light equipment” means hand-held tools and construction equipment, such as chain saws, wheelbarrows, and post-hole diggers. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.691 Lighting fixtures, security or flood.

“Security or floodlighting fixtures” are generally intended to provide lighting that is designed and used to discourage crime and undesirable activity. Security or floodlighting fixtures are characterized by a broad intense beam of artificial light directed to illuminate a large area of a site. (Ord. O2016-408 § 1 (Att. A))

*Code reviser’s note: Ord. 2016-408 adds this section as SMC 21A.15.685; it has been renumbered to prevent duplication and preserve alphabetization.


21A.15.692 Linear activity or development.

A development or activity of a linear nature is one that usually involves multiple parcels and/or that runs along a corridor or pathway defined in an adopted plan. Linear development and activities may be straight, curved or a combination of both. Examples include roads, trails, sidewalks, utility corridors, and other transportation facilities such as bikeways and railroads. (Ord. O2005-172 § 2)


21A.15.693 Liquor and Cannabis Board (LCB).

“Liquor and Cannabis Board (LCB)” means the Washington State Liquor and Cannabis Board which carries out Washington liquor, marijuana, and tobacco laws and regulations. (Ord. O2016-406 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.695 Livestock.

“Livestock” means grazing animals kept either in open fields or structures for training, boarding, home use, sales, or breeding and production, including but not limited to:

(1) Cattle;

(2) Riding and draft horses;

(3) Hogs, excluding pigs weighing under 120 pounds and standing 20 inches or less at the shoulder that are kept as pets or small animals;

(4) Sheep; and

(5) Goats. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.700 Livestock, large.

“Livestock, large” means cattle, horses, and other livestock generally weighing over 500 pounds. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.705 Livestock, small. 

“Livestock, small” means hogs, excluding pigs weighing under 120 pounds and standing 20 inches or less at the shoulder that are kept as household pets or small animals, sheep, goats, miniature horses, llamas, alpaca, and other livestock generally weighing under 500 pounds. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.710 Livestock sales.

“Livestock sales” means the sale of livestock but not including auctions. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.715 Loading space.

“Loading space” means a space for the temporary parking of a vehicle while loading or unloading cargo or passengers. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.725 Lot. 

“Lot” means a physically separate and distinct parcel of property and on lakefront properties above ordinary high water mark, which has been created pursuant to SMC Title 19, Subdivisions, or state law. (Ord. O2009-249 § 1; Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.726 Lot coverage.

“Lot coverage” is the amount of a lot that a building footprint may cover. Lot coverage is expressed as a percent of the total lot area that a building or buildings may cover; for example, a 45 percent lot coverage standard indicates that 45 percent of the area of a lot may be covered by a building or combination of buildings. (Ord. O2019-482 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-407 § 1 (Att. A). Formerly 21A.15.727)


21A.15.726.1 Lot line, front yard.

“Lot line, front yard” means the property boundary or property line abutting a street right-of-way. For property that does not abut a street right-of-way and abuts an access easement or private street the front yard is that property boundary or property line from which the lot gains primary access. (Ord. O2019-482 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.727 Lot line, rear yard.

“Lot line, rear yard” means the property boundary or property line opposite the front yard lot line. Provided, lots with more than one front yard, or triangular shaped lots with three sides, shall have no rear yard lot line. (Ord. O2019-482 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.728 Lot line, side yard.

“Lot line, side yard” means the property boundary or property line that delineates the property boundaries along the side portion of the property. (Ord. O2019-482 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.730 Lot line, interior. 

“Lot line, interior” means lot lines that delineate property boundaries along those portions of the property that do not abut a street. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.731 Low impact development.

“Low impact development” (LID) is a storm water and land use management strategy that strives to mimic predisturbance hydrological processes of infiltration, filtration, storage, evaporation and transpiration by emphasizing conservation, use of on-site natural features, site planning, and distributed storm water management practices that are integrated into a project design. (Ord. O2016-429 § 2 (Att. B); Ord. O2008-236 § 1)


21A.15.732 Maintenance.

“Maintenance” means those usual acts to prevent a decline, lapse or cessation from a lawfully established condition or use. Maintenance may include, but is not limited to, pruning, plant material replaced with alternate plant material, hardscape replaced with alternate hardscape, hardscape replaced with plant material. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.733 Managing agency.

“Managing agency” means an organization that is responsible for organizing and managing a homeless encampment. (Note: The managing agency may be the same entity as the sponsor.) (Ord. O2014-372 § 2)


21A.15.734 Marijuana or marihuana.

“Marijuana” or “marihuana” means all parts of the plant cannabis, whether growing or not, with a THC concentration greater than 0.3 percent on a dry weight basis; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin. The term does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. (Ord. O2014-376 § 3 (Att. A))


21A.15.734.1 Marijuana concentrates.

“Marijuana concentrates” means products consisting wholly or in part of the resin extracted from any part of the plant cannabis and having a THC concentration greater than 10 percent. (Ord. O2016-406 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.735 Marijuana processor.

“Marijuana processor” means a person or entity licensed by the Washington State Liquor and Cannabis Board (“LCB”) to process marijuana into marijuana concentrates, useable marijuana and marijuana-infused products, package and label marijuana concentrates, useable marijuana and marijuana-infused products for sale in retail outlets, and sell marijuana concentrates, useable marijuana and marijuana-infused products at wholesale to marijuana retailers. (Ord. O2016-406 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2014-376 § 3 (Att. A))


21A.15.736 Marijuana producer.

“Marijuana producer” means a person or entity licensed by the LCB to produce and sell marijuana at wholesale to marijuana processors and other marijuana producers. (Ord. O2016-406 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2014-376 § 3 (Att. A))


21A.15.737 Marijuana-infused products.

“Marijuana-infused products” means products that contain marijuana or marijuana extracts, are intended for human use, are derived from marijuana, and have a THC concentration no greater than 10 percent. The term “marijuana-infused products” does not include either marijuana concentrates or useable marijuana. (Ord. O2016-406 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2014-376 § 3 (Att. A))


21A.15.738 Marijuana retailer.

“Marijuana retailer” means a person or entity licensed by the LCB to sell marijuana concentrates, useable marijuana, and marijuana-infused products in a retail outlet. (Ord. O2016-406 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2014-376 § 3 (Att. A))


21A.15.739 Marina.

“Marina” means an establishment providing docking, moorage space and related activities limited to the provisioning or minor repair of pleasure boats and yachts; and accessory facilities including, but not limited to:

(1) Showers;

(2) Toilets; and

(3) Self-service laundries. (Ord. O2014-376 § 3 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10. Formerly 21A.15.735)


21A.15.740 Master telecommunications plan.

“Master telecommunications plan” means a plan developed to establish public policy and applicable development standards related to the deployment of wireless telecommunications infrastructure. (Ord. O2014-376 § 3 (Att. A); Ord. O2014-372 § 2; Ord. O2005-181 § 1. Formerly 21A.15.734)


21A.15.741 Material error. 

“Material error” means substantive information upon which a permit decision is based that is submitted in error or is omitted at the time of permit application. (Ord. O2014-376 § 3 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10. Formerly 21A.15.740)


21A.15.742 Medium-speed electric vehicle.

“Medium-speed electric vehicle” means a self-propelled, electrically powered four-wheeled motor vehicle, equipped with a roll cage or crush-proof body design, whose speed attainable in one mile is more than 25 miles per hour but not more than 35 miles per hour and otherwise meets or exceeds the federal regulations set forth in 49 CFR 571.500. (Ord. O2011-300 § 1 (Att. A))




21A.15.743 Mesotrophic.

“Mesotrophic” means a trophic status characterized by moderate algal productivity, oxygen depletion in the bottom waters, usually no recreational use impairment, summer chlorophyll a concentration averaging four to 10 micrograms/liter, a summer Secchi depth of two to five meters, and a winter total phosphorus concentration ranging from 10 to 20 micrograms/liter. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.744 Microclimate.

“Microclimate” means a climatic condition in a relatively small area, within a few feet above and below the Earth’s surface and within canopies of vegetation. Microclimates are affected by such factors as temperature, humidity, wind and turbulence, dew, frost, heat balance, evaporation, the nature of the soil and vegetation, the local topography, latitude, elevation, and season. Weather and climate are sometimes influenced by microclimatic conditions, especially by variations in surface characteristics. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.745 Microwave.

“Microwave” means electromagnetic waves with a frequency range of 300 megahertz (MHz) to 300 gigahertz (GHz). (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.750 Mitigation. 

Repealed by Ord. O2005-193. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.751 Mitigation bank.

“Mitigation bank” means a property that has been protected in perpetuity, and approved by appropriate City, state, and federal agencies expressly for the purpose of providing compensatory mitigation in advance of authorized impacts through restoration, creation, and/or enhancement of wetlands and, in exceptional circumstances, preservation of adjacent wetlands, wetland buffers, and/or other aquatic resources. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.752 Mitigation banking.

“Mitigation banking” means a system for providing compensatory mitigation in advance of authorized wetland impacts of development in the City in which credits are generated through restoration, creation, and/or enhancement of wetlands and, in exceptional circumstances, preservation of adjacent wetlands, wetland buffers, and/or other aquatic resources. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.755 Mobile home.

“Mobile home” means a structure transportable in one or more sections; that in the traveling mode is eight body feet or more in width or 32 body feet or more in length; or when erected on site is 320 square feet or more in area; built on a permanent chassis; designed to be used as a dwelling unit, with or without permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities; which contains plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems; and shall include any structure that meets all the requirements of this section, or of Chapter 296-150B WAC, except the size requirements for which the manufacturer voluntarily complies with the standards and files the certification required by the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.760 Mobile home park. 

“Mobile home park” means a development with two or more improved pads or spaces designed to accommodate mobile homes. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.765 Monitoring.

“Monitoring” means evaluating the impacts of development proposals on biologic, hydrologic, and geologic systems and assessing the performance of required mitigation through the collection and analysis of data for the purpose of understanding and documenting changes in natural ecosystems, functions and features including, but not limited to, gathering baseline data. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.770 Monuments, tombstones, and gravestones sales. 

“Monuments, tombstones, and gravestones sales” means the retail sale of custom stonework products including only uses located in SIC Industry No. 5599, Monuments, finished to custom order, tombstones and gravestones finished. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.775 Motor vehicle, boat, and mobile home dealer. 

“Motor vehicle, boat, and mobile home dealer” means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of new and/or used automobiles, motor homes, motorcycles, trailers, boats, or mobile homes, including only uses located in SIC Major Group and Industry Group Nos.:

(1) 55 – Automotive dealers and gasoline service stations, except:

(a) 553 – Auto and home supply stores;

(b) 554 – Gasoline service stations; and

(2) Aircraft dealers found in 5599:

(a) 527 – Mobile home dealers; and

(b) Yacht brokers found in 7389. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.782 Mulch.

“Mulch” means any material such as leaves, bark, straw left loose and applied to the soil surface to reduce evaporation. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.790 Native vegetation.

“Native vegetation” means vegetation comprised of plant species, other than noxious weeds, which are indigenous to the coastal region of the Pacific Northwest and that reasonably could have been expected to naturally occur on the site. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 2; Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.794 Naturalized species.

Repealed by Ord. O2013-350. (Ord. O2011-300 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10. Formerly 21A.15.795)


21A.15.795 Naturally occurring ponds.

Repealed by Ord. O2013-350. (Ord. O2011-300 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 2. Formerly 21A.15.796)


21A.15.796 Neighborhood electric vehicle.

“Neighborhood electric vehicle” means a self-propelled, electrically powered four-wheeled motor vehicle whose speed attainable in one mile is more than 20 miles per hour and not more than 25 miles per hour and conforms to federal regulations 49 CFR 571.500. (Ord. O2011-300 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.797 Net buildable area.

“Net buildable area” means the “site area” less the following areas:

(1) Areas within a project site that are required to be dedicated for public rights-of-way in excess of 60 feet in width;

(2) Sensitive areas and their buffers to the extent they are required by the City to remain undeveloped;

(3) Areas required for storm water control facilities other than facilities that are completely underground, including but not limited to retention/ detention ponds, biofiltration swales and setbacks from such ponds and swales;

(4) Areas required by the City to be dedicated or reserved as on-site recreation areas;

(5) Regional utility corridors;

(6) Other areas, excluding setbacks, required by the City to remain undeveloped. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.798 Nonelectric vehicle.

“Nonelectric vehicle” means any motor vehicle that does not meet the definition of “electric vehicle,” SMC 21A.15.384. (Ord. O2011-300 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.799 Nonconcealed WCF.

“Nonconcealed WCF” means an antenna or antenna array, antenna support structure, base station, and feed lines that are readily identifiable as such. (Ord. O2005-181 § 1)


21A.15.800 Nonconformance.

“Nonconformance” means any use, improvement or structure established in conformance with the City’s rules and regulations in effect at the time of establishment that no longer conforms to the range of uses permitted in the site’s current zone or to the current development standards of the code due to changes in the code or its application to the subject property. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.810 Non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER).

“Non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER)” means electromagnetic radiation of low photon energy unable to cause ionization. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.815 Noxious weed. 

“Noxious weed” means any plant that is highly destructive, competitive, or difficult to control by cultural or chemical practices, limited to those plants on the state noxious weed list contained in Chapter 16-750 WAC. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.817 Off-street required parking lot.

“Off-street required parking lot” means parking facilities constructed to meet the off-street parking requirements of Chapter 21A.40 SMC for land uses located on a lot separate from the parking facilities. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.818 Oligotrophic.

“Oligotrophic” means a trophic status characterized by low algal productivity, algal blooms are rare, water clarity is high, all recreational uses unimpaired, summer chlorophyll a concentration average less than four micrograms/liter, a summer Secchi depth greater than five meters, and a winter total phosphorus concentration ranging from zero to 10 micrograms/liter. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.820 Open-work fence.

“Open-work fence” means a fence in which the solid portions are evenly distributed and constitute no more than 50 percent of the total surface area. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.825 Ordinary high water mark.

“Ordinary high water mark” means the mark found by examining the bed and banks of a stream, lake, or tidal water and ascertaining where the presence and action of waters are so common and long maintained in ordinary years as to mark upon the soil a vegetative character distinct from that of the abutting upland. In any area where the ordinary high water mark cannot be found, the line of mean high water shall substitute. In any area where neither can be found, the top of the channel bank shall substitute. In braided channels and alluvial fans, the ordinary high water mark or line of mean high water shall be measured so as to include the entire stream feature. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.830 Outdoor performance center.

“Outdoor performance center” means an establishment for the performing arts with open-air seating for audiences. Such establishments may include related services such as food and beverage sales and other concessions. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.832 Overspray. 

“Overspray” means irrigation water applied beyond the landscape area. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.835 Park. 

“Park” means a developed or undeveloped site designed or developed for recreational use by the public including, but not limited to:

(1) Indoor facilities, such as:

(a) Gymnasiums;

(b) Swimming pools; or

(c) Activity centers;

(2) Outdoor facilities, such as:

(a) Playfields;

(b) Fishing areas;

(c) Picnic and related outdoor activity areas; or

(d) Approved campgrounds;

(3) Areas and trails for:

(a) Hikers;

(b) Equestrians;

(c) Bicyclists; or

(d) Off-road recreational vehicle users;

(4) Recreation space areas required under SMC 21A.30.140;

(5) Play areas required under SMC 21A.30.160; and

(6) Facilities for on-site maintenance. (Ord. O2005-193 § 2; Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.840 Park service area. 

“Park service area” means established by the department, within which the dedications of land and fees received from new residential developments for the benefit of residents within such service area. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.845 Parking lot aisle.

“Parking lot aisle” means that portion of the off-street parking area used exclusively for the maneuvering and circulation of motor vehicles and in which parking is prohibited. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.850 Parking lot unit depth.

“Parking lot unit depth” means the linear distance within which one parking aisle is flanked by accessible rows of parking stalls as measured perpendicular to the parking aisle. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.855 Parking space. 

“Parking space” means an area accessible to vehicles, improved, maintained and used for the sole purpose of parking a motor vehicle. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.860 Parking space angle. 

“Parking space angle” means reference line, generally the property line or center line of an aisle, at which motor vehicles are to be parked. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.862 Partially developed.

“Partially developed” means a lot or lots where a portion of the lot or lots has been improved with a single-family home and associated appurtenances consistent with the underlying zoning designation, and the remaining portion of the lot or lots is unimproved and retains additional development right(s). (Ord. O2011-297 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.865 Party of record.

“Party of record” means a person who has submitted written comments, testified, asked to be notified or is the sponsor of a petition entered as part of the official City record on a specific development proposal. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.870 Peak hour.

“Peak hour” means the hour during the morning or afternoon with the highest traffic volumes for a particular roadway or intersection. (Ord. O2018-466 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.875 Permanent school facilities.

“Permanent school facilities” means facilities of a school district with a fixed foundation that are not relocatable facilities. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.880 Personal medical supply store. 

“Personal medical supply store” means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of eyeglasses, contact lenses, hearing aids, and artificial limbs, including only uses located in SIC Industry Nos.: 

(1) 5995 – Optical goods stores; and

(2) 5999 – Hearing aids and orthopedic and artificial limb stores. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.885 Pet shop.

“Pet shop” means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of pets, small animals, pet supplies, or grooming of pets, including only uses located in SIC Industry No. 5999, Pet shops. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.886 Phosphorus.

“Phosphorus” means elemental phosphorus and shall be measured as total phosphorus. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.887 Phosphorus concentration.

“Phosphorus concentration” means the mass of phosphorus per liquid volume. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.888 Phosphorus loading.

“Phosphorus loading” means the total mass of phosphorus per time basis. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.890 Photographic and electronic shop. 

“Photographic and electronic shop” means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of cameras and photographic supplies, and a variety of household electronic equipment, including only uses located in SIC Industry No.:

(1) 5946 – Camera and photographic supply stores;

(2) 5999 – Binoculars and telescopes;

(3) 5731 – Radio, television, and consumer electronics stores; and

(4) 5734 – Computer and computer software stores. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.895 Plant associations of infrequent occurrence. 

“Plant associations of infrequent occurrence” means one or more plant species of a landform type that does not often occur in the City because of the rarity of the habitat and/or the species involved or for other botanical or environmental reasons. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.896 Plant factor.

“Plant factor” means a factor that when multiplied by reference evapotranspiration estimates the amount of water used by plants. (Ord. O2011-300 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10. Formerly 21A.15.897)


21A.15.897 Plug-in hybrid electric vehicle (PHEV).

“Plug-in hybrid electric vehicle (PHEV)” means an electric vehicle that (1) contains an internal combustion engine and also allows power to be delivered to drive wheels by an electric motor; (2) charges its battery by connecting to the grid or other off-board electric source; (3) may additionally be able to sustain battery charge using an on-board internal-combustion-driven generator; and (4) has the ability to travel short distances powered entirely by electricity. (Ord. O2011-300 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.898 Ponds, naturally occurring.

Repealed by Ord. O2013-350. (Ord. O2005-193 § 2)


21A.15.899 Potable water. 

“Potable water” means water suitable for human consumption. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.900 Private. 

“Private” means solely or primarily for the use of residents or occupants of the premises; e.g., a noncommercial garage used solely by residents or their guests is a private garage. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.905 Private storm water management facility.

“Private storm water management facility” means a surface water control structure installed by a project proponent to retain, detain or otherwise limit runoff from an individual or group of developed sites specifically served by such structure. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.910 Professional office.

“Professional office” means an office used as a place of business by licensed professionals, or persons in other generally recognized professions, which use training or knowledge of a technical, scientific, or other academic discipline as opposed to manual skills, and that does not involve outside storage or fabrication, or on-site sale or transfer of commodities, including only the following SIC Major Group and Industry Nos.:

(1) 64 – Insurance agents, brokers and service;

(2) 653 – Real estate agents and directors;

(3) 7291 – Income tax return preparation services;

(4) 81 – Legal services;

(5) 871 – Engineering, architectural and surveying services;

(6) 872 – Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping services; and

(7) 874 – Management and public relations services. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.915 Public agency. 

“Public agency” means any agency, political subdivision, or unit of local government of this state including, but not limited to, municipal corporations, special purpose districts and local service districts, any agency of the state of Washington, the United States or any state thereof or any Indian tribe recognized as such by the federal government. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.920 Public agency animal control facility. 

“Public agency animal control facility” means a facility for the impoundment and disposal of stray or abandoned small animals. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.925 Public agency archive.

“Public agency archive” means a facility for the enclosed storage of public agency documents or related materials, excluding storage of vehicles, equipment, or similar materials. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.930 Public agency or utility office. 

“Public agency or utility office” means an office for the administration of any governmental or utility activity or program, with no outdoor storage and including, but not limited to uses located in SIC Major Group, Industry Group and Industry Nos.:

(1) 91 – Executive, legislative, and general government, except finance;

(2) 93 – Public finance, taxation, and monetary policy;

(3) 94 – Administration of human resource programs;

(4) 95 – Administration of environmental quality and housing program;

(5) 96 – Administration of economic programs;

(6) 972 – International affairs;

(7) 9222 – Legal counsel and prosecution; and

(8) 9229 – Public order and safety. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.935 Public agency or utility yard.

“Public agency or utility yard” means a facility for open or enclosed storage, repair, and maintenance of vehicles, equipment, or related materials owned by a public agency or public utility, excluding document storage. (Ord. O2005-170 § 1; Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.936 Public agency or utility yard, satellite.

“Satellite public agency or utility yard” means a small facility for open or enclosed storage and limited maintenance of vehicles or equipment used to maintain specific neighborhoods, parks, or areas of the City. (Ord. O2005-170 § 1)


21A.15.940 Public agency training facility. 

“Public agency training facility” means an establishment or school for training state and local law enforcement, fire safety, National Guard or transit personnel and facilities including but not limited to:

(1) Dining and overnight accommodations;

(2) Classrooms;

(3) Shooting ranges;

(4) Auto test tracks; and

(5) Fire suppression simulations. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.942 Qualified professional.

“Qualified professional” means a person with experience and training in the applicable field or critical area. A qualified professional must have obtained a B.S. or B.A. or equivalent degree in biology, engineering, environmental studies, fisheries, geomorphology or a related field, and two years of related work experience.

(1) A qualified professional for watercourses, wetlands, and wildlife habitat conservation areas must have a degree in biology or a related field and relevant professional experience.

(2) A qualified professional for preparing geotechnical reports and geotechnical design recommendations must be a professional geotechnical engineer or geologist licensed in the state of Washington. Identification of geologic hazards may be performed by geologists or other geology professionals with experience identifying geologic hazards.

(3) A qualified professional for preparing critical aquifer recharge reports must be a professional hydrogeologist or geologist licensed in the state of Washington. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 2)


21A.15.945 Radio frequency.

“Radio frequency” means the number of times the current from a given source of non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation changes from a maximum positive level through a maximum negative level and back to a maximum positive level in one second; measured in cycles per second or hertz (Hz). (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.946 Radio frequency emissions.

“Radio frequency emissions” means any electromagnetic radiation or other communications signal emitted from an antenna or antenna-related equipment on the ground, antenna support structure, building, or other vertical projection. (Ord. O2005-181 § 1)


21A.15.947 Rapid charging station.

“Rapid charging station” means an industrial grade electrical outlet that allows for faster recharging of electric vehicle batteries through higher power levels and that meets or exceeds applicable state and federal standards. (Ord. O2011-300 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.948 Reasonable alternative.

In determining what is a “reasonable alternative” to a proposed development, alteration or activity, the department may consider the purpose, effectiveness, engineering feasibility, commercial availability of technology, best management practices, safety and cost of the alternative action or proposal. Reasonable alternatives are those that are capable of being carried out, taking into consideration the overall project purposes, needs and objectives. (Ord. O2005-193 § 2; Ord. O2005-172 § 2)


21A.15.950 Reasonable use.

“Reasonable use” means a legal concept articulated by federal and state courts in regulatory taking cases. (Ord. O2005-193 § 2; Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.955 Receiving site.

“Receiving site” means those lots where the procurement of development rights enables a permissible change in the allowed intensity on the property pursuant to Chapter 21A.80 SMC and all other controlling policies and law. (Ord. O2011-297 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.960 Recreational vehicle (RV).

“Recreational vehicle (RV)” means a vehicle designed primarily for recreational camping, travel, or seasonal use that has its own motive power or is mounted on or towed by another vehicle, including but not limited to:

(1) Travel trailer;

(2) Folding camping trailer;

(3) Park trailer;

(4) Truck camper;

(5) Park trailer;

(6) Motor home; and

(7) Multi-use vehicle. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.965 Recreational vehicle parks.

“Recreational vehicle parks” means the use of land upon which two or more recreational vehicle sites, including hook-up facilities, are located for occupancy by the general public of recreational vehicles as temporary living quarters for recreation or vacation purposes. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.970 Recyclable material.

“Recyclable material” means a nontoxic, recoverable substance that can be reprocessed for the manufacture of new products. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.972 Reference evapotranspiration (Eto).

“Reference evapotranspiration (Eto)” means a standard measurement of environmental parameters that affect the water use of plants. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.975 Regional storm water management facility.

“Regional storm water management facility” means a surface water control structure installed in or adjacent to a stream or wetland of a basin or sub-basin by the surface water management (SWM) division or a project proponent. Such facilities protect downstream areas identified by SWM as having previously existing or predicted significant regional basin flooding or erosion problems. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.980 Regional utility corridor. 

“Regional utility corridor” means a right-of-way tract or easement other than a street right-of-way that contains transmission lines or pipelines for utility companies. Right-of-way tracts or easements containing lines serving individual lots or developments are not regional utility corridors. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.982 Religious organization.

“Religious organization” means the federally protected practice of a recognized religious assembly, school, or institution that owns or controls real property. (Ord. O2014-372 § 2)


21A.15.985 Relocatable facilities cost per student.

“Relocatable facilities cost per student” means the estimated cost of purchasing and siting a relocatable facility in a school district for the grade span of school to be provided, as a function of the district’s facilities standard per grade span and taking into account the requirements of students with special needs. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.990 Relocatable facility.

“Relocatable facility” means any factory-built structure, transportable in one or more sections that is designed to be used as an education space and is needed to prevent the overbuilding of school facilities, to meet the needs of service areas within a district or to cover the gap between the time that families move into new residential developments and the date that construction is completed on permanent school facilities. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1000 Restoration.

“Restoration” means returning a stream, wetland, other sensitive area or any associated buffer to a state in which its stability and functions approach its unaltered state as closely as possible. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1005 Retail, comparison.

“Retail, comparison” provides for the sale of comparison goods and services and is centrally located in the community. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1010 Retail, convenience. 

“Retail, convenience” provides for daily living goods, is easy to access and use and is close to residential neighborhoods. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1011 Retaining wall. 

“Retaining wall” means any wall used to resist the lateral displacement of any material. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1011.1 Riparian.

“Riparian” means the area adjacent to flowing or standing freshwater aquatic systems. Riparian habitat encompasses the area beginning at the ordinary high water mark and extends to that portion of the terrestrial landscape that is influenced by, or that directly influences, the aquatic ecosystem. In riparian systems, the vegetation, water tables, soils, microclimate, and wildlife inhabitants of terrestrial ecosystems are often influenced by perennial or intermittent water. Simultaneously, adjacent vegetation, nutrient and sediment loading, terrestrial wildlife, as well as organic and inorganic debris, influence the biological and physical properties of the aquatic ecosystem. Riparian habitat includes the entire extent of the floodplain and riparian areas of wetlands that are directly connected to stream courses or other freshwater. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.1012 Runoff.

“Runoff” means water not absorbed by the soil in the landscape area to which it is applied. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1015 Salmonid. 

“Salmonid” means a member of the fish family Salmonidae, including:

(1) Chinook, coho, chum, sockeye and pink salmon;

(2) Rainbow, steelhead and cutthroat salmon;

(3) Brown trout;

(4) Brook and Dolly Varden char;

(5) Kokanee; and

(6) Whitefish. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1020 School bus base.

“School bus base” means an establishment for the storage, dispatch, repair, and maintenance of coaches and other vehicles of a school transit system. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1025 School district. 

“School district” means any school district whose boundaries include the City of Sammamish. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1030 School district support facility. 

“School district support facility” means uses (excluding schools and bus bases) that are required for the operation of a school district. This term includes school district administrative offices, centralized kitchens, and maintenance or storage facilities. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1035 Schools, elementary, and middle/junior high.

“Schools, elementary, and middle/junior high” means institutions of learning offering instruction in the several branches of learning and study required by the Education Code of the State of Washington in grades kindergarten through nine, including associated meeting rooms, auditoriums and athletic facilities. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1040 Schools, secondary or high school. 

“Schools, secondary or high school” means institutions of learning offering instruction in the several branches of learning and study required by the Education Code of the State of Washington in grades nine through 12, including associated meeting rooms, auditoriums and athletic facilities. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1045 Seismic hazard areas.

“Seismic hazard areas” means those areas mapped as moderate to high and high liquefaction susceptibility and peat deposits on the Liquefaction Susceptibility Map of King County, Washington, Washington Division of Geology and Earth Sciences, OFR 2004-20, Palmer et al., September, 2004, as revised. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1050 Self-service storage facility. 

“Self-service storage facility” means an establishment containing separate storage spaces that are leased or rented as individual units. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1055 Sending site.

“Sending site” means designated lot or lots with development rights which landowners may sell in exchange for placing a conservation easement on the property or a portion of the property. (Ord. O2011-297 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.1060 Senior citizen.

“Senior citizen” means a person aged 62 or older. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1062 Senior citizen assisted housing.

“Senior citizen assisted housing” means housing in a building consisting of two or more dwelling units or sleeping units restricted to occupancy by at least one senior citizen per unit, and may include the following support services, as deemed necessary:

(1) Food preparation and dining areas;

(2) Group activity areas;

(3) Medical supervision; and

(4) Similar activities. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1065 Sensitive areas.

Repealed by Ord. O2005-193. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1070 Setback.

“Setback” means the minimum required distance between a structure or a building and a specified line such as a property line, lot line, access easement line, or buffer line that is required to remain free of structures or buildings. (Ord. O2019-482 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1071 Setback, structure.

“Setback, structure” means the minimum required distance between a structure and a specified line such as a property line, lot line, access easement line, or buffer line that is required to remain free of structures or buildings. (Ord. O2019-482 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.1072 Setback, single detached dwelling unit.

“Setback, single detached dwelling unit” means the minimum required distance between a single detached dwelling unit and a specified line such as a property line, lot line, access easement line, or buffer line that is required to remain free of structures. (Ord. O2019-482 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.1073 Setback, detached accessory dwelling unit.

“Setback, detached accessory dwelling unit” means the minimum required distance between a detached accessory dwelling unit and a specified line such as a property line, lot line, access easement line, or buffer line that is required to remain free of structures. (Ord. O2019-482 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.1075 Shelters for temporary placement. 

“Shelters for temporary placement” means housing units within the City that provide housing to persons on a temporary basis for a duration not to exceed four weeks. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1085 Sign. 

“Sign” means any device, structure, fixture, or placard that is visible from a public right-of-way or surrounding properties and uses graphics, symbols, or written copy for the purpose of advertising or identifying any establishment, product, goods, or service. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1086 Sign, A-frame.

“Sign, A-frame” means a freestanding, two-panel, foldable, portable temporary sign made of rigid material. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.1090 Sign, awning.

“Sign, awning” means a sign painted on or attached directly to and supported by an awning. An awning may be constructed of rigid or nonrigid materials and may be retractable or nonretractable. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1095 Sign, changing message center. 

Repealed by Ord. O2018-462. (Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1096 Sign, community banner.

“Sign, community banner” means a temporary sign, located on City banner poles, which advertises an event that would provide civic, cultural, educational, philanthropic, or service opportunities hosted or promoted by the City or a community group that is not-for-profit or nonprofit and nonpolitical with an IRS designation of Section 501(c) or (d). (Ord. O2005-180 § 1)


21A.15.1097 Sign, commercial.

“Sign, commercial” means a sign erected for a business transaction or advertising the exchange of goods and services. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.1100 Sign, community bulletin board. 

Repealed by Ord. O2017-436. (Ord. O2004-153 § 1; Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1101 Sign, community event.

Repealed by Ord. O2017-436. (Ord. O2005-180 § 1)


21A.15.1105 Sign, directional.

“Sign, directional” means a sign that is primarily designed to guide or direct pedestrian or vehicular traffic to an area, business, place, or convenience, and may include incidental graphics such as trade names and trademarks. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1110 Sign, freestanding.

“Sign, freestanding” means a permanent sign fixed directly to the ground, or having one or more supports fixed directly to the ground, and being detached from any building or fence. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1115 Sign, fuel price.

“Sign, fuel price” means a manually or electronically controlled sign utilized to advertise the price of gasoline and/or diesel fuel. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1117 Sign, fundraising.

Repealed by Ord. O2017-436. (Ord. O2011-305 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.1120 Sign, incidental. 

“Sign, incidental” means a sign, emblem or decal designed to inform the public of goods, facilities, or services available on the premises, and may include but not be limited to signs designating:

(1) Restrooms;

(2) Hours of operation;

(3) Acceptable credit cards;

(4) Property ownership or management;

(5) Phone booths; and

(6) Recycling containers. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1125 Sign, indirectly illuminated. 

“Sign, indirectly illuminated” means a sign that is illuminated entirely from an external artificial source. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1130 Sign, monument.

“Sign, monument” means a freestanding sign that is above ground level and is anchored to the ground by a solid base, with no open space between the sign and the ground. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1131 Sign, noncommercial.

“Sign, noncommercial” means any sign that is not a commercial sign. This definition also includes signs regarding fund raising or membership drive activities for noncommercial or nonprofit entities or groups. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.1135 Sign, off-premises directional. 

“Sign, off-premises directional” means a sign that contains no advertising of a commercial nature that is used to direct pedestrian or vehicular traffic circulation to a facility, service, or business located on other premises within 660 feet of the sign. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1140 Sign, on-premises.

“Sign, on-premises” means a sign that displays a message that is incidental to and directly associated with the use of the property on which it is located. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1144 Sign, permanent.

“Sign, permanent” means any sign which is intended to be lasting and is constructed from an enduring material such as masonry and metal which remains unchanged in position, character, and condition (beyond normal wear), and is permanently affixed to the ground, wall or building, provided the sign is listed as a permanent sign in the ordinance. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.1145 Sign, permanent residential development identification. 

“Sign, permanent residential development identification” means a permanent sign identifying the residential development upon which the sign is located. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1146 Sign, pole.

“Sign, pole” means a freestanding sign having one or more supports standing directly upon the ground, and being detached from any building or fence. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.1148 Sign, political.

Repealed by Ord. O2017-436. (Ord. O2005-180 § 1)


21A.15.1150 Sign, portable.

“Sign, portable” means a sign that is capable of being moved and is not permanently affixed to the ground, a structure, or building. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1155 Sign, projecting.

“Sign, projecting” means any sign that is attached to and supported by the exterior wall of a building with the exposed face of the sign on a plane perpendicular to the wall of the building, projecting more than one foot from the wall of a building and vertical to the ground. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1159 Sign, temporary.

“Sign, temporary” means any sign, banner, pennant, or valance not permanently attached to the ground, wall or building, intended to be displayed for a limited period of time only. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A)) 


21A.15.1160 Sign, time and temperature.

Repealed by Ord. O2018-462. (Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1165 Sign, wall.

“Sign, wall” means any sign painted on, or attached directly to and supported by, the wall of a building or structure. All wall signs are building-mounted signs. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1166 Sign, window.

“Sign, window” means any sign applied to or mounted on a window. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A))




21A.15.1170 Site.

“Site” means a single lot, or two or more contiguous lots that are under common ownership or documented legal control, used as a single parcel for a development proposal in order to calculate compliance with the standards and regulations of this title. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1172 Site area. 

“Site area” means the total horizontal area of a project site, less the following: 

(1) Areas below the ordinary high water mark;

(2) Areas that are required to be dedicated on the perimeter of a project site for public rights-of-way. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1175 Site cost per student. 

“Site cost per student” means the estimated cost of a site in the district for the grade span of school to be provided, as a function of the district’s facilities standard per grade span and taking into account the requirements of students with special needs. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1177 SITUS file.

“SITUS file” means information on an individual parcel of land, including its size, known extent of existing development, known environmental constraints, approval conditions and other site-specific information; a SITUS file is a King County file. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1190 Source-separated organic material.

“Source-separated organic material” means vegetative material, scrap lumber or wood, or other materials that provide a source for recycled or composted products. This does not include chemically treated wood products and/or toxic organic substances. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1195 Special use permit. 

“Special use permit” means a permit granted by the City to locate a regional land use at a particular location, subject to conditions placed on the proposed use to ensure compatibility with adjacent land uses. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1200 Specialized instruction school.

“Specialized instruction school” means establishments engaged in providing specialized instruction in a designated field of study, rather than a full range of courses in unrelated areas; including, but not limited to:

(1) Art;

(2) Dance;

(3) Music;

(4) Cooking;

(5) Driving; and

(6) Pet obedience training. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1205 Specified sexual activities. 

“Specified sexual activities” means human genitalia in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; or erotic fondling, touching or display of human genitalia, pubic region, buttock, or female breast. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1207 Sponsor.

“Sponsor” means an entity that is hosting a homeless encampment on property it owns or controls and that serves as a liaison with the surrounding community. (Ord. O2014-372 § 2)


21A.15.1210 Sporting goods store.

“Sporting goods store” means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of sporting goods and equipment, including only uses located in SIC Industry Nos.:

(1) 5941 – Sporting goods stores and bicycle shops; and

(2) 5999 – Tent shops and trophy shops. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1215 Sports club.

“Sports club” means an establishment engaged in operating physical fitness facilities and sports and recreation clubs, including only uses located in SIC Industry Nos.:

(1) 7991 – Physical fitness facilities; and

(2) 7997 – Membership sports and recreation clubs. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1220 Stable.

“Stable” means a structure or facility in which horses or other livestock are kept for:

(1) Boarding;

(2) Training;

(3) Riding lessons;

(4) Breeding;

(5) Rental; or

(6) Personal use. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1225 Standard of service, school districts.

“Standard of service, school districts” means the standard adopted by each school district that identifies the program year, the class size by grade span and taking into account the requirements of students with special needs, the number of classrooms, the types of facilities the district believes will best serve its student population, and other factors as identified by the school district. The district’s standard of service shall not be adjusted for any portion of the classrooms housed in relocatable facilities that are used as transitional facilities or for any specialized facilities housed in relocatable facilities. Except as otherwise defined by the school board pursuant to a board resolution, “transitional facilities” shall mean those facilities that are used to cover the time required for the construction of permanent facilities; provided, that the “necessary financial commitments” as defined in Chapter 21A.60 SMC are in place to complete the permanent facilities called for in the capital plan. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1230 Steep slope hazard areas.

“Steep slope hazard areas” means those landslide hazard areas in the City on slopes 40 percent or steeper within a vertical elevation change of at least 10 feet. A slope is delineated by establishing its toe and top and is measured by averaging the inclination over at least 10 feet of vertical relief. For the purpose of this definition:

(1) The toe of a slope is a distinct topographic break in slope that separates slopes inclined at less than 40 percent from slopes 40 percent or steeper. Where no distinct break exists, the toe of a steep slope is the lowermost limit of the area where the ground surface drops 10 feet or more vertically within a horizontal distance of 25 feet; and

(2) The top of a slope is a distinct, topographic break in slope that separates slopes inclined at less than 40 percent from slopes 40 percent or steeper. Where no distinct break exists, the top of a steep slope is the uppermost limit of the area where the ground surface drops 10 feet or more vertically within a horizontal distance of 25 feet.

(3) A distinct topographic break occurs when the change in gradient is less than five feet vertically within a horizontal distance of 25 feet. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 2; Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1235 Stream functions. 

“Stream functions” means natural processes performed by streams including functions that are important in facilitating food chain production, providing habitat for nesting, rearing, and resting sites for aquatic, terrestrial, and avian species, maintaining the availability and quality of water, such as purifying water, acting as recharge and discharge areas for groundwater aquifers, moderating surface and storm water flows and maintaining the free flowing conveyance of water, sediments, and other organic matter. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1240 Streams.

“Streams” means those areas in the City where surface waters produce a defined channel or bed, not including irrigation ditches, canals, storm or storm water runoff conveyance devices or other entirely artificial watercourses, unless they are used by salmonids or are used to convey streams naturally occurring prior to construction of such watercourses. For the purpose of this definition, a defined channel or bed is an area that demonstrates clear evidence of the passage of water and includes, but is not limited to, bedrock channels, gravel beds, sand and silt beds, and defined-channel swales. The channel or bed need not contain water year-round. For the purpose of defining the following categories of streams, normal rainfall is rainfall that is at or near the mean of the accumulated annual rainfall record, based upon the water year for King County as recorded at the Seattle-Tacoma International Airport.

(1) Streams shall be classified according to the following criteria:

(a) Type S streams are all streams inventoried as “shorelines of the state” under the City’s shoreline master program. No Type S streams have been identified in the City as of September 1, 2005.

(b) Type F streams are those streams that are used by salmonids, have the potential to support salmonid uses, or that have been identified as being of special significance. Streams of special significance are those perennial reaches designated by the City based on historic fish presence and/or the probability of restoration of the following:

(i) George Davis Creek;

(ii) Ebright Creek;

(iii) Pine Lake Creek; and

(iv) Laughing Jacobs Creek, below Laughing Jacobs Lake.

(c) Type Np streams which are perennial during a year of normal rainfall and do not have the potential to be used by salmonids. Type Np streams include the intermittent dry portions of the perennial channel below the uppermost point of perennial flow. If the uppermost point of perennial flow cannot be identified with simple, nontechnical observations, then the point of perennial flow should be determined using the best professional judgment of a qualified professional.

(d) Type Ns streams which are seasonal or ephemeral during a year of normal rainfall and do not have the potential to be used by salmonids.

(2) For the purposes of this definition, “used by salmonids” and “potential to support salmonid uses” is presumed for:

(a) Streams where naturally reoccurring use by salmonid populations has been documented by a government agency;

(b) Streams that are fish passable by salmonid populations from Lake Sammamish, as determined by a qualified professional based on review of stream flow, gradient and barriers and criteria for fish passability established by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife; and

(c) Streams that are planned for restoration in a six-year capital improvement plan adopted by a government agency that will result in a fish passable connection to Lake Sammamish. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 2; Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1245 Street.

“Street” means a public or recorded private thoroughfare providing pedestrian and vehicular access through neighborhoods and communities and to abutting property. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1250 Street frontage.

“Street frontage” means any portion of a lot or combination of lots that directly abuts a public right-of-way. (Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1255 Structure.

“Structure” means anything permanently constructed in or on the ground, or over the water, excluding fences six feet or less in height, uncovered decks less than 18 inches above grade, uncovered paved areas, and structural or nonstructural fill. (Ord. O2005-171 § 1; Ord. O2003-132 § 10)




21A.15.1260 Student factor.

“Student factor” means the number derived by a school district to describe how many students of each grade span are expected to be generated by a dwelling unit. Student factors shall be based on district records of average actual student generated rates for new developments constructed over a period of not more than five years prior to the date of the fee calculation; if such information is not available in the district, data from adjacent districts, districts with similar demographics, or countywide averages must be used. Student factors must be separately determined for single-family and multifamily dwelling units, and for grade spans. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1265 Submerged land.

“Submerged land” means any land at or below the ordinary high water mark. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1270 Substantial improvement.

“Substantial improvement” means any maintenance, repair, structural modification, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either before the maintenance, repair, modification or addition is started or before the damage occurred, if the structure has been damaged and is being restored. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1271 TDR certificate.

“TDR certificate” is a form of currency that represents development rights available for sale and use. (Ord. O2011-297 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.1272 TDR certificate of intent.

“TDR certificate of intent” is a document issued to a landowner upon approval of a TDR sending site application. The letter contains a determination of the number of development rights calculated for the sending site and an agreement by the City to issue a corresponding number of TDR certificates in exchange for a conservation easement. The sending site owner may use the TDR certificate letter of intent to market development rights to potential purchasers, but the letter of intent document has no value itself and cannot be transferred or used to obtain increased development rights within receiving areas. (Ord. O2011-297 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.1273 TDR program.

“TDR program” is a market-based program that permanently conserves lands with important public benefits by establishing a means to transfer development rights from eligible sending sites to eligible receiving sites through a voluntary process that fairly compensates landowners while providing a public benefit for communities. (Ord. O2011-297 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.1274 TDR sending site application.

“TDR sending site application” is an application that a sending site landowner must file in order to be eligible for consideration for designation as a TDR sending site. (Ord. O2011-297 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.1275 Temporary use permit.

“Temporary use permit” means a permit to allow a use of limited duration and/or frequency, or to allow multiple related events over a specified period. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1276 Temporary WCF.

“Temporary WCF” shall mean a WCF that is designed for temporary use and is installed or erected: (1) in the event of a public emergency to provide emergency communications by public officials, or (2) at the site of an existing permanent WCF for only so long as is necessary, but in no event longer than 90 days, to provide signal coverage during repair, maintenance, or reconstruction of such permanent WCF, or during a power outage. (Ord. O2010-281 § 3)


21A.15.1277 Theater.

“Theater” means an establishment primarily engaged in the indoor exhibition of motion pictures or of live theatrical presentations. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1278 Theatrical production services. 

“Theatrical production services” means an establishment engaged in uses located in SIC Industry No. 792, Theatrical producers (except motion picture), bands, orchestras, and entertainers, except establishments primarily engaged in providing live theatrical presentations, such as road companies and summer theaters. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1280 Tightline sewer.

“Tightline sewer” means a sewer trunk line designed and intended specifically to serve only a particular facility or place, and whose pipe diameter should be sized appropriately to ensure service only to that facility or place. It may occur outside the local service area for sewers, but does not amend the local service area. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1282 Total phosphorus.*

“Total phosphorus” means the phosphorus concentration as determined by a state-certified analytical laboratory using EPA 365.3 or SM 4500-P-B, E or an equivalent method. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A))

*Code reviser’s note: Ord. O2013-350 adds this section as SMC 21A.15.1275; it has been renumbered to prevent duplication and preserve alphabetization.


21A.15.1285 Trails.

“Trails” means manmade pathways designed and intended for use by pedestrians, bicyclists, equestrians, and/or recreational users. Trails may be paved or unpaved, and may be intended and constructed for transportation, recreation, and nature contact and enjoyment. Types of trails are described and defined in the park and recreation plan, trails, bikeways and paths plan, or elsewhere in the city Comprehensive Plan. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-172 § 2; Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1288 Transfer of development rights (TDR).

“Transfer of development rights (TDR)” means the transfer of the right to develop or build from sending sites to receiving sites. (Ord. O2011-297 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.1290 Transfer station.

“Transfer station” means a staffed collection and transportation facility used by private individuals and route collection vehicles to deposit solid waste collected off-site into larger transfer vehicles for transport to permanent disposal sites, and may also include recycling facilities involving collection or processing for shipment. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1295 Transit bus base.

“Transit bus base” means an establishment for the storage, dispatch, repair and maintenance of coaches, light rail trains, and other vehicles of a public transit system. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1305 Transitional housing facilities.

“Transitional housing facilities” means housing units within the City owned by public housing authorities, nonprofit organizations or other public interest groups that provide housing to persons on a temporary basis for a duration not to exceed 24 months in conjunction with job training, self sufficiency training, and human services counseling, the purpose of which is to help persons make the transition from homelessness to placement in permanent housing. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1310 Transmission equipment.

“Transmission equipment” means equipment, such as antennas and satellite, or point-to-point microwave dishes, that transmit or receive radio signals. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1315 Transmission line booster station.

“Transmission line booster station” means an establishment containing equipment designed to increase voltage of electrical power transported through transmission and/or distribution lines to compensate for power loss due to resistance. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1320 Transmission support structure. 

“Transmission support structure” means a pole or lattice-work structure specifically designed and intended to support antenna and related communication equipment. The term does not include poles or lattice-work towers supporting above-ground distribution or transmission lines for utility services such as electric, telephone, cable, etc. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1325 Transmitter building.

“Transmitter building” means building used to contain communication transmission equipment. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1330 Transportation system management (TSM).

“Transportation system management (TSM)” means low-cost projects that can be implemented in a short time frame designed to increase the efficiency of existing transportation facilities. This also includes transit and/or ride sharing measures to decrease single occupancy vehicle trips. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1332 Tree, heritage.

“Tree, heritage” means a tree that is equal to or greater than twenty-two (22) inches DBH. (Ord. O2005-175 § 1)


21A.15.1332.1 Tree, landmark.*

“Tree, landmark” means a tree that is equal to or greater than thirty-two (32) inches DBH. (Ord. O2015-395 § 1)

*Code reviser’s note: Ord. 2015-395 adds this section as SMC 21A.15.1332; it has been renumbered to prevent duplication of numbering.


21A.15.1333 Tree, significant.

“Tree, significant” means a tree that is in a healthy condition and is a noninvasive species, including those trees defined as a heritage tree and landmark tree, that is:

(1) A coniferous tree with a diameter of eight (8) inches or more DBH; or

(2) A deciduous tree with a diameter of twelve (12) inches or more DBH. (Ord. O2015-395 § 1; Ord. O2005-175 § 1)


21A.15.1334 Trophic state index.

“Trophic state index” means a classification system which uses algal biomass as the basis for classification which can be independently measured by chlorophyll a, Secchi depth, and total phosphorus concentration. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.1334.1 Trophic status.

“Trophic status” means a classification which defines lake quality by the degree of biological productivity. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.1335 Ultimate roadway section.

“Ultimate roadway section” means a designation by the City that the maximum roadway or intersection capacity has been reached and further right-of-way acquisition and/or improvements are not feasible to increase peak hour vehicle capacity. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1337 Underground storage tanks.

“Underground storage tank (UST)” means a tank and any underground piping connected to the tank that has at least 10 percent of its combined volume underground and is used for the storage of hazardous substances. USTs are generally associated with industrial/commercial land uses and can be found at filling stations, airports, hospitals, automotive repair shops, industrial plants, residential areas and other facilities. The definition of UST does not include underground facilities for the storage or treatment of storm water or for the storage of nonhazardous substances, such as drinking water. (Ord. O2005-193 § 2)


21A.15.1345 Use.

“Use” means activity or function carried out on an area of land, or in a building or structure located thereon. Any use subordinate or incidental to the primary use on a site is considered an accessory use. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1350 Utility facility.

“Utility facility” means a facility for the distribution or transmission of services to an area, including, but not limited to:

(1) Telephone exchanges;

(2) Water pumping or treatment stations;

(3) Electrical substations;

(4) Water storage reservoirs or tanks;

(5) Municipal groundwater well-fields;

(6) Regional storm water management facilities;

(7) Natural gas gate stations and limiting stations;

(8) Propane, compressed natural gas and liquefied natural gas storage tanks serving multiple lots or uses from which fuel is distributed directly to individual users;

(9) Sewer lift stations; and

(10) Pipes, electrical wires and associated structural supports. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1352 Vactor waste.

“Vactor waste” means liquid or solid waste material collected from catch basins, retention/detention facilities or drainage pipes. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1353 Vactor waste receiving facility. 

“Vactor waste receiving facility” means a facility where vactor waste is brought for treatment and storage prior to final disposal. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1355 Variance.

“Variance” means an adjustment in the application of standards of a zoning code to a particular property. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1360 Vegetation. 

“Vegetation” means any and all plant life growing at, below or above the soil surface. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1365 Vocational school.

“Vocational school” means establishments offering training in a skill or trade to be pursued as a career, including only uses located in SIC Industry Group Nos.:

(1) 824 – Vocational schools; and

(2) 8222 – Technical institutes. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1375 Warehousing and wholesale trade.

“Warehousing and wholesale trade” means establishments involved in the storage and/or sale of bulk goods for resale or assembly, excluding establishments offering the sale of bulk goods to the general public that is classified as a retail use in SMC 21A.20.070. These establishments shall include only SIC Major Group Nos. 50 and 51 and SIC Industry Group Nos. 422 and 423. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1380 Wastewater treatment facility.

“Wastewater treatment facility” means a plant for collection, decontamination, and disposal of sewage, including residential, industrial, and agricultural liquid wastes, and including any physical improvement within the scope of the definition of “water pollution control facility” set forth in WAC 173-90-015(4) as amended. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1382 Water budget.

“Water budget” means the upper limit of irrigation water applied to the established landscape area. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1385 Water-dependent use.

“Water-dependent use” means a use or portion of a use which cannot exist in a location that is not adjacent to the water and which is dependent on the water by reason of the intrinsic nature of its operations. (Ord. O2005-193 § 2; Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1386 Water-enjoyment use.

“Water-enjoyment use” means a recreational use or other use that facilitates public access to the shoreline as a primary characteristic of the use; or a use that provides for recreational use or aesthetic enjoyment of the shoreline for a substantial number of people as a general characteristic of the use and which, through location, design, and operation, ensures the public’s ability to enjoy the physical and aesthetic qualities of the shoreline. In order to qualify as a water-enjoyment use, the use must be open to the general public and the shoreline-oriented space within the project must be devoted to the specific aspects of the use that fosters shoreline enjoyment. (Ord. O2005-193 § 2)


21A.15.1387 Water-oriented use.

“Water-oriented use” means a use that is water-dependent, water-related, or water-enjoyment, or a combination of such uses. (Ord. O2005-193 § 2)


21A.15.1388 Water-related use.

“Water-related use” means a use or portion of a use which is not intrinsically dependent on a waterfront location but whose economic viability is dependent upon a waterfront location because:

(1) The use has a functional requirement for a waterfront location such as the arrival or shipment of materials by water or the need for large quantities of water; or

(2) The use provides a necessary service supportive of the water-dependent uses and the proximity of the use to its customers makes its services less expensive and/or more convenient. (Ord. O2005-193 § 2)


21A.15.1390 Wet meadows, grazed.

Repealed by O2013-350. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1395 Wetland edge.

“Wetland edge” means the line delineating the outer edge of a wetland, as determined by application of the federal 1987 Wetland Delineation Manual (Environmental Laboratory, 1987) and the United States Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) Interim Regional Supplement for Western Mountains, Valleys, and Coast Region (USACE, 2010), or such other manual(s) adopted by the Department consistent with RCW 90.58.380 and WAC 173-22-035, as amended. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 2; Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1400 Wetland, forested.

Repealed by O2013-350. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1405 Wetland functions.

“Wetland functions” means natural processes performed by wetlands including functions that are important in facilitating food chain production, providing habitat for nesting, rearing, and resting sites for aquatic, terrestrial, and avian species, maintaining the availability and quality of water, acting as recharge and discharge areas for groundwater aquifers and moderating surface and storm water flows, as well as performing other functions including, but not limited to, those set forth in 33 CFR 320.4(b)(2), 1988. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1410 Wetland, isolated.

“Wetland, isolated” means a wetland that is hydrologically isolated from other aquatic resources. Isolated wetlands may perform important functions and are protected by state law (Chapter 90.48 RCW), whether or not they are protected by federal law. The term “isolated wetland” shall not apply within the City’s shoreline jurisdiction as set forth in Chapter 25.05 SMC. (Ord. O2017-431 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 2; Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1415 Wetlands.

“Wetlands” are those areas in the City of Sammamish designated in accordance with the federal 1987 Wetland Delineation Manual (Environmental Laboratory, 1987) and the United States Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) Interim Regional Supplement for Western Mountains, Valleys, and Coast Region (USACE, 2010), or such other manuals adopted by the Department of Ecology pursuant to RCW 90.58.380 and WAC 173-22-035, as amended. Wetlands are areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. Wetlands do not include those artificial wetlands intentionally created from nonwetland sites, including, but not limited to, irrigation and drainage ditches, grass-lined swales, canals, detention facilities, wastewater treatment facilities, farm ponds, and landscape amenities, or those wetlands created after July 1, 1990, that were unintentionally created as a result of the construction of a road, street, or highway. Wetlands may include those artificial wetlands intentionally created from nonwetland areas to mitigate the conversion of wetlands. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 2; Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1416 Wetlands of local significance.

“Wetlands of local significance” include the wetland identified in the King County Council Wetlands Inventory (1990) as the East Lake Sammamish No. 21 wetland (North Beaver Lake Bog), and others as designated by the City council. Wetlands of local significance shall be subject to greater protection and environmental education efforts where possible. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.15.1420 Wetpond.

“Wetpond” means an artificial water body constructed as a part of a surface water management system. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1425 Wildlife shelter. 

“Wildlife shelter” means a facility for the temporary housing of sick, wounded, or displaced wildlife. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1426 Wireless communication facility.

“Wireless communication facility (WCF)” means any manned or unmanned location for the transmission and/or reception of radio frequency signals, or other wireless communications, and usually consisting of an antenna or group of antennas, feed lines, and base station, and may include an antenna support structure. The following developments shall be deemed included in the general definition of a WCF: developments containing new, consolidated, or existing antenna support structures, public antenna support structures, and collocation on existing antenna support structures, collocation onto existing utility pole or cross-country electrical distribution tower, attached antennas or antenna arrays, base stations and feed lines, whether concealed or nonconcealed. Included in this definition are: noncommercial amateur radio, amateur ham radio and citizen band antennas, satellite earth stations and antenna support structures, and antennas and/or antenna arrays for AM/FM/TV/HDTV broadcasting WCFs. (Ord. O2005-181 § 1)


21A.15.1427 Wireless communications.

“Wireless communications” means any personal wireless service, which includes, but is not limited to, cellular, personal communication services (PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR), unlicensed spectrum services utilizing devices described in Part 15 of the FCC rules and regulations (e.g., wireless Internet services and paging). (Ord. O2005-181 § 1)


21A.15.1428 Wireless right-of-way use agreement.

“Wireless right-of-way use agreement” or “WROWA” means the initial authorization, or renewal of an agreement, to construct in, under, over (if permitted by City regulations), or across public ways of the City and to also provide wireless telecommunications service to persons or areas in the City. (Ord. O2005-181 § 1)


21A.15.1430 Work release facility.

“Work release facility” means a facility that allows the opportunity for convicted persons to be employed outside of the facility, but requires confinement within the facility when not in the place of employment. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1432 Wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle. 

“Wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle” means a motor vehicle or the remains or remnant parts of a motor vehicle that is mechanically inoperative and cannot be made operative without the addition of vital parts or mechanisms or the application of a substantial amount of labor, and meets at least three of the following requirements:

(1) Is three years old or older;

(2) Is extensively damaged, such damage including but not limited to any of the following: missing wheels, tires, motor, or transmission;

(3) Is apparently inoperable;

(4) Has an approximate fair market value equal only to the approximate value of the scrap in it. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


21A.15.1435 Yard or organic waste processing facility.

“Yard or organic waste processing facility” means a site where yard and garden wastes, including wood and land clearing debris, are processed into new products such as soil amendments and wood chips. (Ord. O2003-132 § 10)


Chapter 21A.20 PERMITTED USES

Sections:

21A.20.010    Establishment of uses.

21A.20.020    Interpretation of land use tables.

21A.20.030    Residential land uses.

21A.20.040    Recreational/cultural land uses.

21A.20.050    General services land uses.

21A.20.060    Government/business services land uses.

21A.20.070    Retail land uses.

21A.20.080    Manufacturing land uses.

21A.20.090    Resource land uses.

21A.20.100    Regional land uses.


21A.20.010 Establishment of uses.

The use of a property is defined by the activity for which the building or lot is intended, designed, arranged, occupied, or maintained. The use is considered permanently established when that use will be or has been in continuous operation for a period exceeding 60 days. A use that will operate for less than 60 days is considered a temporary use, and subject to the requirements of Chapter 21A.70 SMC. All applicable requirements of this code, or other applicable state or federal requirements, shall govern a use located in the City of Sammamish. (Ord. O2016-406 § 3 (Att. C); Ord. O2003-132 § 11)


21A.20.020 Interpretation of land use tables.

(1) The land use tables in this chapter determine whether a specific use is allowed in a zone district. The zone district is located on the vertical column and the specific use is located on the horizontal row of these tables.

(2) If an “X” appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the use is not allowed in that district, except for certain temporary uses.

(3) If the letter “P” appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the use is allowed in that district subject to the review procedures specified in Chapter 21A.100 SMC and the general requirements of the code.

(4) If the letter “C” appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the use is allowed subject to the conditional use review procedures specified in Chapter 21A.100 SMC and the general requirements of the code.

(5) If the letter “S” appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the regional use is permitted subject to the special use permit review procedures specified in Chapter 21A.100 SMC and the general requirements of the code.

(6) If a number appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the use may be allowed subject to the appropriate review process indicated above, the general requirements of the code and the specific conditions indicated in the development condition with the corresponding number immediately following the land use table.

(7) If more than one letter-number combination appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the use is allowed in that zone subject to different sets of limitation or conditions depending on the review process indicated by the letter, the general requirements of the code and the specific conditions indicated in the development condition with the corresponding number immediately following the table.

(8) All applicable requirements shall govern a use whether or not they are cross-referenced in a section. (Ord. O2016-406 § 3 (Att. C); Ord. O2003-132 § 11)


21A.20.030 Residential land uses.

A. Table of Residential Land Uses.

KEY

P – Permitted Use

C – Conditional Use

S – Special Use

X – Prohibited Use

	 	 	ZONE	RESIDENTIAL	COMMERCIAL

	 	 	Urban Residential	Neighborhood Business	Community Business	Office

	SIC#	SPECIFIC LAND USE	R-1 – R-8	R-12 – R-18	NB	CB	O

	 	DWELLING UNITS, TYPES:	 	 	 	 	 

	*	Single detached	P

C9	P

C9	X	X	X

	*	Townhouse	P10	P	P2	P2	P2

	*	Apartment	P3	P	P2	P2	P2

	*	Mobile home park	C6	P	X	X	X

	*	Duplexes(17)	P16	P	X	X	X

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	GROUP RESIDENCES:	 	 	 	 	 

	*	Community residential facility-I	C	P	P2	P2	P2

	*	Community residential facility-II	X	X	P2	P2	P2

	*	Dormitory	C4	P	X	X	X

	*	Senior citizen assisted housing	X	P	P2	P2	P2

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	ACCESSORY USES:	 	 	 	 	 

	*	Residential accessory uses	P5	P5	X	X	X

	*	Home business Type 1	P	P	P	P	P

	*	Home business Type 2	C	C	C	C	C

	*	EV charging station(11, 12)	P13	P13	P	P	P

	*	Rapid charging station(14)	P15	P15	P	P	P

	*	Cooperative(18)	X	X	X	X	X

	*	Collective garden(18)	X	X	X	X	X

	*	TEMPORARY LODGING:	 	 	 	 	 

	7011	Hotel/motel (1)	X	X	X	P	P

	*	Bed and breakfast guesthouse	P7	P7	P7	P8	X

	7041	Organization hotel/lodging houses	X	X	X	X	X

B. Development Conditions. 

1. Except bed and breakfast guesthouses.

2. Only as part of a mixed use development subject to the conditions of Chapter 21A.30 SMC, stand-alone townhouse developments are permitted subject to the provisions of SMC 21A.25.040, 21A.30.020, 21A.30.040 and 21A.30.140.

3. Only in a building listed on the National Register as an historic site or designated as a landmark subject to the provisions of Chapter 21A.70 SMC.

4. Only as an accessory to a school, college/university, or church.

5. a. Accessory dwelling units:

(1) Only one accessory dwelling per primary single detached dwelling unit;

(2) Only in the same building as the primary dwelling unit when there is more than one primary dwelling on a lot;

(3) The primary dwelling unit or the accessory dwelling unit shall be owner occupied;

(4) The accessory dwelling units shall not exceed a floor area of 1,000 square feet when detached, except when one of the dwelling units is wholly contained within the existing residence then the floor area shall not exceed 50 percent of the floor area of the existing unit;

(5) When the primary and accessory dwelling units are located in the same building, only one entrance may be located on each street side of the building;

(6) The total number of occupants in both the primary residence and the accessory dwelling unit combined may not exceed the maximum number established by the definition of family in SMC 21A.15.450;

(7) Additions to an existing structure or the development of a newly constructed detached ADU shall be designed consistent with the existing facade, roof pitch, siding, and windows of the primary dwelling unit;

(8) No additional off-street parking space shall be required when the parcel contains four or more parking spaces;

(9) The accessory dwelling unit shall be converted to another permitted use or shall be removed if one of the dwelling units ceases to be owner occupied; and

(10) An applicant seeking to build an accessory dwelling unit shall file a notice approved by the department with the records and elections division that identifies the dwelling unit as accessory. The notice shall run with the land. The applicant shall submit proof that the notice was filed before the department shall approve any permit for the construction of the accessory dwelling unit. The required contents and form of the notice shall be set forth in administrative rules.

b. One single or twin engine, noncommercial aircraft shall be permitted only on lots that abut, or have a legal access that is not a City right-of-way, to a waterbody or landing field, provided:

(1) No aircraft sales, service, repair, charter, or rental; and

(2) No storage of aviation fuel except that contained in the tank or tanks of the aircraft.

6. Mobile home parks shall not be permitted in the R-1 zones.

7. Only as an accessory to the permanent residence of the operator, provided:

a. Serving meals to paying guests shall be limited to breakfast; and

b. The number of persons accommodated per night shall not exceed five, except that a structure which satisfies the standards of the Uniform Building Code as adopted by the City of Sammamish for R-1 occupancies may accommodate up to 10 persons per night.

8. Only when part of a mixed use development.

9. Required prior to approving more than one dwelling on individual lots, except on lots in subdivisions, short subdivisions, or binding site plans approved for multiple unit lots, and except as provided for accessory dwelling units in subsection (B)(5) of this section.

10. Only when done in accordance with the low impact development standards in SMC 21A.30.020 and Chapter 21A.85 SMC.

11. Level 1 and Level 2 charging only.

12. Level 1 and Level 2 charging are permitted in critical aquifer recharge areas and in other critical areas when serving an existing use.

13. Allowed only as accessory to a primary permitted use or permitted conditional use.

14. The term “rapid” is used interchangeably with “Level 3” and “fast charging.”

15. Only as an “electric vehicle charging station – restricted.”

16. Duplexes are allowed in R-4, R-6 and R-8 zones only. Duplexes must be new construction only; no additions to existing structures are allowed.

17. Duplexes only are subject to the design standards in SMC 21B.30.270 and are defined in SMC 21B.15.160. Affordable duplex units that meet the provisions of SMC 21B.75.050 and 21B.75.060 shall be counted as one-half of a dwelling unit for the purpose of calculating density. Units in duplexes on the corners of rights-of-way shall be counted as one-half a dwelling unit for the purpose of calculating density. The entrances to the duplex dwelling units on corners shall be located with only one entrance facing on each street side of the building.

18. All marijuana related uses both medical and recreational, including marijuana collective gardens, marijuana cooperatives, marijuana producers, marijuana processors, marijuana distributors, and marijuana retailers, are prohibited in all zones in the City of Sammamish. (Ord. O2016-406 § 3 (Att. C); Ord. O2012-327 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2011-316 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2011-300 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2009-249 § 1; Ord. O2003-132 § 11)


21A.20.040 Recreational/cultural land uses.

A. Table of Recreational/Cultural Land Uses.

KEY

P – Permitted Use

C – Conditional Use

S – Special Use

X – Prohibited Use

	 	 	ZONE	RESIDENTIAL	COMMERCIAL

	 	 	Urban Residential	Neighborhood Business	Community Business	Office

	SIC#	SPECIFIC LAND USE	R-1 – R-8	R-12 – R-18	NB	CB	O

	 	PARK/RECREATION:	 	 	 	 	 

	*	Park	P1	P1, P10	P	P	P

	*	Trails	P	P	P	P	P

	*	Marina	C2	C2	P4	P	P

	*	Sports club (9)	C3	C3	C	P	X

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	AMUSEMENT/ENTERTAINMENT:	 	 	 	 	 

	*	Theater	X	X	X	P5	P5

	7833	Theater, drive-in	X	X	X	X	X

	793	Bowling center	X	X	X	P	X

	*	Golf facility	P6	P6	X	X	X

	7999	Amusement and recreation services	P7

C	P7

C	X	P	X

	*	Amusement arcades	X	X	X	P	X

	 	CULTURAL:	 	 	 	 	 

	823	Library	P8

C	P8

C	P	P	P

	841	Museum	P8

C	P8

C	P	P	P

	842	Arboretum	P	P	P	P	P

	*	Conference center	P8

C	P8

C	P	X	P

B. Development Conditions.

1. The following conditions and limitations shall apply, where appropriate:

a. No stadiums on sites less than 10 acres;

b. Lighting for structures and fields shall be directed away from residential areas;

c. Setback requirements for structures in these on-site required recreation areas shall be maintained pursuant to SMC 21A.25.030. Buildings, service yards, swing sets, sandboxes, playhouses, other playground equipment, basketball hoops, tennis courts, camping tents, temporary tent structures used for functions and gathering, and dumpsters shall maintain a minimum distance of 20 feet from property lines adjoining residential zones R-1 to R-8.

2. Limited to day moorage. The marina shall not create a need for off-site public services beyond those already available prior to date of application.

3. Limited to recreation facilities subject to the following conditions and limitations:

a. The bulk and scale shall be compatible with residential or rural character of the area; 

b. For sports clubs, the gross floor area shall not exceed 10,000 square feet unless the building is on the same site or adjacent to a site where a public facility is located or unless the building is a nonprofit facility located in the urban area; and

c. Use is limited to residents of a specified residential development or to sports clubs providing supervised instructional or athletic programs.

4. Limited to day moorage.

5. Adult use facilities shall be prohibited within 660 feet of any residential zones, any other adult use facility, or school licensed daycare centers, parks, community centers, public libraries or churches which conduct religious or educational classes for minors.

6. Clubhouses, maintenance buildings and equipment storage areas, and driving range tees shall be at least 50 feet from residential property lines. Lighting for practice greens and driving range ball impact areas shall be directed away from adjoining residential zones.

7. Limited to a golf driving range as an accessory to golf courses.

8. Only as accessory to a park or in a building listed on the National Register as an historic site or designated as a landmark subject to the provisions of Chapter 21A.70 SMC.

9. Only for stand-alone sports clubs that are not part of a park.

10. Park structures shall maintain a minimum distance of 10 feet from property lines adjoining multifamily zones R-12 and R-18. (Ord. O2016-406 § 3 (Att. C); Ord. O2010-279 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-171 § 2; Ord. O2003-132 § 11)


21A.20.050 General services land uses.

A. Table of General Services Land Uses.

KEY

P – Permitted Use

C – Conditional Use

S – Special Use

X – Prohibited Use

	 	 	ZONE	RESIDENTIAL	COMMERCIAL

	 	 	Urban Residential	Neighborhood Business	Community Business	Office

	SIC#	SPECIFIC LAND USE	R-1 – R-8	R-12 – R-18	NB	CB	O

	 	PERSONAL SERVICES:	 	 	 	 	 

	72	General personal service	X	X	P	P	P3

	7216	Drycleaning plants	X	X	X	X	X

	7261	Funeral home/crematory	C4	C4	X	P	X

	*	Cemetery, columbarium or mausoleum	P20

C5	P20

C5	P20	P20	P20

	*	Daycare I	P6	P	P	P	P7

	*	Daycare II	P8

C	P8

C	P	P	P7

	074	Veterinary clinic	X	X	P9	P9	X

	753	Automotive repair(1)	X	X	P10	P	X

	754	Automotive service	X	X	P10	P	X

	76	Miscellaneous repair	X	X	X	P	X

	*	Battery exchange station	X	X	P10	P10	X

	866	Churches, synagogue, temple	P11

C	P11

C	P	P	P

	83	Social services(2)	P11

C12	P11

C12	P12	P	P

	*	Stable	P13

C	X	X	X	X

	*	Kennel or cattery	X	X	X	C	X

	*	Theater production services	X	X	X	P24	X

	*	Artist studios	P22	P22	P	P	P23

	*	Interim recycling facility	P17	P17	P18	P18	X

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	HEALTH SERVICES:	 	 	 	 	 

	801 – 04	Office/outpatient clinic	P11

C12	P11

C12	P	P	P

	805	Nursing and personal care facilities	X	C	X	P	X

	806	Hospital	C12	C12	X	P	C

	807	Medical/dental lab	X	X	X	P	P

	808 – 09	Miscellaneous health	X	X	X	P	P

	*	Marijuana producer(25)	X	X	X	X	X

	*	Marijuana processor(25)	X	X	X	X	X

	*	Marijuana retailer(25)	X	X	X	X	X

	*	Cooperative(25)	X	X	X	X	X

	*	Collective garden(25)	X	X	X	X	X

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	EDUCATION SERVICES:	 	 	 	 	 

	*	Elementary school	P	P	X	X	X

	*	Middle/junior high school	P	P	X	X	X

	*	Secondary or high school	P21	P21	X	X	X

	*	Vocational school	P12

C	P12

C	X	C	P14

	*	Specialized instruction school	P15

C16	P15

C16	P	P	P14

	*	School district support facility	P19

C	P19

C	C	P	P

B. Development Conditions.

1. Except SIC Industry No. 7534, Tire retreading, see manufacturing permitted use table.

2. Except SIC Industry Group Nos.:

a. 835 – Daycare services; and

b. 836 – Residential care, which is otherwise provided for on the residential permitted land use table.

3. Limited to SIC Industry Group and Industry Nos.:

a. 723 – Beauty shops;

b. 724 – Barber shops;

c. 725 – Shoe repair shops and shoeshine parlors;

d. 7212 – Garment pressing and agents for laundries and drycleaners;

e. 217 – Carpet and upholstery cleaning.

4. Only as an accessory to a cemetery.

5. Structures shall maintain a minimum distance of 100 feet from property lines adjoining residential zones.

6. Only as an accessory to residential use, provided:

a. Outdoor play areas shall be completely enclosed by a solid wall or fence, with no openings except for gates, and have a minimum height of six feet; and

b. Outdoor play equipment shall maintain a minimum distance of 20 feet from property lines adjoining residential zones.

7. Permitted as an accessory use, see commercial/industrial accessory, SMC 21A.20.060 (A).

8. Only as a re-use of a public school facility subject to the provisions of Chapter 21A.70 SMC, or an accessory use to a school, church, park, sport club or public housing administered by a public agency, provided:

a. Outdoor play areas shall be completely enclosed by a solid wall or fence, with no openings except for gates and have a minimum height of six feet;

b. Outdoor play equipment shall maintain a minimum distance of 20 feet from property lines adjoining residential zones; 

c. Direct access to a developed arterial street shall be required in any residential zone; and

d. Hours of operation may be restricted to assure compatibility with surrounding development.

9. a. No burning of refuse or dead animals is allowed;

b. The portion of the building or structure in which animals are kept or treated shall be soundproofed. All run areas, excluding confinement areas for livestock, shall be surrounded by an eight-foot solid wall and surfaced with concrete or other impervious material; and 

c. The provisions of Chapter 21A.65 SMC relative to animal keeping are met.

10. The repair work, battery exchange station work, or service shall only be performed in an enclosed building, and no outdoor storage of materials. SIC Industry No. 7532, Top, body, and upholstery repair shops and paint shops, is not allowed.

11. Only as a re-use of a public school facility subject to the provisions of Chapter 21A.70 SMC.

12. Only as a re-use of a surplus nonresidential facility subject to Chapter 21A.70 SMC.

13. Covered riding arenas are subject to the provisions of Chapter 21A.65 SMC and shall not exceed 20,000 square feet; provided, that stabling areas, whether attached or detached, shall not be counted in this calculation.

14. All instruction must be within an enclosed structure.

15. Only as an accessory to residential use, provided:

a. Students are limited to 12 per one-hour session;

b. All instruction must be within an enclosed structure; and

c. Structures used for the school shall maintain a distance of 25 feet from property lines adjoining residential zones.

16. Subject to the following:

a. Structures used for the school and accessory uses shall maintain a minimum distance of 25 feet from property lines adjoining residential zones; 

b. On lots over two and one-half acres:

(1) Retail sales of items related to the instructional courses are permitted, provided total floor area for retail sales is limited to 2,000 square feet;

(2) Sales of food prepared in the instructional courses are permitted, provided total floor area for food sales is limited to 1,000 square feet and is located in the same structure as the school; and

(3) Other incidental student-supporting uses are allowed, provided such uses are found to be both compatible with and incidental to the principal use; and

c. On sites over 10 acres, and zoned R-1 and/or R-4:

(1) Retail sales of items related to the instructional courses are permitted, provided total floor area for retail sales is limited to 2,000 square feet;

(2) Sales of food prepared in the instructional courses are permitted, provided total floor area for food sales is limited to 1,750 square feet and is located in the same structure as the school;

(3) Other incidental student-supporting uses are allowed, provided such uses are found to be functionally related, subordinate, compatible with and incidental to the principal use;

(4) The use is integrated with allowable agricultural uses on the site;

(5) Advertised special events shall comply with the temporary use requirements of this chapter; and

(6) Existing structures that are damaged or destroyed by fire or natural event, if damaged by more than 50 percent of their prior value, may reconstruct and expand an additional 65 percent of the original floor area but need not be approved as a conditional use if their use otherwise complies with the standards set forth in development condition (B)(16)(c) of this section and the requirements of this title.

17. Limited to drop box facilities accessory to a public or community use such as a school, fire station or community center.

18. With the exception of drop box facilities for the collection and temporary storage of recyclable materials, all processing and storage of material shall be within enclosed buildings. Yard waste processing is not permitted.

19. Only when adjacent to an existing or proposed school.

20. Limited to columbariums accessory to a church; provided, that required landscaping and parking are not reduced.

21. a. New high schools shall be permitted in urban residential zones subject to the review process set forth in Chapter 21A.100 SMC; and

b. Renovation, expansion, modernization, or reconstruction of a school, or the addition of relocatable facilities, is permitted. 

22. Only as a re-use of a surplus nonresidential facility subject to Chapter 21A.70 SMC or as a joint use of an existing public school facility.

23. All studio use must be within an enclosed structure.

24. Adult use facilities shall be prohibited within 660 feet of any residential zones, any other adult use facility, or school licensed daycare centers, parks, community centers, public libraries or churches which conduct religious or educational classes for minors.

25. All marijuana related uses both medical and recreational, including marijuana collective gardens, marijuana cooperatives, marijuana producers, marijuana processors, marijuana distributors, and marijuana retailers, are prohibited in all zones in the City of Sammamish. (Ord. O2016-406 § 3 (Att. C); Ord. O2011-300 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2009-249 § 1; Ord. O2003-132 § 11)


21A.20.060 Government/business services land uses.

A. Table of Government/Business Service Land Uses.

KEY

P – Permitted Use

C – Conditional Use

S – Special Use

X – Prohibited Use

	 	 	ZONE	RESIDENTIAL	COMMERCIAL

	 	 	Urban Residential	Neighborhood Business	Community Business	Office

	SIC#	SPECIFIC LAND USE	R-1 – R-8	R-12 – R-18	NB	CB	O

	 	GOVERNMENT SERVICES:	 	 	 	 	 

	*	Public agency or utility yard(25)	C25	C25	P	P	P

	*	Satellite public agency or utility yard	P26

C	P26

C	P	P	P

	*	Public agency or utility office	P2, P27

C	P2, P27

C	P	P	P

	*	Public agency archives	P27	P27	X	X	P

	921	Court	P27	P27	P3	P3	P

	9221	Police facility	P27	P27	P5	P	P

	9224	Fire facility	C4	C4	P	P	P

	*	Utility facility	P22

C21	P22

C21	P	P	P

	*	Commuter parking lot	C

P14	C

P14	P	P	P

	*	Private storm water management facility	P6	P6	P6	P6	P6

	*	Vactor waste receiving facility	P13	P13	P23	P23	P23

	*	Farmers’ market	P26, P27	P26, P27	P	P	P

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	BUSINESS SERVICES:	 	 	 	 	 

	*	Construction and trade	X	X	X	X	P7

	*	Individual transportation and taxi	X	X	X	P18	P8

	421	Trucking and courier service	X	X	X	P9	P10

	*	Self-service storage	X	C11	X	P	P

	473	Freight and cargo service	X	X	X	X	P

	472	Passenger transportation service	X	X	X	P	P

	48	Communication offices	X	X	X	X	P

	482	Telegraph and other communications	X	X	X	P	P

	*	General business service	X	X	P	P	P

	*	Professional office	X	P31	P	P	P

	7312	Outdoor advertising service	X	X	X	X	P12

	735	Miscellaneous equipment rental	X	X	X	P12	P12

	751	Automotive rental and leasing	X	X	X	P	X

	752	Automotive parking	X	X	P15	P15	P15

	*	Off-street required parking lot	P24	P24	P24	P24	P24

	7941	Professional sport teams/promoters	X	X	X	X	P

	873	Research, development and testing	X	X	X	X	P1

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	ACCESSORY USES:	 	 	 	 	 

	*	Commercial/industrial accessory uses	X	X	P16	P16	P

	*	Helistop	C17	C17	C17	C17	C17

	*	EV charging station(28, 29)	P	P	P	P	P

	*	Rapid charging station(29, 30)	P	P	P	P	P

B. Development Conditions.

1. Except SIC Industry No. 8732, Commercial economic, sociological, and educational research, see general business service/office.

2. a. Only as a re-use of a public school facility or a surplus nonresidential facility subject to the provisions of Chapter 21A.70 SMC; or

b. Only when accessory to a fire facility and the office is no greater than 1,500 square feet of floor area.

3. Only as a re-use of a surplus nonresidential facility subject to Chapter 21A.70 SMC. 

4. a. All buildings and structures shall maintain a minimum distance of 20 feet from property lines adjoining residential zones;

b. Any buildings from which fire-fighting equipment emerges onto a street shall maintain a distance of 35 feet from such street;

c. No outdoor storage.

5. Limited to “storefront” police offices. Such offices shall not have:

a. Holding cells;

b. Suspect interview rooms (except in the NB zone); or

c. Long-term storage of stolen properties.

6. Private storm water management facilities serving development proposals located on commercial zoned lands shall also be located on commercial lands, unless participating in an approved shared facility drainage plan. Such facilities serving development within an area designated “urban” in the King County comprehensive plan shall only be located in the urban area.

7. No outdoor storage of materials.

8. Limited to office uses.

9. Limited to self-service household moving truck or trailer rental accessory to a gasoline service station.

10. Limited to SIC Industry No. 4215, Courier services, except by air.

11. Accessory to an apartment development of at least 12 units, provided:

a. The gross floor area in self-service storage shall not exceed the total gross floor area of the apartment dwellings on the site;

b. All outdoor lights shall be deflected, shaded and focused away from all adjoining property;

c. The use of the facility shall be limited to dead storage of household goods;

d. No servicing or repair of motor vehicles, boats, trailers, lawn mowers or similar equipment; 

e. No outdoor storage or storage of flammable liquids, highly combustible or explosive materials or hazardous chemicals;

f. No residential occupancy of the storage units;

g. No business activity other than the rental of storage units; and

h. A resident director shall be required on the site and shall be responsible for maintaining the operation of the facility in conformance with the conditions of approval.

12. No outdoor storage.

13. Only as an accessory use to a public agency or utility yard, or to a transfer station.

14. Limited to new commuter parking lots designed for 30 or fewer parking spaces or commuter parking lots located on existing parking lots for churches, schools, or other permitted nonresidential uses which have excess capacity available during commuting; provided, that the new or existing lot is adjacent to a designated arterial that has been improved to a standard acceptable to the Department of Transportation.

15. No tow-in lots for damaged, abandoned or otherwise impounded vehicles.

16. Storage limited to accessory storage of commodities sold at retail on the premises or materials used in the fabrication of commodities sold on the premises.

17. Limited to emergency medical evacuation sites in conjunction with police, fire or health service facilities.

18. Limited to private road ambulance services with no outside storage of vehicles.

19. Limited to two acres or less.

20. a. Utility yards only on sites with utility district offices; or

b. Public agency yards are limited to material storage for road maintenance facilities.

21. Limited to bulk gas storage tanks which pipe to individual residences but excluding liquefied natural gas storage tanks.

22. Excluding bulk gas storage tanks.

23. Vactor waste treatment, storage and disposal shall be limited to liquid materials. Materials shall be disposed of directly into a sewer system, or shall be stored in tanks (or other covered structures), as well as enclosed buildings.

24. Provided:

a. Off-street required parking for a land use located in the urban area must be located in the urban area;

b. Off-street required parking for a land use located in the rural area must be located in the rural area; and

c. Off-street required parking must be located on a lot which would permit, either outright or through a land use permit approval process, the land use the off-street parking will serve. 

25. Prior to issuing the notice of decision, the applicant shall hold a second neighborhood meeting consistent with the provisions of SMC 20.05.035.

26. Accessory to an existing publicly owned and improved site, limited to parks and schools.

27. Accessory to an existing publicly owned and improved site, containing a school, City Hall, or civic center.

28. Level 1 and Level 2 charging are permitted in critical aquifer recharge areas and in other critical areas when serving an existing use.

29. Allowed only as accessory to a primary permitted use or permitted conditional use. 

30. The term “rapid” is used interchangeably with “Level 3” and “fast charging.”

31. The professional office use and improvements shall be subject to the following limitations:

a. Only allowed within the Inglewood and Pine Lake Community Centers as designated by the Sammamish Comprehensive Plan;

b. The total floor area associated with the use shall not exceed 3,000 square feet;

c. The hours that the business is open to the public shall be limited to between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.;

d. The number of individual professional office spaces shall not exceed three per building; and

e. The individual professional office spaces shall be located on the ground floor of the building in which they are located. (Ord. O2016-406 § 3 (Att. C); Ord. O2011-300 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2011-299 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-279 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-170 § 1; Ord. O2003-132 § 11)


21A.20.070 Retail land uses.

A. Table of Retail Land Uses.

KEY

P – Permitted Use

C – Conditional Use

S – Special Use

X – Prohibited Use

	 	 	ZONE	RESIDENTIAL	COMMERCIAL

	 	 	Urban Residential	Neighborhood Business	Community Business	Office

	SIC#	SPECIFIC LAND USE	R-1 – R-8	R-12 – R-18	NB	CB	O

	*	Building, hardware and garden materials	X	X	P1	P	X

	*	Department and variety stores	X	X	P	P	C

	54	Food stores	X	X	P	P	C

	*	Agricultural product sales	P2	X	X	X	X

	553	Auto supply stores	X	X	X	P4	X

	554	Gasoline service stations	X	X	P	P	X

	56	Apparel and accessory stores	X	X	X	P	X

	*	Furniture and home furnishings stores	X	X	X	P	X

	58	Eating and drinking places	X	X	P5	P	P

	*	Drug stores	X	X	P	P	C

	592	Liquor stores	X	X	X	P	X

	593	Used goods: antiques/secondhand shops	X	X	X	P	X

	*	Sporting goods and related stores	X	X	X	P	X

	*	Book, stationery, video and art supply stores	X	X	P	P	C

	*	Jewelry stores	X	X	X	P	X

	*	Hobby, toy, game shops	X	X	P	P	X

	*	Photographic and electronic shops	X	X	P	P	X

	*	Fabric shops	X	X	X	P	X

	598	Fuel dealers	X	X	X	C7	P

	*	Florist shops	X	X	P	P	P

	*	Personal medical supply stores	X	X	X	P	X

	*	Pet shops	X	X	P	P	X

	*	Bulk retail	X	X	X	P	X

	*	Livestock sales	P8, P9	X	X	X	X

	*	Marijuana retailer(10)	X	X	X	X	X

B. Development Conditions.

1. Only hardware and garden materials stores shall be permitted.

2. a. Except for hay sales, limited to products produced on site; and

b. Covered sales areas shall not exceed a total area of 500 square feet.

3. Limited to SIC Industry No. 5331, Variety stores, and further limited to a maximum of 2,000 square feet of gross floor area.

4. Only the sale of new or reconditioned automobile supplies is permitted.

5. Excluding SIC Industry No. 5813, Drinking places.

6. Adult use facilities shall be prohibited within 660 feet of any residential zones, any other adult use facility, school, licensed daycare centers, parks, community centers, public libraries, or churches which conduct religious or educational classes for minors.

7. No outside storage of fuel trucks and equipment.

8. Retail sale of livestock is permitted only as accessory to raising livestock.

9. Limited to the R-1 zone.

10. All marijuana related uses both medical and recreational, including marijuana collective gardens, marijuana cooperatives, marijuana producers, marijuana processors, marijuana distributors, and marijuana retailers, are prohibited in all zones in the City of Sammamish. (Ord. O2016-406 § 3 (Att. C); Ord. O2014-376 § 3 (Att. A); Ord. O2009-249 § 1; Ord. O2003-132 § 11)


21A.20.080 Manufacturing land uses.

A. Table of Manufacturing Land Uses.

KEY

P – Permitted Use

C – Conditional Use

S – Special Use

X – Prohibited Use

	 	 	ZONE	RESIDENTIAL	COMMERCIAL

	 	 	Urban Residential	Neighborhood Business	Community Business	Office

	SIC#	SPECIFIC LAND USE	R-1 – R-8	R-12 – R-18	NB	CB	O

	27	Printing and publishing	X	X	P1	P1	P1

C

	32	Stone, clay, glass and concrete products	X	X	X	P2	X

	357	Computer and office equipment	X	X	X	X	C

	38	Measuring and controlling instruments	X	X	X	X	C

	*	Marijuana producer(3)	X	X	X	X	X

	*	Marijuana processor(3)	X	X	X	X	X

	*	Cooperative(3)	X	X	X	X	X

	*	Collective garden(3)	X	X	X	X	X

B. Development Conditions.

1. Limited to photocopying and printing services offered to the general public.

2. Only within enclosed buildings, and as an accessory use to retail sales.

3. All marijuana related uses both medical and recreational, including marijuana collective gardens, marijuana cooperatives, marijuana producers, marijuana processors, marijuana distributors, and marijuana retailers, are prohibited in all zones in the City of Sammamish. (Ord. O2016-406 § 3 (Att. C); Ord. O2003-132 § 11)


21A.20.090 Resource land uses.

A. Table of Resource Land Uses.

KEY

P – Permitted Use

C – Conditional Use

S – Special Use

X – Prohibited Use

	 	 	ZONE	RESIDENTIAL	COMMERCIAL

	 	 	Urban Residential	Neighborhood Business	Community Business	Office

	SIC#	SPECIFIC LAND USE	R-1 – R-8	R-12 – R-18	NB	CB	O

	 	AGRICULTURE:	 	 	 	 	 

	01	Growing and harvesting crops	P	X	X	X	X

	02	Raising livestock and small animals	P2	X	X	X	X

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	FORESTRY:	 	 	 	 	 

	08	Growing and harvesting forest products	P	X	X	X	X

	*	Forest research	X	X	X	X	P1

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT:	 	 	 	 	 

	0921	Hatchery/fish preserve	C	X	X	X	X

	0273	Aquaculture	C	X	X	X	X

B. Development Conditions.

1. Only forest research conducted within an enclosed building.

2. Large livestock allowed only in the R1-8 zones. On parcels less than 2.00 acres the property must have an approved farm plan from the King County conservation district on file with the City. (Ord. O2016-406 § 3 (Att. C); Ord. O2009-249 § 1; Ord. O2003-132 § 11)


21A.20.100 Regional land uses.

A. Table of Regional Land Uses.

KEY

P – Permitted Use

C – Conditional Use

S – Special Use

X – Prohibited Use

	 	 	ZONE	RESIDENTIAL	COMMERCIAL

	 	 	Urban Residential	Neighborhood Business	Community Business	Office

	SIC#	SPECIFIC LAND USE	R-1 – R-8	R-12 – R-18	NB	CB	O

	*	Jail	S	S	S	S	S

	*	Work release facility	S	S	S	S	S

	*	Public agency training facility	X	X	X	S1	S1

	*	Hydroelectric generation facility	C9

S	X	X	X	X

	*	Nonhydroelectric generation facility	C8

S	C8

S	C8

S	C8

S	C8

S

	*	Communication facility	C4c

S	C4c

S	C4c

S	P	P

	*	Earth station	C4a

S	C4a

S	P4b

C	P	P

	13	Oil and gas extraction	S	S	S	S	S

	*	Energy resource recovery facility	S	S	S	S	S

	*	Landfill	S	S	S	S	S

	*	Transfer station	S	S	S	S	X

	*	Wastewater treatment facility	S	S	S	S	S

	*	Municipal water production	S	S	S	S	S

	*	Airport/heliport	S	S	S	S	S

	*	Transit bus base	S	S	S	S	S

	*	School bus base	C

P3

S	C3

S	S	S	S

	7948	Racetrack	S5	S5	S5	S	S5

	*	Fairground	X	X	X	S	X

	8422	Zoo/wildlife exhibit	S	S	X	S	X

	7941	Stadium/arena	X	X	X	X	X

	8221 – 8222	College/university	P6

C7

S	P6

C7

S	P6

C7

S	P	P

B. Development Conditions.

1. Except weapons armories and outdoor shooting ranges.

2. Except outdoor shooting range.

3. Only in conjunction with an existing or proposed school.

4. a. Limited to no more than three satellite dish antennas.

b. Limited to one satellite dish antenna.

c. Limited to tower consolidations.

5. Except racing of motorized vehicles.

6. Only as a re-use of a public school facility subject to the provisions of Chapter 21A.70 SMC.

7. Only as a re-use of a surplus nonresidential facility subject to the provisions of Chapter 21A.70 SMC.

8. Limited to cogeneration facilities for on-site use only.

9. Limited to facilities that comply with the following provisions:

a. Any new diversion structure shall not:

(1) Exceed a height of eight feet as measured from the stream bed; or

(2) Impound more than three surface acres of water at the normal maximum surface level;

b. There shall be no active storage;

c. The maximum water surface area at any existing dam or diversion shall not be increased;

d. An exceedance flow of no greater than 50 percent in mainstream reach shall be maintained;

e. Any transmission line shall be limited to a:

(1) Right-of-way of five miles or less; and

(2) Capacity of 230 KV or less;

f. Any new, permanent access road shall be limited to five miles or less; and 

g. The facility shall only be located above any portion of the stream used by anadromous fish. (Ord. O2016-406 § 3 (Att. C); Ord. O2003-132 § 11)


Chapter 21A.25 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS – DENSITY AND DIMENSIONS

Sections:

21A.25.010    Purpose.

21A.25.020    Interpretation of tables.

21A.25.030    Densities and dimensions – Residential zones.

21A.25.040    Densities and dimensions – Commercial zones.

21A.25.050    Measurement methods.

21A.25.060    Minimum urban residential density.

21A.25.070    Calculations – Allowable dwelling units, lots or floor area, lot coverage.

21A.25.080    Calculations – Site area used for density calculations.

21A.25.090    Calculations – Site area used for minimum density calculations.

21A.25.100    Repealed.

21A.25.110    Lot area – Prohibited reduction.

21A.25.120    Measurement of setbacks.

21A.25.130    Setbacks – Specific building or use.

21A.25.140    Setbacks – Livestock buildings and manure storage areas.

21A.25.150    Setbacks – Modifications.

21A.25.155    Setbacks – Required building separation.

21A.25.160    Setbacks – From regional utility corridors.

21A.25.170    Setbacks – From alley.

21A.25.180    Setbacks – Required modifications.

21A.25.190    Setbacks – Projections and structures allowed.

21A.25.200    Height – Exceptions to limits.

21A.25.210    Lot divided by zone boundary.

21A.25.220    Sight distance requirements.

21A.25.230    Repealed.


21A.25.010 Purpose. 

The purpose of this chapter is to establish basic dimensional standards for development, generally related to residential density and commercial intensity, setbacks, height, individual building bulk and variation, as well as specific rules for general application. The standards and rules are established to provide flexibility in project design and regulate some of the effects of density and intensity of development. (Ord. O2016-407 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 12)


21A.25.020 Interpretation of tables.

(1) SMC 21A.25.030 and 21A.25.040 contain general density and dimension standards for the various zones and limitations specific to a particular zone(s). Additional rules, exceptions, and methodologies are set forth in SMC 21A.25.050 through 21A.25.220.

(2) The density and dimension tables are arranged in a matrix format on two separate tables and are delineated into two general land use categories:

(a) Residential; and

(b) Commercial.

(3) Development standards are listed down the left side of both tables, and the zones are listed at the top. The matrix cells contain the minimum dimensional requirements of the zone. The parenthetical numbers in the matrix identify specific requirements applicable either to a specific use or zone. A blank box indicates that there are no specific requirements. If more than one standard appears in a cell, each standard will be subject to any applicable parenthetical footnote following the standard. (Ord. O2003-132 § 12)


21A.25.030 Densities and dimensions – Residential zones.

A. Residential Zones.

	 	Z

O

N

E

S	RESIDENTIAL

	 	URBAN RESIDENTIAL

	STANDARDS	R-1(13)	R-4	R-6	R-8	R-12	R-18

	Maximum Density

DU/Acre (11)	1 du/ac	4 du/ac

(5)	6 du/ac	8 du/ac	12 du/ac	18 du/ac

	Minimum Density (2)	 	 	 	85%

(14)	80%

(14)	75%

(14)

	Minimum Lot Width	35 ft

(6)	30 ft

(6)	30 ft

(6)	30 ft	30 ft	30 ft

	Minimum Front Yard Structure Setback (7)(22)	20 ft

(25)	15 ft

(16) (25)	15 ft

(16) (25)	10 ft	10 ft	10 ft

	Minimum Rear Yard Structure Setback (8)(21)(22)	10 ft	10 ft	10 ft	10 ft	5 ft	5 ft

	Minimum Side Yard Structure Setback (2)(8)(12)(21)(22)	10 ft	10 ft	10 ft	10 ft	5 ft	5 ft

	Minimum Front Yard Single Detached Dwelling Setback (7)(12)	20 ft

(6) (25)	15 ft

(6) (16) (23) (25)	15 ft

(6) (16) (24) (25)	10 ft	10 ft	10 ft

	Minimum Side Yard Single Detached Dwelling Setback (2)(8)(12)(21)	25 ft	5 ft

(23)	5 ft

(24)	5 ft

(26)	5 ft	5 ft

	Minimum Rear Yard Single Detached Dwelling Setback (8)(21)	30 ft	12 ft

(23)	12 ft

(24)	20 ft	20 ft	20 ft

	Minimum Side Yard Detached Accessory Dwelling Setback (17)(27)	5 ft	5 ft	5 ft	5 ft	5 ft	5 ft

	Minimum Rear Yard Detached Accessory Dwelling Setback (17)(27)	5 ft	5 ft	5 ft	5 ft	5 ft	5 ft

	Maximum Structure Height (3)(15)(29)	35 ft

(20)	35 ft

(20)

 	35 ft

(20)

 	35 ft

(20)

 	60 ft	60 ft

80 ft

(10)

	Maximum Detached Accessory Dwelling Structure Height (28)	18 ft	18 ft	18 ft	18 ft	18 ft	18 ft

	Maximum Impervious Surface: Percentage (4)(30)	30%

(9)	 	 	75%	85%	85%

	Minimum Yard Area (18)(30)	 	45%	35%	 	 	 

	Maximum Lot Coverage (19)(30)	 	40%	50%	 	 	 

B. Development Conditions.

1. Also see SMC 21A.25.060.

2. These standards may be modified under the provisions for zero lot line and townhouse developments.

3. Netting or fencing and support structures for the netting or fencing used to contain golf balls in the operation of golf courses or golf driving ranges are exempt from the structure height requirements; provided, that the maximum height shall not exceed 75 feet.

4. Applies to each individual lot. Impervious surface area standards for:

a. Regional uses shall be established at the time of permit review;

b. Nonresidential uses in residential zones shall comply with SMC 21A.25.130;

c. Lot may be increased beyond the total amount permitted in this chapter subject to approval of a conditional use permit.

5. Mobile home parks shall be allowed a base density of six dwelling units per acre.

6. All lots located within the R-1, R-4, and R-6 zoning districts created under SMC Title 19A must abut a public or private street and shall be orientated so that the average street frontage or average front yard width of each lot created equals the minimum lot width requirements pursuant to subsection (A) of this section with no individual lot having a street frontage or front yard abutting the street of less than 20 feet.

7. At least 20 linear feet of driveway shall be provided between any garage, carport or other fenced parking area and the street property line. The linear distance shall be measured along the center line of the driveway from the access point to such garage, carport or fenced area to the street property line.

8. For townhouse and apartment development, the setback shall be a minimum of 20 feet along any property line abutting R-1 through R-8.

9. Lots smaller than one-half acre in area shall comply with standards of the nearest comparable R-4 through R-8 zone. For lots that are one-half acre in area or larger, the impervious surface area allowed shall be 10,000 square feet or 30 percent of the property, whichever is greater. On any lot over one acre in area, an additional five percent of the lot area may be used for buildings related to agricultural or forestry practices. For lots smaller than two acres but larger than one-half acre, an additional 10 percent of the lot area may be used for structures which are determined to be medically necessary, provided the applicant submits with the permit application a notarized affidavit, conforming with the requirements of SMC 21A.70.170(1)(b). Public projects shall be subject to the applicable impervious surface provisions of the R-4 zone.

10. The 80-foot maximum structure height is to be used only for projects in the R-18 zone using residential density incentives and transfer of density credits pursuant to this title.

11. Density applies only to dwelling units and not to sleeping units.

12. Vehicle access points from garages, carports or fenced parking areas shall be set back from the property line on which a joint use driveway is located to provide a straight line length of at least 30 feet as measured from the center line of the garage, carport or fenced parking area, from the access point to the opposite side of the joint use driveway.

13. All subdivisions and short subdivisions in the R-1 zone shall be required to be clustered away from critical areas or the axis of designated corridors such as urban separators or the wildlife habitat network to the extent possible and a permanent open space tract that includes at least 50 percent of the site shall be created. Open space tracts shall meet the provisions of SMC 21A.30.030.

14. See SMC 21A.25.090.

15. Subject to the increase in maximum structure height permitted pursuant to Chapter 21A.85 SMC, low impact development incentives, and SMC 21A.30.020.

16. Thirty percent of the area contained within the front yard setback shall be landscaped. This part of the front yard setback area may be used to comply with the minimum yard area percentage.

17. When constructed in accordance with SMC 21A.20.030(B)(5).

18. For the purposes of this section, “yard” is any surface area that is not structured or hardened. Yard areas may be landscaped, contain uncovered decks of less than 18 inches above grade, and artificial turf, but do not include areas covered by pervious concrete or other similar materials.

19. The maximum lot coverage may be increased by five percentile points once, if a covered outdoor living space or an accessory dwelling unit is built on site. For the purposes of this section, a covered outdoor living space includes any structure with a roof that is not fully enclosed by walls.

20. For new single-family residential homes and additions in single-family land use districts, the maximum height of any individual building facade is 40 feet. Facades taller than 40 feet may be permitted when architectural modulation is provided that includes:

a. An upper story balcony, porch, deck, exterior stairway, or other functional architectural feature; and

b. A floor line projection (e.g., skirt roof), roof ledger, window fenestrations, pillars, columns, or similar architectural design features (such as bay windows, window seats, or awnings) to provide articulation and reduce massing effects.

21. Reduction of minimum rear yard and/or side yard setbacks shall be granted when bundled and submitted with a Type I permit application and when agreement with the adjoining property owner(s) of a parcel under separate ownership has been reached resulting in an executed agreement that includes an approved site plan consenting to a reduction of setback. The agreement shall provide that it runs with the land and must be recorded with King County Records prior to permit issuance. The agreement shall reference the parcel number and legal description of all affected properties and conform to a format specified by the director. Provided, no side or rear setback may be reduced to less than five feet. Further provided, that setback reductions granted under this part shall not cause for a violation or nonconformance with existing site restrictions (e.g., easements) or adopted construction codes, Chapter 16.05 SMC. The setback reduction granted under this part shall not be available for or applicable to lots created through the subdivision process that remain vested under RCW 58.17.170.

22. Applies to all structures and buildings unless modified for primary single detached dwelling units or detached accessory dwelling units.

23. R-4 setbacks for primary single detached dwelling units are dynamic. The minimum dimension listed in the table is modified as follows in response to home size:

a. For single-family homes less than 2,500 square feet:

Front setback: not less than 15 feet (20 feet minimum for garages);

Side setback: not less than five feet;

Rear setback: an average of 15 feet but at no point less than 12 feet.

b. For single-family homes between 2,500 square feet and 4,000 square feet:

Front setback: not less than 20 feet;

Side setback: an average of 10 feet but at no point less than eight feet;

Rear setback: an average of 20 feet but at no point less than 15 feet.

c. For single-family homes greater than 4,000 square feet:

Front setback: not less than 25 feet;

Side setback: an average of 12 feet but at no point less than 10 feet;

Rear setback: an average of 25 feet but at no point less than 20 feet.

24. R-6 setbacks for primary single detached dwelling units are dynamic. The minimum dimension listed in the table is modified as follows in response to home size:

a. For single-family homes less than 2,500 square feet:

Front setback: not less than 15 feet (20 feet minimum for garages);

Side setback: not less than five feet;

Rear setback: an average of 15 feet but at no point less than 12 feet.

b. For single-family homes between 2,500 square feet and 4,000 square feet:

Front setback: not less than 15 feet (20 feet minimum for garages);

Side setback: an average of 10 feet but at no point less than eight feet;

Rear setback: an average of 20 feet but at no point less than 15 feet.

c. For single-family homes greater than 4,000 square feet:

Front setback: not less than 20 feet;

Side setback: an average of 12 feet but at no point less than 10 feet;

Rear setback: an average of 25 feet but at no point less than 20 feet.

25. The front yard setback along any arterial streets shall be 30 feet.

26. Side yard setbacks shall be a minimum of 10 feet when the abutting property is zoned R-1, R-4, or R-6.

27. Only applies to stand-alone detached accessory dwelling units. Does not apply to detached accessory dwelling units that are combined with other structures or improvements such as pool houses, outdoor kitchens, detached garages, covered patios, etc. Standard minimum structure setbacks apply to detached accessory dwelling units that are combined with other structures and improvements.

28. Does not apply to detached accessory dwelling units that conform to minimum structure setbacks.

29. For school and government uses, structure height may exceed the maximum structure height by one foot for every one foot the front, side, and rear yard setbacks are increased above the minimum setbacks; provided, however, the maximum structure height may not exceed 75 feet.

30. For school and government uses, maximum impervious surface limitations, minimum yard area requirements, and maximum lot coverage restrictions may be increased as part of the review of a Type 1, Type 2, or Type 3 permit application to accommodate instances where they render a necessary component of a project infeasible. Deviation from the maximum impervious surface limitations, minimum yard area requirements, and maximum lot coverage restrictions shall be granted if the following are satisfied: (a) the proposed increase is the minimum necessary to resolve the design conflict as demonstrated through written engineering analysis prepared by a qualified consultant and verified by the City; (b) the proposed increase will not result in impact to the root zone and tree protection areas required for retained significant trees under SMC 21A.37.270; and (c) the project is compliant with applicable stormwater regulations. (Ord. O2019-482 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-429 § 3 (Att. C); Ord. O2016-407 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-279 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2009-249 § 1; Ord. O2008-236 § 1; Ord. O2004-143 § 1; Ord. O2003-132 § 12)


21A.25.040 Densities and dimensions – Commercial zones.

A. Commercial Zones.

	 	Z

O

N

E

S	COMMERCIAL

	 	NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS	COMMUNITY BUSINESS	OFFICE

	STANDARDS	NB	CB	O

	Maximum Density

DU/Acre 	8 du/ac

(1)	18 du/ac

(1)	18 du/ac

(1)

	Minimum Lot Area	 	 	 

	Maximum Lot Depth/Width Ratio	 	10 ft	10 ft

	Minimum Rear Yard Setback (4)	20 ft

(5)	20 ft

(5)	20 ft

(5)

	Minimum Front Yard Setback	10 ft

(2)	10 ft

(2)	10 ft

	Minimum Side Yard Setback (4)	20 ft

(5)	20 ft

(5)	20 ft

(5)

	Maximum Structure Height (7)	35 ft

45 ft

(3)	35 ft

60 ft

(3)	45 ft

60 ft

(3)

	Maximum Floor/Lot Ratio: Square Feet	1/1

(6)	1.5/1

(6)	2.5/1

(6)

	Maximum Impervious Surface: Percentage (8)(9)	85%	85% 	75%

B. Development Conditions.

1. These densities are allowed only through the application of mixed use development standards and for stand-alone townhouse development in the NB zone on property designated commercial outside of center in the urban area.

2. Gas station pump islands shall be placed no closer than 25 feet to street front lines.

3. This maximum structure height allowed only for mixed use developments and for stand-alone townhouse development in the NB zone on property designated commercial outside of center in the urban area.

4. Required on property lines adjoining residential zones.

5. Required on property lines adjoining residential zones for industrial uses established by conditional use permits.

6. The floor/lot ratio for mixed use developments shall conform to Chapter 21A.30 SMC.

7. Height limits may be increased when portions of the structure or building which exceed the maximum structure height limit provide one additional foot of front, rear, and side yard setback for each foot above the maximum structure height limit, provided the maximum height may exceed 75 feet only in mixed use developments. Netting or fencing and support structures for the netting or fencing used to contain golf balls in the operation of golf courses or golf driving ranges are exempt from this additional setback requirement; provided, that the maximum height shall not exceed 75 feet.

8. The impervious surface area for any lot may be increased beyond the total amount permitted in this chapter subject to approval of a conditional use permit.

9. Subject to the increase in maximum height permitted pursuant to SMC 21A.30.020, preferred low impact development incentives. (Ord. O2019-482 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-429 § 3 (Att. C); Ord. O2009-249 § 1; Ord. O2008-236 § 1; Ord. O2003-132 § 12)


21A.25.050 Measurement methods.

The following provisions shall be used to determine compliance with this title:

(1) Front yard setbacks shall be measured from the property line or lot line of an existing edge of a street right-of-way or temporary turnaround, except as provided by SMC 21A.25.170;

(2) Lot widths shall be measured by scaling a circle of the applicable diameter within the boundaries of the lot; provided, that an access easement shall not be included within the circle;

(3) Structure height shall be measured from the average existing grade of land prior to any cuts and fills or other disturbances associated with the proposed project to the highest point of the structure or roof. The average existing grade shall be determined by first delineating the smallest square or rectangle that can enclose the structure or building and then averaging the existing grade elevations taken at the midpoint of each side of the square or rectangle;

(4) Lot area shall be the total horizontal land area contained within the boundaries of a lot; and

(5) Impervious surface calculations shall not include areas of turf, landscaping, natural vegetation, surface water flow control, or water quality treatment facilities. (Ord. O2019-482 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 12)


21A.25.060 Minimum urban residential density.

Minimum density for residential development in the urban areas designated by the comprehensive plan shall be based on the tables in this chapter and adjusted as provided for in SMC 21A.25.090. (Ord. O2004-143 § 1; Ord. O2003-132 § 12)


21A.25.070 Calculations – Allowable dwelling units, lots or floor area, lot coverage.

Permitted number of units, or lots or floor area shall be determined as follows:

(1) The allowed number of dwelling units or lots (base density) shall be computed by multiplying the site area specified in SMC 21A.25.080 by the applicable residential base density number;

(2) The maximum density (unit or lot) limits shall be computed by adding the bonus or transfer units authorized by Chapter 21A.80 SMC to the base units computed under subsection (1) of this section;

(3) The allowed floor area, which excludes structured or underground parking areas and areas housing mechanical equipment, shall be computed by applying the floor-to-lot area ratio to the project site area specified in SMC 21A.25.080;

(4) The allowed lot coverage shall be computed by dividing the total building footprint area by the total lot area. The total building footprint area is computed by adding the horizontal land area covered by a building or combination of buildings on the subject lot. The total building footprint does not include building eaves of up to 18 inches; for eaves and overhangs greater than 18 inches, that portion of the eaves and overhangs that extends beyond 18 inches shall count toward the building footprint;

(5) When calculations other than density calculations result in a fraction, the fraction shall be rounded to the nearest whole number as follows:

(a) Fractions of 0.51 or above shall be rounded up;

(b) Fractions of 0.50 or below shall be rounded down; and

(c) For the purpose of the application of this part, rounding is based on a fraction that is truncated to two numbers past the decimal point. For example, 2.50823 is truncated to 2.50; and

(6) When density calculations result in a fraction:

(a) For multifamily and attached dwelling projects located in the R-8, R-12, R-18, NB, CB, or O zone with density calculations resulting in a fraction, the fraction shall be rounded to the nearest whole number as follows:

(i) Fractions of 0.51 or above shall be rounded up; and

(ii) Fractions of 0.50 or below shall be rounded down.

(b) Subdivisions. For subdivision proposals with density calculations resulting in 10 or more whole units of density before rounding fractions, the fraction may be rounded to the nearest whole number when the fraction is equal to or greater than 0.51. The extra unit achieved by rounding up must be used for an affordable housing unit duplex meeting the requirements of SMC 21A.20.030(B)(17), 21B.75.050, and 21B.75.060. For example, a subdivision proposal with a density calculation resulting in 10.51 would yield 10 single-family detached residential units, or 10 single-family detached residential units and one affordable housing unit duplex consisting of two affordable housing units for a total of 12 units. Nothing in this subsection restricts or limits the application of the density bonus provisions found in other sections of the code.

(c) Short Subdivisions. For subdivision proposals with density calculations resulting in nine or fewer whole units of density before rounding fractions, the fraction may be rounded to the nearest whole number when the fraction is equal to or greater than 0.71. The extra unit achieved by rounding up must be used for an affordable housing unit duplex meeting the requirements of SMC 21A.20.030(B)(17), 21B.75.050, and 21B.75.060. For example, a subdivision proposal with a density calculation resulting in 4.71 would yield four single-family detached residential units, or four single-family detached residential units and one affordable housing unit duplex consisting of two affordable housing units for a total of six units. Nothing in this subsection restricts or limits the application of the density bonus provisions found in other sections of the code.

(d) For subdivision proposals with density calculations resulting in fractions and where the project design utilizes townhomes or duplexes for at least 25 percent of the total project units, the fraction shall be rounded to the nearest whole number as follows:

(i) Fractions of 0.21 or above shall be rounded up; and

(ii) Fractions of 0.20 or below shall be rounded down.

(e) For the purpose of the application of this part, rounding is based on a fraction that is truncated to two numbers past the decimal point. For example, 2.50823 is truncated to 2.50. (Ord. O2019-482 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-407 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 12)


21A.25.080 Calculations – Site area used for density calculations.

(1) All site areas may be used in the calculation of maximum allowed residential density or project floor area except as outlined under the provisions of subsection (2) of this section.

(2) Existing submerged lands, steep slopes and buffers, Categories 1 – 4 wetlands and buffers, Types S, F, Np, and Ns streams and buffers, and property to be used as a street(s) shall not be credited toward base and maximum density or floor area calculations; provided, that subdivisions or short plats that meet the tree retention standards of SMC 21A.35.210(2), Tree retention requirements, shall be credited 10 percent of the environmentally sensitive areas and associated buffers identified above.

(a) The site has accumulated sufficient technique points pursuant to SMC 21A.85.040, preferred low impact development incentives, to allow for inclusion of such areas as set forth in that section; or

(b) The site meets the tree retention incentives of SMC 21A.35.220(2), in which case 10 percent of the critical areas and buffers identified above may be included in the site area used for calculating base and maximum density or floor area. (Ord. O2009-249 § 1; Ord. O2008-236 § 1; Ord. O2005-174 § 1; Ord. O2003-132 § 12)


21A.25.090 Calculations – Site area used for minimum density calculations.

Minimum density shall be determined by:

(1) Multiplying the density (dwelling units/acre) as set forth in SMC 21A.20.030(A) by the net buildable area of the project site; and then

(2) Multiplying the resulting product by minimum density percentage set forth in SMC 21A.25.030(A). (Ord. O2009-249 § 1; Ord. O2003-132 § 12)


21A.25.100 Administrative adjustment of setbacks.

Repealed by Ord. O2019-482. (Ord. O2010-278 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.25.110 Lot area – Prohibited reduction.

Any portion of a lot that was used to calculate compliance with the standards and regulations of this title shall not be subsequently subdivided or segregated from such lot. (Ord. O2003-132 § 12)


21A.25.120 Measurement of setbacks. 

(1) Side Yard Setback. The side yard setback is the setback between a structure and any lot line to which neither the street nor rear yard setback applies. The side yard setback is measured from a side yard lot line to a line parallel to and measured perpendicularly from the side yard lot line at the depth prescribed for each zone. Four-sided corner lots abutting streets on two sides shall have two side setbacks and no rear setback.

(2) Front Yard Setback. The front yard setback is measured between a structure and the front yard lot line. The front yard setback is measured from a front yard lot line to a line parallel to (offset to) and measured perpendicularly from the front yard lot line at the depth prescribed for each zone. In lots adjoining two or more front yards, including corner lots, the minimum front yard setback shall apply to all such front yards.

(3) Rear Yard Setback. The rear yard setback is the setback measurement between a structure and the rear yard lot line. Four-sided lots adjoining more than one street shall have no rear yard setback. In triangular lots with one street frontage, the rear setback shall be measured from the shorter of the lot lines not adjoining the street. (Ord. O2019-482 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 12)


21A.25.130 Setbacks – Specific building or use.

When a building or use is required to maintain a specific setback from a property line or other building, such setback shall apply only to the specified building or use. (Ord. O2003-132 § 12)


21A.25.140 Setbacks – Livestock buildings and manure storage areas.

(1) The minimum setback for any building used to house, confine or feed swine shall be 90 feet. If a greater dimension is specified within this code the greater dimension shall apply.

(2) The minimum setback for any building used to house, confine or feed any other livestock shall be 25 feet. If a greater dimension is specified within this code the greater dimension shall apply.

(3) The minimum setback for any manure storage area shall be 35 feet. If a greater dimension is specified within this code the greater dimension shall apply. (Ord. O2019-482 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 12)


21A.25.150 Setbacks – Modifications.

The following setback modifications are permitted:

(1) When the common property line of two lots is covered by a building(s), the setbacks required by this chapter shall not apply along the common property line; and

(2) When a lot is located between lots having nonconforming front yard setbacks, the required front yard setback for such lot may be the average of the two nonconforming setbacks or 60 percent of the required front yard setback, whichever results in the greater front yard setback. (Ord. O2019-482 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 12)


21A.25.155 Setbacks – Required building separation.

The provisions of this section do not apply to zero lot line development proposed pursuant to Chapter 21A.30 SMC. (Ord. O2010-286 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 12)


21A.25.160 Setbacks – From regional utility corridors. 

(1) In subdivisions and short subdivisions, areas used as regional utility corridors shall be contained in separate tracts.

(2) In other types of land development permits, easements shall be used to delineate such corridors. 

(3) All buildings and structures shall maintain a minimum distance of five feet from property or easement lines delineating the boundary of regional utility corridors, except for utility structures necessary to the operation of the utility corridor or when structures are allowed by mutual agreement in the utility corridor. (Ord. O2003-132 § 12)


21A.25.170 Setbacks – From alley.

(1) Structures may be built to a property line abutting an alley, except as provided in subsection (2) of this section.

(2) Vehicle access points from garages, carports or fenced parking areas shall be set back from the alley property line to provide a straight line length of at least 26 feet, as measured from the centerline of the garage, carport or fenced parking area, from the access point to the opposite edge of the alley. No portion of the garage or the door in motion may cross the property line. (Ord. O2003-132 § 12)


21A.25.180 Setbacks – Required modifications. 

The following setback modifications are required:

(1) In addition to providing the standard street setback, a lot adjoining a half-street or designated arterial shall provide an additional width of street setback sufficient to accommodate construction of the planned half-street or arterial; and

(2) Where the standard setback for a property is modified within an adopted neighborhood plan area zoning, the applicable setback shall be that specified therein. (Ord. O2003-132 § 12)


21A.25.190 Setbacks – Projections and structures allowed.

Provided, that the required setbacks from regional utility corridors of SMC 21A.25.160, as allowed in the environmentally critical areas of SMC 21A.50.210, the adjoining half-street or designated arterial setbacks of SMC 21A.25.180 and the sight distance requirements of SMC 21A.25.220 are maintained, structures may extend into or be located in required setbacks, as follows:

(1) Fireplace structures, bay or garden windows, enclosed stair landings, closets, or similar structures may project 30 inches into a rear yard or front yard setback and 18 inches into a side yard setback, provided such projections are:

(a) Limited to two per facade; and

(b) Not wider than 10 feet;

(2) Uncovered porches and decks that exceed 18 inches above the finished grade may project five feet into the front yard setback;

(3) Uncovered porches and decks not exceeding 18 inches above the finished grade may project to the street property line;

(4) Eaves may not project more than:

(a) Twenty-four inches into a rear yard or front yard setback; or

(b) Eighteen inches across a lot line in a zero lot line development, provided there are appropriate easements, and that any neighboring building and its associated eaves are 10 feet from the lot line; or

(c) Eighteen inches into a side yard setback;

(5) Fences in accord with SMC 21A.30.190(1);

(6) Rockeries, retaining walls and curbs may project into or be located in any setback provided these structures:

(a) Do not exceed a height of six feet in the R-1 through R-18 zones;

(b) Do not exceed the building height for the zone in commercial zones, measured in accordance with the standards established in the International Building Code, SMC Title 16; and

(c) Are in accordance with the requirements in Chapter 21A.50 SMC, Environmentally Critical Areas;

(7) Fences located on top of rockeries, retaining walls or berms are subject to the requirements of SMC 21A.30.190;

(8) Telephone poles and lines; power poles and lines; cable TV and Internet lines; light and flagpoles; trellises not exceeding eight feet in height, not wider than 10 feet; culverts; underground water facilities; underground sewer facilities; and accessory facilities for the provision of utilities, such as drains, but excluding electrical and cellular equipment cabinets, and similar utility boxes and vaults;

(9) The following may project into or be located within a setback, but may only project into or be located within a rear yard or side yard setback area if an agreement documenting consent between the owners of record of the abutting properties is recorded with the King County Department of Records and Elections prior to the installment or construction of the structure:

(a) Sprinkler systems, heat pumps, air conditioning units, electrical and cellular equipment cabinets and other similar utility boxes and vaults;

(b) Security system access controls;

(c) Structures, except for buildings, associated with trails and on-site recreation spaces and play areas required in SMC 21A.30.140 and 21A.30.160 such as benches, picnic tables and drinking fountains; and

(d) Surface water management facilities as required by Chapter 9.04 KCC as adopted by SMC Title 13;

(10) Mailboxes and newspaper boxes may project into or be located within front yard setbacks;

(11) Fire hydrants and associated appendages;

(12) Metro bus shelters may be located within front yard setbacks;

(13) Unless otherwise allowed in SMC 21A.45.060(1), freestanding and monument signs four feet or less in height, with a maximum sign area of 20 square feet, may project into or be located within front yard setbacks; and

(14) Stormwater vaults, structures, and conveyance systems, both above and below ground, provided such projections are:

(a) Consistent with setback, easement and access requirements specified in the current Surface Water Design Manual; or

(b) In the absence of said specifications, not within 10 feet of the property line for storm water vaults and structures, and not within five feet of the property line for conveyance systems.


[IMAGE]


(Ord. O2019-482 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-429 § 3 (Att. C); Ord. O2009-249 § 1; Ord. O2005-171 §§ 3, 4; Ord. O2004-143 § 1; Ord. O2003-132 § 12)


21A.25.200 Height – Exceptions to limits. 

The following structures may be erected above the height limits of SMC 21A.25.030 through 21A.25.050:

(1) Roof structures housing or screening elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or similar equipment required for building operation and maintenance; and

(2) Fire or parapet walls, skylights, flagpoles, public athletic field lighting, chimneys, smokestacks, church steeples, crosses, spires, communication transmission and receiving structures, utility line towers and poles, and similar structures. (Ord. O2010-279 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 12)


21A.25.210 Lot divided by zone boundary. 

When a lot is divided by a zone boundary, the following rules shall apply:

(1) When a lot contains both residential and nonresidential zoning, the zone boundary between the zones shall be considered a lot line for determining permitted building height and required setbacks on the site;

(2) When a lot contains residential zones of varying density:

(a) Any residential density transfer within the lot shall be allowed from the portion with the lesser residential density to that of the greater residential density;

(b) Residential density transfer from the higher density zone to the lower density zone may be allowed only when:

(i) The units transferred from any R-12 or R-18 zoned portion of the lot are maintained in an attached dwelling unit configuration on the lower density portion receiving such units;

(ii) The transfer does not reduce the minimum density achievable on the lot; 

(iii) The transfer enhances the efficient use of needed infrastructure;

(iv) The transfer does not result in significant adverse impacts to the low density portion of the lot;

(v) The transfer contributes to preservation of environmentally sensitive areas, wildlife corridors, or other natural features; and

(vi) The transfer does not result in significant adverse impacts to adjoining lower density properties;

(c) Compliance with these criteria shall be evaluated during review of any development proposals in which such a transfer is proposed; and

(3) Uses on each portion of the lot shall only be those permitted in each zone pursuant to Chapter 21A.20 SMC. (Ord. O2003-132 § 12)


21A.25.220 Sight distance requirements.

Except for utility poles and traffic control signs, the following sight distance provisions shall apply to all intersections and site access points:

(1) A sight distance triangle area as determined by subsection (2) of this section shall contain no fence, berm, vegetation, on-site vehicle parking area, signs or other physical obstruction between 42 inches and eight feet above the existing street grade;

(2) The sight distance triangle at:

(a) A street intersection shall be determined by measuring 15 feet along both street property lines beginning at their point of intersection. The third side of the triangle shall be a line connecting the endpoints of the first two sides of the triangle; or

(b) A site access point shall be determined by measuring 15 feet along the street lines and 15 feet along the edges of the driveway beginning at the respective points of intersection. The third side of each triangle shall be a line connecting the endpoints of the first two sides of each triangle; and

(3) The director may require modification or removal of structures or landscaping located in required street setbacks, if:

(a) Such improvements prevent adequate sight distance to drivers entering or leaving a driveway; and

(b) No reasonable driveway relocation alternative for an adjoining lot is feasible. 


[IMAGE]


Note: The area of a sight distance triangle between 42 inches and eight feet above the existing street grade shall remain open.

(Ord. O2003-132 § 12)


21A.25.230 Personal services and retail uses in R-4 through R-18 zones.

Repealed by Ord. O2009-249. (Ord. O2003-132 § 12)


Chapter 21A.30 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS – DESIGN REQUIREMENTS

Sections:

21A.30.010    Purpose.

21A.30.020    Lot segregations – Zero lot line development.

21A.30.030    Lot segregations – Clustered development.

21A.30.040    Townhouse development.

21A.30.050    Attached dwellings and group residence – Applicability.

21A.30.060    Attached dwellings and group residences – Vehicular access and parking location.

21A.30.070    Attached dwellings and group residences – Building facade modulation.

21A.30.080    Mixed use development – Percentages of residential uses.

21A.30.090    Mixed use development – Residential density.

21A.30.100    Mixed use development – Building floor area.

21A.30.110    Mixed use development – Shared parking.

21A.30.120    Mobile home parks – Standards for existing parks.

21A.30.130    Mobile home parks – Standards for new parks.

21A.30.140    On-site recreation – Space required.

21A.30.150    Recreation space – Fees in lieu of.

21A.30.160    On-site recreation – Play areas required.

21A.30.170    On-site recreation – Maintenance of recreation space or dedication.

21A.30.180    Storage space and collection points for recyclables.

21A.30.185    Garbage and trash storage design.

21A.30.190    Fences.

21A.30.200    Trail corridors – Applicability.

21A.30.210    Trail corridors – Development standards.

21A.30.220    Trail corridors – Maintenance of trail corridors/improvements.

21A.30.230    Outdoor lighting.

21A.30.240    Nonresidential use design standards.

21A.30.250    Public agency and utility yard – Design requirements.

21A.30.260    Satellite public agency and utility yard – Design requirements.


21A.30.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to improve the quality of development by providing building and site design standards that:

(1) Reduce the visual impact of large residential buildings from adjacent streets and properties;

(2) Enhance the aesthetic character of large residential buildings;

(3) Contain sufficient flexibility of standards to encourage creative and innovative site and building design;

(4) Meet the on-site recreation needs of project residents;

(5) Enhance aesthetics and environmental protection through site design;

(6) Allow for continued or adaptive reuse of historic resources while preserving their historic and architectural integrity;

(7) Reduce the health and aesthetic impact of waste containers adjacent to streets;

(8) Promote compatibility between residential and nonresidential uses; and

(9) Promote health, safety, and security by minimizing glare and light trespass from outdoor lighting onto adjacent properties. (Ord. O2016-408 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.30.020 Lot segregations – Zero lot line development.

In any R zone or in the NB zone on property designated commercial outside of center in the urban area, rear yard and side yard setbacks may be modified during subdivision or short subdivision review as follows:

(1) If a building is proposed to be located within a normally required rear yard or side yard setback in the NB zone:

(a) An easement shall be provided on the abutting lot of the subdivision that is wide enough to ensure a 10-foot separation between the walls of structures on adjoining lots, except as provided for common wall construction;

(b) The easement area shall be free of permanent structures and other obstructions that would prevent normal repair and maintenance of the structure’s exterior;

(c) Buildings utilizing reduced setbacks shall not have doors that open directly onto the private yard areas of abutting property. Windows in such buildings shall not be oriented toward such private yard areas unless they consist of materials such as glass block, textured glass, or other opaque materials, and shall not be capable of being opened, except for clerestory-style windows or skylights; and

(d) The final plat or short plat shall show the approximate location of buildings proposed to be placed in a standard setback area.

(2) If a building is proposed to be located within a normally required rear yard or side yard setback in an R zone:

(a) The residential development must qualify for the attached housing incentive provided in SMC 21A.85.040;

(b) An easement shall be provided on the abutting lot of the subdivision that is wide enough to ensure a 10-foot separation between the walls of structures on adjoining lots, except as provided for common wall construction;

(c) The easement area shall be free of permanent structures and other obstructions that would prevent normal repair and maintenance of the structure’s exterior;

(d) Buildings utilizing reduced setbacks shall not have doors that open directly onto the private yard areas of abutting property. Windows in such buildings shall not be oriented toward such private yard areas unless they consist of materials such as glass block, textured glass, or other opaque materials, and shall not be capable of being opened, except for clerestory-style windows or skylights; and

(e) The final plat or short plat shall show the approximate location of buildings proposed to be placed in a standard setback area. (Ord. O2019-482 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2008-236 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.30.030 Lot segregations – Clustered development.

When residential lot clustering is proposed, the following provisions shall be met:

(1) Any open space resulting from lot clustering should be located where existing stands of native vegetation exist and shall not be altered or disturbed except as specified on recorded documents creating the open space. Such open spaces may be retained under ownership by the subdivider, conveyed to residents of the development, or conveyed to a third party. When access to the open space is provided, the access shall be located in a separate tract; and

(2) In the R-1 zone, open space tracts created by clustering required by SMC 21A.25.030 shall be located and configured to create urban separators and greenbelts as required by the interim comprehensive plan, to connect and increase protective buffers for critical areas as defined in SMC 21A.15.254, to connect and protect wildlife habitat corridors designated by the interim comprehensive plan, and to connect existing or planned public parks or trails. The City may require open space tracts created under this subsection to be dedicated to the City, an appropriate managing public agency, or qualifying private entity such as a nature conservancy. (Ord. O2016-429 § 4 (Att. D); Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.30.040 Townhouse development.

In the R-1 through R-8 zones and in the NB zone on property designated commercial outside of center in the urban area, a building that contains a grouping of attached townhouse units shall not exceed a 200-foot maximum length without a separation of at least 10 feet from other groupings or rows of townhouses. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.30.050 Attached dwellings and group residence – Applicability.

The standards of SMC 21A.30.060 through 21A.30.070 shall apply to all new apartment developments exceeding four dwelling units, new townhouse development and new group residences except Class I community residential facilities (CRF-I). Expansions of existing development that involve four or more dwelling units shall be subject to compliance with SMC 21A.30.060 to 21A.30.070. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.30.060 Attached dwellings and group residences – Vehicular access and parking location.

(1) On sites abutting an alley constructed to a width of at least 20 feet, apartment and townhouse development and all group residences except Class I community residential facilities (CRF-I) shall have parking areas placed to the rear of buildings with primary vehicular access via the alley, except when waived by the director due to physical site limitations.

(2) When alley access is provided, no additional driveway access from the public street shall be allowed except as necessary to access parking under the structure or for fire protection.

(3) When the number of uncovered common parking spaces for attached dwellings and group residences exceed 30 spaces and when there is alley access, no more than 50 percent of these uncovered parking spaces shall be permitted between the street property line and any building, except when authorized by the director due to physical site limitations. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.30.070 Attached dwellings and group residences – Building facade modulation.

Apartment and townhouse developments and all group residences shall provide building facade modulation on facades exceeding 60 feet and facing abutting streets or properties zoned R-1 through R-4. The following standards shall apply:

(1) The maximum wall length without modulation shall be 30 feet; and

(2) The sum of the modulation depth and the modulation width shall be no less than eight feet. Neither the modulation depth nor the modulation width shall be less than two feet;

(3) Any other technique approved by the director that achieves the intent of this section. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.30.080 Mixed use development – Percentages of residential uses.

Residential uses in mixed use developments shall be subject to the following limits:

(1) A maximum of 50 percent of the total built floor area when located in NB zones; and

(2) A maximum of 75 percent of the total built floor area when located in CB and O zones; provided, that the total percentage may be increased by an additional 10 percent with the approval of the director. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.30.090 Mixed use development – Residential density.

Base residential density for mixed use developments shall be determined using total site area according to SMC 21A.25.040(A). (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.30.100 Mixed use development – Building floor area.

(1) For mixed use developments that utilize at least 25 percent of building square footage for residential uses in the NB zone and at least 50 percent of building square footage in the CB or O zones, the building floor area ratio shall be as follows:

(a) 1.5/1 in NB zones;

(b) 3.5/1 in CB zones; and

(c) 4.0/1 in O zones.

(2) Building floor area ratios of subsection (1) of this section may be increased when all required parking is contained within a common parking structure, as follows:

(a) 2.0/1 in NB zones;

(b) 4.5/1 in CB zones; and

(c) 5.0/1 in O zones. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.30.110 Mixed use development – Shared parking.

For mixed use developments, a 20 percent reduction of required parking shall be permitted when the criteria of SMC 21A.40.040 for shared parking facilities are met. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.30.120 Mobile home parks – Standards for existing parks.

(1) Mobile home parks established prior to August 3, 1999 shall continue to be governed by all standards relating to density, setbacks, landscaping and off-street parking in effect at the time they were approved.

(2) Placement of new accessory structures and replacement mobile homes, either standard or nonstandard, in these mobile home parks shall be governed by the dimensional standards in effect when the parks were approved. Where internal setbacks are not specified, the average of the prevailing setbacks on the pads to either side of the proposed new or replacement structure shall apply. 

(3) No spaces or pads in an existing mobile home park shall be used to accommodate recreational vehicles (RVs), except when the spaces or pads were specifically for RVs at the time the park was established.

(4) An existing mobile home park may be enlarged, provided the proposed enlargement meets the standards set forth in SMC 21A.30.130.

(5) Both insignia and non-insignia mobile homes may be installed in established parks; provided, that all mobile homes supported by piers shall be fully skirted, and that nonstandard mobile homes shall meet the minimum livability and safety requirements set forth in SMC Title 16, Buildings and Construction. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.30.130 Mobile home parks – Standards for new parks.

New mobile home parks shall be developed subject to the following standards:

(1) A mobile home park shall be at least three acres in area;

(2) Residential densities in a mobile home park shall be as follows:

(a) Six dwellings per acre in R-4 zone;

(b) The base density of the zone in which the park is located in all R-6 through R-18 zones; and

(c) Mobile home parks shall be eligible to achieve the maximum density permitted in the zone by providing the affordable housing benefit for mobile home parks set forth in Chapter 21A.75 SMC;

(3) Both insignia and non-insignia mobile homes may be installed in mobile home parks; provided, that non-insignia mobile homes shall meet the minimum livability and safety requirements set forth in SMC Title 16, Uniform Building Code;

(4) A mobile home park shall be exempt from impervious surface limits set forth in Chapter 21A.25 SMC;

(5) At least one of the off-street parking spaces required for each mobile home shall be located on or adjacent to each mobile home pad;

(6) Internal roads and sidewalks shall provide access to each mobile home space and shall be constructed in accordance with the adopted interim street standards as set forth in the public works standards for residential minor access streets;

(7) There shall be a minimum of 10 feet of separation maintained between all mobile homes on the site. Accessory structures shall be located no closer than:

(a) Ten feet to mobile homes on adjacent spaces, unless constructed of noncombustible materials, in which case the minimum setback shall be five feet;

(b) Five feet to accessory structures of mobile homes on adjacent spaces; and 

(c) Five feet to the mobile home or other accessory structures on the same space, except a carport or garage may be attached to the mobile home, and the separation may be waived when such structures are constructed of noncombustible materials;

(8) All mobile homes and RVs supported by piers shall be fully skirted; and 

(9) A mobile home park may include a storage area for RVs owned by residents of the park, provided the storage area contains no utility hook-ups and no RV within the storage area shall be used as living quarters. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.30.140 On-site recreation – Space required.

(1) All single-family, multifamily and townhouse developments of more than four units, and mixed use developments of more than four units, shall provide recreation space excluding environmentally sensitive areas as defined by Chapter 21A.50 SMC for leisure, play or sport activities as follows:

(a) Residential developments at a density of eight units or less per acre: 390 square feet per unit;

(b) Attached residential developments at a density of greater than eight units per acre, and mixed use:

(i) Studio and one bedroom: 90 square feet per unit;

(ii) Two bedroom: 130 square feet per unit; and

(iii) Three or more bedroom: 170 square feet per unit.

(2) Any recreation space located outdoors shall:

(a) Be of a grade and surface suitable for recreation;

(b) Be on the site of the proposed development;

(c) Have no dimensions less than 20 feet (except trail segments);

(d) When the required open space is less than 5,000 square feet, the required open space shall be located in a single area or tract;

(e) When the required open space exceeds 5,000 square feet:

(i) The space shall have a street roadway or parking area frontage along 10 percent or more of the recreation space perimeter (except trail segments);

(ii) A minimum of 60 percent of the required open space shall be located in a single area or tract;

(iii) At least one area or tract shall contain a minimum of 5,000 square feet;

(f) Be accessible and convenient to all residents within the development; and

(g) Be accessible by trail or walkway to any existing or planned community park, public open space or trail system, which may be located on adjoining property.

(3) Indoor recreation areas may be credited towards the total recreation space requirement, when the City determines that such areas are located, designed and improved in a manner that provides recreational opportunities functionally equivalent to those recreational opportunities available outdoors. For senior citizen assisted housing, indoor recreation areas need not be functionally equivalent but may include social areas, game and craft rooms, and other multi-purpose entertainment and education areas.

(4) Storm water runoff tracts may be credited for up to 100 percent of the on-site recreation space requirement, subject to the following criteria, which are intended to create ponds that are more natural in shape and appearance; provide opportunities for passive or active recreation, wildlife viewing and educational opportunities; or to create more visual interest:

(a) The storm water runoff tract is dedicated or reserved as a part of a recreation space tract;

(b) To earn a 50 percent credit towards the on-site recreation space requirement, the detention pond shall be constructed to meet the following conditions:

(i) Side slopes shall not exceed 33 percent unless they are existing, natural, or covered with vegetation and meet the design criteria in the Surface Water Design Manual for side slopes.

(ii) A bypass system or an emergency overflow pathway shall be designed to handle flow exceeding the facility design and located so that it does not pass through active recreation areas or present a safety hazard.

(iii) The area surrounding the storm water pond above the live storage shall be landscaped in a manner to enhance passive recreational opportunities such as a trail or pathway around the pond perimeter.

(iv) The storm water pond shall be designed so that it does not require fencing per the fencing requirements in Chapter 5 of 2016 KCSWDM (page 5-6).

(v) Split-rail fencing (three feet minimum height) is required around the pond at the emergency overflow elevation of the pond or higher. Wire mesh backing of the fence is encouraged, but not required.

(c) To receive a 100 percent credit, the storm water pond must meet all the additional requirements in the criteria in subsection (4)(b) of this section, and provide three or more of the following amenities:

(i) Provide seating using walls, benches and/or tables and chairs that view the storm water system.

(ii) Create overlook or destination points with views of the storm water pond.

(iii) Provide vertical planes (using stairs, platforms, etc.) that allow storm water to be interacted with and viewed from different levels.

(iv) Provide interpretive signage describing the storm water feature, or the landscape features (such as highlighting the pollinator benefits of plantings incorporated into the storm water tract).

(v) Stack horizontal and vertical planes to create features such as pools and waterfalls.

(vi) Provide a fountain feature near the pond center.

(vii) Provide at least one fitness station located near the pond accessible via a trail or pathway. (Ord. O2016-429 § 4 (Att. D); Ord. O2004-154 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.30.150 Recreation space – Fees in lieu of.

If on-site recreation space is not provided, the applicant shall pay a fee-in-lieu of actual recreation space. The City’s acceptance of this payment is discretionary, and may be permitted if the proposed on-site recreation space does not meet the criteria of this chapter, or the recreation space provided within a City park in the vicinity will be of greater benefit to the prospective residents of the development. Fees provided in lieu of on-site recreation space shall be determined annually by the City on the basis of the typical market value of the required recreation space land area prior to the development. Any recreational space provided by the applicant shall be credited toward the required fees. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.30.160 On-site recreation – Play areas required.

(1) All single detached subdivisions, apartment, townhouse and mixed use development, excluding age-restricted senior citizen housing, shall provide children’s play areas within the recreation space on-site, except when facilities are available to the public within one-quarter mile that are developed as parks or playgrounds and are accessible without crossing of arterial streets.

(2) Play apparatus provided in the play area shall meet Consumer Product Safety Standards for equipment, soft surfacing and spacing, and shall be located in an area that is:

(a) At least 400 square feet in size with no dimension less than 20 feet; and

(b) Adjacent to main pedestrian paths or near building entrances. (Ord. O2009-249 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.30.170 On-site recreation – Maintenance of recreation space or dedication.

(1) Recreation space as defined in SMC 21A.30.140(2) may be dedicated as a park open to the public in lieu of providing the on-site recreation required above when the following criteria are met:

(a) The dedicated area is at least 20 acres in size, except when adjacent to an existing or planned public park; 

(b) The dedicated land provides one or more of the following:

(i) Shoreline access;

(ii) Regional trail linkages;

(iii) Habitat linkages;

(iv) Recreation facilities; or

(v) Heritage sites; and

(c) The dedicated area is located within one mile of the project site.

(2) Unless the recreation space is dedicated to the City pursuant to subsection (1) of this section, maintenance of any recreation space retained in private ownership shall be the responsibility of the owner or other separate entity capable of long-term maintenance and operation in a manner acceptable to the City. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.30.180 Storage space and collection points for recyclables.

Developments shall provide storage space for the collection of recyclables as follows:

(1) The storage space shall be provided at the following rates, calculated based on any new dwelling unit in multiple-dwelling developments and any new square feet of building gross floor area in any other developments:

(a) One and one-half square feet per dwelling unit in multiple-dwelling developments except where the development is participating in a county-sponsored or approved direct collection program in which individual recycling bins are used for curbside collection;

(b) Two square feet per every 1,000 square feet of building gross floor area in office, educational and institutional developments;

(c) Three square feet per every 1,000 square feet of building gross floor area in manufacturing and other nonresidential developments; and

(d) Five square feet per every 1,000 square feet of building gross floor area in retail developments.

(2) The storage space for residential developments shall be apportioned and located in collection points as follows:

(a) The required storage area shall be dispersed in collection points throughout the site when a residential development comprises more than one building.

(b) There shall be one collection point for every 30 dwelling units.

(c) Collection points may be located within residential buildings, in separate buildings/structures without dwelling units, or outdoors.

(d) Collection points located in separate buildings/structures or outdoors shall be no more than 200 feet from a common entrance of a residential building.

(e) Collection points shall be located in a manner so that the swing of any collection point gate does not obstruct pedestrian or vehicle traffic or access to parking or that the gate swing or any hauling truck does not project into any public right-of-way.

(3) The storage space for nonresidential developments shall be apportioned and located in collection points as follows:

(a) Storage space may be allocated to a centralized collection point.

(b) Outdoor collection points shall not be located in any required setback areas.

(c) Collection points shall be located in a manner so that the swing of any collection point gate does not obstruct pedestrian or vehicle traffic or access to parking or that the gate swing or any hauling truck does not project into any public right-of-way.

(d) Access to collection points may be limited, except during regular business hours and/or specified collection hours.

(4) The collection points shall be designed as follows:

(a) Dimensions of the collection points shall be of sufficient width and depth to enclose containers for recyclables.

(b) Architectural design of any structure enclosing an outdoor collection point or any building primarily used to contain a collection point shall be consistent with the design of the primary structure(s) on the site.

(c) Collection points shall be identified by signs not exceeding two square feet.

(d) A six-foot wall or fence shall enclose any outdoor collection point, excluding collection points located in industrial developments that are greater than 100 feet from residentially zoned property.

(e) Enclosures for outdoor collection points and buildings used primarily to contain a collection point shall have gate openings at least 12 feet wide for haulers. In addition, the gate opening for any building or other roofed structure used primarily as a collection point shall have a vertical clearance of at least 12 feet.

(f) Weather protection of recyclables shall be ensured by using weather-proof containers or by providing a roof over the storage area.

(5) Only recyclable materials generated on-site shall be collected and stored at such collection points. Except for initial sorting of recyclables by users, all other processing of such materials shall be conducted off-site.

(6) The director may waive or modify specific storage space and collection point requirements set forth in this section if the director finds, in writing, that an alternate recycling program design proposed by the applicant meets the needs of the development and provides an equivalent or better level of storage and collection for recyclables. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.30.185 Garbage and trash storage design.

(1) Single-family detached homes shall provide a designated location for the storage of garbage, recycling, and other waste containers. The designated location shall either be placed in an enclosure or garage, or screened so that the garbage, recycling, and other waste containers are not visible from public streets. The director may authorize an alternate storage location that will meet the purpose of SMC 21A.30.010.

(2) Residents shall return garbage, recycling, and other waste containers to their designated storage location within 24 hours after collection, or as soon as is feasible. (Ord. O2016-408 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.30.190 Fences.

Fences are permitted as follows:

(1) Fences with a height of six feet or less may be located in the rear and side yard setbacks except that fences up to eight feet in height and not exceeding 32 linear feet in length for the segment exceeding six feet along any side or rear yard line may be located in the rear and side yard setbacks. Fences exceeding six feet within the rear or side yard setback shall only be allowed when located along a side or rear yard line shared with a property under separate ownership and when an agreement with the adjoining property owner(s) has been reached resulting in an executed agreement including an approved site plan and maintenance agreement consenting to a fence of up to eight feet recorded with King County Records prior to building permit issuance. Requests for fences exceeding six feet in height shall be considered when bundled and submitted with a Type I construction permit application. Agreements shall reference the parcel number and legal description of all affected properties and conform to a format specified by the director. Provided, no fence shall exceed eight feet. Further provided, that fence height granted under this section shall not cause for a violation or non-conformance with existing site restrictions (e.g., easements) or adopted construction codes, Chapter 16.05 SMC. Fences are limited to four feet in height in the front yard setback and shall be consistent with the sight distance requirements of SMC 21A.25.220. For corner or atypical shaped lots with more than one front yard a fence of six feet or less may be located within the front setback along the street frontage that does not provide access to the property when located outside of the vision clearance triangle and sight distance requirements of SMC 21A.25.220.

(2) Fences located on a rockery, retaining wall, or berm within a required setback area are permitted subject to the following requirements:

(a) In R-1 through R-18 zones:

(i) The total height of the fence and the rockery, retaining wall or berm upon which the fence is located shall not exceed a height of 10 feet. The maximum height of 10 feet may be increased to 12 feet in accordance with subsection (1) of this section. This height shall be measured from the top of the fence to the ground on the low side of the rockery, retaining wall or berm; and

(ii) The total height of the fence itself, measured from the top of the fence to the top of the rockery, retaining wall or berm, shall not exceed six feet. The maximum height of six feet may be increased to eight feet in accordance with subsection (1) of this section.

(b) In the R-18 and commercial zones, the height of the fence, measured from the top of the fence to the top of the rockery, retaining wall or berm, shall not exceed six feet.

(c) Any portion of the fence above a height of eight feet, measured to include both the fence and the rockery, retaining wall, or berm (as described in subsection (2)(a)(i) of this section), shall be an open-work fence. The height of the solid-work style fence may be increased to 10 feet in accordance with subsection (1) of this section.


[IMAGE]


(3) Fences located on a rockery, retaining wall or berm outside required setback areas shall not exceed the building height for the zone.

(4) Electric fences shall:

(a) Be permitted in all zones; provided, that when placed within R-4 through R-18 zones, additional fencing or other barriers shall be constructed to prevent inadvertent contact with the electric fence from abutting property;

(b) Comply with the following requirements:

(i) An electric fence using an interrupted flow of current at intervals of about one second on and two seconds off shall be limited to 2,000 volts at 17 milliamp;

(ii) An electric fence using continuous current shall be limited to 1,500 volts at seven milliamp;

(iii) All electric fences in the R-4 through R-18 zones shall be posted with permanent signs a minimum of 36 square inches in area at 50-foot intervals stating that the fence is electrified; and

(iv) Electric fences sold as a complete and assembled unit can be installed by an owner if the controlling elements of the installation are certified by an A.N.S.I. approved testing agency.

(5) Except as specifically required for the necessary security related to a nonresidential use, no barbed or razor-wire fence shall be located in any R-4 through R-18 zone. (Ord. O2019-482 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.30.200 Trail corridors – Applicability. 

Trail easements, or tracts, of sufficient width and length consistent with the dimensional standards as defined below, shall be provided by all developments, except for single detached residential permits, when such developments are located on properties that include trail corridors shown within an adopted City parks or trails plan. In addition to the general public, the residents or tenants of the development shall be provided access to the trail easement. The area of the trail easement shall be counted as part of the site for purposes of density and floor area calculations. (Ord. O2005-172 § 3; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.30.210 Trail corridors – Development standards. 

Proposed public and private trails shall be reviewed by the department of community development for consistency with the following standards:

(1) Use of Existing Corridors. Trails should generally be located along existing cleared areas or on improved corridors, including but not limited to utility corridors, road or railroad rights-of-way, so as to avoid or minimize the need to remove additional vegetation and create other associated impacts. Where an existing right-of-way is wider than the cleared or improved area, proposed trails should generally be located on the cleared or improved portion of the right-of-way wherever possible, subject to safety and other technical factors. If sensitive areas exist on or in proximity to an existing cleared or improved corridor, then impacts from constructing the trail shall be mitigated consistent with Chapter 21A.50 SMC, including the recommendations from any required sensitive areas study. Trails may be located in other areas if it is demonstrated that a new corridor creates less overall or less incremental impact to sensitive areas and habitat while still achieving overall project goals and objectives. As shown in the adopted City comprehensive plan, parks plan or trails plan, trails and corridors should connect public lands, utility corridors, or rights-of-way or other public infrastructure to maximize transportation and public recreation uses. 

(2) Compatibility with Adjacent Land Uses. Trails should be designed and constructed to encourage users to remain on the trail, to diminish the likelihood of trespass and to promote privacy for adjacent landowners. The applicant shall propose for the department’s review and approval the use of fencing, signage, landscaping or other appropriate means to accomplish this requirement. Any proposed lighting should be directed away from houses along the trail corridor. Safety of trail users and adjacent landowners shall be addressed through review of vehicle access and crossing locations and design. Allowed uses should be consistent with the trail types identified in an adopted city comprehensive plan, parks plan or trails plan, and/or determined through a City-approved, site-specific master planning process if applicable. 

(3) Width. The width of the cleared area, trail corridor, surface and shoulder should be designed consistent with AASHTO standards for public multi-use paved trails (Guide for the Development of Bicycle Facilities, 1999, as amended, American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials), and with U.S. Forest Service standards (Trails Management Handbook, 1991, as amended, and Standard Specifications for Construction of Trails Handbook, 1984, as amended) if unpaved. Cleared areas shall be the minimum necessary consistent with the standards and requirements in the SMC.

(4) Sensitive Areas and Buffers. Trail impacts to sensitive areas should be reviewed consistent with the impact avoidance and mitigation sequencing requirements of Chapter 21A.50 SMC. Mitigation of impacts is required, even for trails located on existing corridors consistent with subsection (1) of this section. Wetland and stream buffers shall be expanded to compensate for the total area of the trail corridor, including all disturbed areas located within the buffer area. No expansion shall be required for trails located on existing improved corridors, including but not limited to utility corridors, road or railroad rights-of-way, within wetland or stream buffers. Mitigation shall be required for all impacts consistent with Chapter 21A.50 SMC.

(5) Location. Except for approved viewing platforms, spur trails, wetland or stream crossings proposed consistent with Chapter 21A.50 SMC, or trails located on existing corridors consistent with subsection (1) of this section, trails that are proposed in proximity to wetlands or streams or associated buffers may only be located in the outer 25 percent of the wetland or stream buffer and should be generally aligned parallel to the stream or perimeter of the wetland. Spur trails and viewing structures should be designed to minimize impacts on sensitive area and wildlife habitat. Viewing platforms shall be placed landward of the wetland or stream edge.

(6) Wildlife. Trails should be designed and constructed to encourage users to remain on the trail through the use of fencing, signage, landscaping or other appropriate means to minimize impacts to wildlife and habitat. In addition to the requirements related to wildlife corridors elsewhere in the SMC, trail location, lighting, construction decisions, and requirements for use (e.g., pet leash requirements, bicycle speed limits, etc.) should be guided by recommendations from sensitive areas studies to avoid, minimize and mitigate impacts to habitat for sensitive species. In a vegetation management plan developed for City review and approval consistent with SMC 21A.50.160, all disturbed areas shall be landscaped with appropriate native vegetation upon completion of trail construction or as soon thereafter as possible. The trail maintenance entity shall ensure that such vegetation survives through an appropriate mechanism. An integrated vegetation and pest management plan shall be developed by the applicant and approved by the department that avoids or minimizes the use of pesticides, herbicides and other hazardous substances.

(7) Surfacing. To promote infiltration and groundwater recharge and to minimize slope instability, trail surfaces shall be made of pervious materials. Public multi-use trails, or other trails determined by the department to require impervious surfaces, may be paved; however, pervious paving or other low-impact techniques that meet overall project goals for cost and durability are encouraged. Boardwalks may be used for areas subject to regular inundation, and should be constructed with nonhazardous materials. Impervious materials may also be used if necessary for soil stabilization or to prevent soil erosion, or if the trail is specifically designed and intended to be accessible to physically challenged persons and is identified as such in an adopted city comprehensive plan, parks plan or trails plan. (Ord. O2005-172 § 3; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.30.220 Trail corridors – Maintenance of trail corridors/improvements. 

Maintenance of any trail corridor or improvements, retained in private ownership, shall be the responsibility of the owner or other separate entity capable of long-term maintenance and operation in a manner acceptable to the City. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.30.230 Outdoor lighting.

(1) Applicability. This section applies to the following types of lighting:

(a) All new and replacement exterior light fixtures in parking lots, and associated with commercial, institutional, and mixed-use buildings; and

(b) All existing, new, or replacement security or floodlighting associated with residential uses.

(2) Exemptions. The following types of lighting are exempt from the provisions of this section:

(a) Seasonal decorations;

(b) Lighting used under emergency conditions (e.g., searchlights, law enforcement vehicles);

(c) Moving vehicle lights;

(d) Underwater lighting in swimming pools;

(e) Lighting for signs, if permitted under Chapter 21A.45 SMC;

(f) Traffic control devices;

(g) Lights required by state or federal law (e.g., wireless communication facility towers);

(h) Temporary lighting for construction sites, special events (e.g., theatrical performances, community events); and

(i) Other lighting of a similar nature as approved by the director.

(3) Standards.

(a) Security or Floodlighting Fixtures Associated with Single-Family Residences and Townhouses.

(i) Lighting fixtures shall be properly aimed and installed in a manner that causes minimal or no light trespass onto adjacent properties;

(ii) Lighting fixtures shall not exceed 1,260 lumens, unless the lighting fixture is fully shielded; and

(iii) Motion sensors associated with security or floodlighting shall not be activated by off-site movement.

(b) Parking Lots.

(i) Lighting fixtures shall be partially shielded so that minimal light is emitted above a horizontal plane, and shall be installed and maintained in a way that causes minimal or no light trespass onto adjacent properties.

(ii) Outdoor lighting shall not exceed 5.0 lumens per square foot of parking lot surface and pedestrian walkway. Requests for additional lighting may be considered with the approval of the director.

(iii) Lighting fixtures shall be no more than 25 feet tall, with lower light fixtures preferable so as to maintain a human scale. Requests for higher light fixtures may be considered with the approval of the director.

(iv) Site light fixtures shall be designed to use metal halide or LED light sources unless an alternative is approved by the director.

(v) Solar-powered and high-energy-efficient lighting is encouraged. The director may allow flexibility level standards for solar-powered lights.

(vi) Motion-sensing lighting is encouraged. The director may allow flexibility with outdoor lighting standards when motion-sensing technology is used.

(c) Commercial, Institutional, and Mixed-Use Buildings.

(i) Outdoor light fixtures shall be fully shielded, pointed downward, and should be maintained in a way that causes minimal or no light trespass onto adjacent properties.

(ii) Outdoor lighting shall not exceed 5.0 lumens per square foot of hardscape outside the building structure. Requests for additional lighting may be considered with the approval of the director.

(iii) Exceptions.

(A) One partially shielded light fixture or sconce is allowed if it is located beneath a building overhang and will generate less than 630 lumens;

(B) Landscape/accent lighting; provided, that the combined output of the light fixture does not exceed 2,100 lumens;

(C) Motion-sensor lighting that extinguishes the light no more than 15 minutes after the area is vacated.

(iv) Outdoor lighting shall not exceed 5.0 lumens per square foot of hardscape. Requests for additional lighting may be considered with the approval of the director. Except:

(A) Drive-up windows may add 8,000 lumens per drive-up window. In order to use this allowance, light fixtures must be within 20 feet horizontal distance of the center of the window.

(B) Vehicle service stations may add lighting that results in a total of 16,000 lumens per fuel pump.

(v) Site lighting shall be metal halide or LED unless an alternative is approved by the director.

Smaller scale lighting fixtures
[IMAGE]


(Ord. O2016-408 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.30.240 Nonresidential use design standards.

(1) Applicability. This section applies to new nonresidential uses or improvements within the R-1, R-4, R-6, and R-8 zoning designations. Nonresidential uses and improvements include, but are not limited to, those uses specified in SMC 21A.20.050 through 21A.20.080 and 21A.20.100 and supporting improvements (e.g., parking lots), or other similar uses or improvements as determined by the director.

(2) Location. New nonresidential uses and improvements shall be located with direct access to a neighborhood collector or arterial street, as defined in the adopted Public Works Standards.

(3) Traffic Demand Management. New nonresidential uses shall prepare and adhere to a traffic demand management plan to reduce traffic generation during the a.m. and p.m. peak hours. The traffic demand management plan shall be reviewed and approved by the City.

(4) Parking Lots. New parking lots for nonresidential uses, or parking lots that are expanded by more than 50 percent of the original parking lot area, shall:

(a) Incorporate the following low impact development design into the parking lot design as follows:

(i) Infiltration of all stormwater generated from the proposed parking lot is required. The director may authorize a reduction in infiltration required if the applicant demonstrates that infiltration is not feasible due to site-specific soil and/or geologic conditions.

(ii) Required landscaping shall incorporate soil amendments. Soil amendments shall be comprised of a compost or soil amendment mix consistent with the adopted Sammamish Surface Water Design Manual.

(iii) Incorporate any other low impact development technique required by Sammamish Surface Water Design Manual.

(b) Incorporate a berm around the perimeter of the parking lot where adjacent to public right-of-way and neighboring properties, designed such that the berm height is no less than three feet above the highest elevation of the parking lot. The berm shall be maintained as needed to ensure the berm height is not diminished over time due to erosion or other causes. The director may authorize an alternative design to the berm that will provide an equivalent amount of screening for vehicle headlights and follow Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED) principles. (Ord. O2016-408 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.30.250 Public agency and utility yards – Design requirements.

Public agency and utility yards are subject to the following design requirements:

(1) Public agency and utility yards and associated structures located on sites that have direct access to principal arterials shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from residentially zoned properties;

(2) Public agency and utility yards and associated structures located on sites that have direct access to minor or collector arterials shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from residentially zoned properties and shall incorporate one of the following into the site design:

(a) Solid wood fencing around the perimeter of the site; or

(b) Increased landscaping density to provide a “green wall” or visually solid landscaping effect.

(3) Vehicle and equipment start-up and maintenance areas shall be buffered from adjacent properties by buildings or structures designed to reduce visual and noise impacts; and

(4) Vehicle and equipment start-up and maintenance areas shall be set back from adjacent properties subject to the following criteria:

(a) Vehicle and equipment startup and maintenance areas shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet from adjacent properties; or

(b) Vehicle and equipment start-up and maintenance areas shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from adjacent properties, provided:

(i) That site design shall ensure that noise generated on the site does not exceed 70 decibels as measured at the shared property line; and

(ii) That site design incorporates buildings or structures designed to be consistent with the design of adjacent residential development;

(c) Required setback areas shall provide landscaping for the entire setback area. (Ord. O2005-170 § 1)


21A.30.260 Satellite public agency and utility yards – Design requirements.

Satellite public agency and utility yards are subject to the following design requirements:

(1) Buildings and structures shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from residentially zoned properties;

(2) Vehicle and equipment start-up and maintenance areas shall be buffered from adjacent properties by incorporating one of the following site design features:

(a) Buildings or structures are designed to reduce visual and noise impacts;

(b) Ensuring that noise generated from the satellite public agency and utility yard shall not exceed 60 decibels as measured at the property line; or

(c) Providing 30 feet of landscaping area between the proposed development and adjacent residentially zoned properties;

(3) Hours of operation shall be limited to Monday through Friday, 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., and Saturday and Sunday, 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., except in response to emergency situations or following community events (e.g., ball games, concerts, community picnics, etc.). (Ord. O2005-170 § 1)




Chapter 21A.35 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS – LANDSCAPING AND IRRIGATION

Sections:

21A.35.010    Purpose.

21A.35.020    Application.

21A.35.030    Landscaping – Screen types and description.

21A.35.040    Landscaping – Street frontages.

21A.35.050    Landscaping – Side and rear lot lines.

21A.35.055    Landscaping – Drainage facilities.

21A.35.060    Landscaping – Surface parking areas.

21A.35.070    Landscaping – General standards for all landscape areas.

21A.35.080    Landscaping – Additional standards for required landscape areas.

21A.35.090    Landscaping – Alternative options.

21A.35.100    Landscaping – Plan design, design review, and installation.

21A.35.110    Maintenance.

21A.35.120    Financial guarantees.

21A.35.130    Water use – Applicability of water budget for landscape areas.

21A.35.140    Water use – Irrigation water budget calculated.

21A.35.150    Water use – Estimated water use calculated.

21A.35.160    Water use – Irrigation efficiency goals and system design standards.

21A.35.170    Water use – Irrigation system design, design review and audit at installation.

21A.35.180    Water use – Irrigation design plan contents.

21A.35.190    Water use – Irrigation schedules.

21A.35.200    Water use – Irrigation system maintenance.

21A.35.210    Repealed.

21A.35.220    Repealed.

21A.35.230    Repealed.

21A.35.240    Repealed.


21A.35.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to preserve the aesthetic character of communities, to improve the aesthetic quality of the built environment, to promote retention and protection of existing vegetation; to promote water efficiency, to promote native wildlife, to reduce the impacts of development on drainage systems and natural habitats, and to increase privacy for residential zones by:

(1) Providing visual relief from large expanses of parking areas and reduction of perceived building scale;

(2) Providing physical separation between residential and nonresidential areas;

(3) Providing visual screens and barriers as a transition between differing land uses;

(4) Retaining existing vegetation and significant trees by incorporating them into the site design;

(5) Providing increased areas of permeable surfaces to allow for:

(a) Infiltration of surface water into groundwater resources;

(b) Reduction in the quantity of storm water discharge; and

(c) Improvement in the quality of storm water discharge;

(6) Encouraging the use of native plant species by their retention or use in the landscape design; 

(7) Requiring water use efficiency through water budgeting and efficient irrigation design standards;

(8) Encouraging the use of a diversity of plant species that promote native wildlife habitat. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.35.020 Application.

Except for communication facilities regulated pursuant to Chapter 21A.55 SMC, all new development shall be subject to the landscaping provisions of this chapter; provided, that specific landscaping and tree retention provisions for uses established through a conditional use permit or a special use permit shall be determined during the applicable review process. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.35.030 Landscaping – Screen types and description.

The three types of landscaping screens are described and applied as follows:

(1) Type I Landscaping Screen. 

(a) Type I landscaping shall function as a full screen and visual barrier. This landscaping is typically found between residential and nonresidential areas;

(b) Type I landscaping shall minimally consist of:

(i) A mix of primarily evergreen trees and shrubs generally interspersed throughout the landscape strip and spaced to form a continuous screen;

(ii) Between 70 and 90 percent evergreen trees; 

(iii) Trees provided at the rate of one per 10 linear feet of landscape strip and spaced no more than 20 feet apart on center; 

(iv) Evergreen shrubs provided at the rate of one per four linear feet of landscape strip and spaced no more than eight feet apart on center; and

(v) Groundcover pursuant to SMC 21A.35.080; and

(vi) Subject to director’s review for consistency with subsection (1)(a) of this section;

(2) Type II Landscaping Screen. 

(a) Type II landscaping is a “filtered screen” that functions as a visual separator. This landscaping is typically found between commercial and industrial uses, between differing types of residential development, and to screen industrial uses from the street; 

(b) Type II landscaping shall minimally consist of:

(i) A mix of evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs generally interspersed throughout the landscape strip spaced to create a filtered screen;

(ii) At least 50 percent deciduous trees and at least 30 percent evergreen trees;

(iii) Trees provided at the rate of one per 20 linear feet of landscape strip and spaced no more than 30 feet apart on center;

(iv) Shrubs provided at the rate of one per four linear feet of landscape strip and spaced no more than eight feet apart on center; and

(v) Groundcover pursuant to SMC 21A.35.080; 

(3) Type III Landscaping Screen. 

(a) Type III landscaping is a “see-through screen” that functions as a partial visual separator to soften the appearance of parking areas and building elevations. This landscaping is typically found along street frontage or between apartment developments; 

(b) Type III landscaping shall minimally consist of:

(i) A mix of evergreen and deciduous trees generally interspersed throughout the landscape strip and spaced to create a continuous canopy;

(ii) At least 70 percent deciduous trees; 

(iii) Trees provided at the rate of one per linear 25 feet of landscape strip and spaced no more than 30 feet apart on center; 

(iv) Shrubs provided at the rate of one per four linear feet of landscape strip and spaced no more than eight feet apart on center; and

(v) Groundcover pursuant to SMC 21A.35.080. (Ord. O2005-175 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.35.040 Landscaping – Street frontages. 

The required width of perimeter landscaping along street frontages shall be provided as follows: 

(1) Twenty feet of Type II landscaping shall be provided for an institutional use, excluding playgrounds and playfields; 

(2) Ten feet of Type II landscaping shall be provided for an industrial development;

(3) Ten feet of Type II landscaping shall be provided for an above-ground utility facility development, excluding distribution and transmission corridors, located outside a public right-of-way;

(4) Ten feet of Type III landscaping shall be provided for a commercial or attached/group residence development; and 

(5) For single-family subdivisions:

(a) Street trees shall be planted per the public works standards. (Ord. O2009-249 § 1; Ord. O2005-175 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.35.050 Landscaping – Side and rear lot lines.

The required width of perimeter landscaping along the side and rear yard lot lines shall be provided as follows:

(1) Twenty feet of Type I landscaping shall be included in a commercial or industrial development along any portion adjacent to a residential development;

(2) Five feet of Type II landscaping shall be included in an attached/group residence development, except that along portions of the development adjacent to property developed with single detached residences or vacant property that is zoned R(1-8), the requirement shall be 10 feet of Type II landscaping;

(3) Ten feet of Type II landscaping shall be included in an industrial development along any portion adjacent to a commercial or institutional development; and

(4) Ten feet of Type II landscaping shall be included in an institutional use, excluding playgrounds and playfields, or an above-ground utility facility development, excluding distribution or transmission corridors, when located outside a public right-of-way. (Ord. O2019-482 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.35.055 Landscaping – Drainage facilities. 

The landscaping requirements established for detention facilities in the Sammamish Addendum to the King County Surface Water Design Manual are hereby adopted by reference and shall be mandatory for all drainage facilities not located entirely underground. The department shall review and approve proposed landscaping plans subject to the following:

(1) Revisions to plans or additional landscaping requirements may be required to ensure that the proposed landscaping provides an effective screen and an enhancement to the overall appearance of the facility.

(2) Trails or walkways shall be incorporated into the landscaping plan.

(3) Ten feet of Type I landscaping consisting of 100 percent evergreen trees and shrubs shall be required for that portion of the perimeter of detention facilities where the slope of the detention facility exceeds 3H:1V. (Ord. O2016-429 § 5 (Att. E); Ord. O2005-175 § 1; Ord. O2004-155 § 1)


21A.35.060 Landscaping – Surface parking areas. 

Parking area landscaping shall be provided within surface parking areas with 10 or more parking stalls for the purpose of providing shade and diminishing the visual impacts of large paved areas as follows:

(1) Residential developments with common parking areas shall provide planting areas at the rate of 20 square feet per parking stall;

(2) Commercial, industrial, or institutional developments shall provide landscaping at a rate of:

(a) Twenty square feet per parking stall when 10 to 30 parking stalls are provided; and

(b) Twenty-five square feet per parking stall when 31 or more parking stalls are provided;

(3) Trees shall be provided and distributed throughout the parking area at a rate of:

(a) One tree for every five parking stalls for a commercial or industrial development; and

(b) One tree for every 10 parking stalls for residential or institutional development;

(4) The maximum distance between any parking stall and landscaping shall be no more than 100 feet;

(5) Permanent curbs or structural barriers shall be provided to protect the plantings from vehicle overhang; and

(6) Parking area landscaping shall consist of:

(a) Bioretention shall be evaluated in accordance with the Surface Water Design Manual to the maximum extent feasible. Vegetated areas within parking area landscaping that function as bioretention for the treatment of storm water runoff shall consist of the following:

(i) Trees, shrubs, perennials and groundcovers tolerant of summer drought, ponding fluctuations and saturated soil conditions for prolonged lengths of time anticipated by the facility design and hydrologic conditions.

(ii) Plants should be tolerant of typical pollutants from surrounding surfaces, such as petroleum hydrocarbons, dissolved metals, and fertilizers.

(iii) Plantings should consist of native plant types; at least 15 percent of the plant palette shall be evergreen. Planting and grading for drainage features should be designed to be integrated aesthetically with the surrounding landscape and urban design elements.

(iv) Visual buffering, sight distances and setbacks should be considered for landscaping adjacent to roadways.

(v) The planting and bioretention soil media shall consist of a bioretention soil mix in accordance with the January 2009 WSU Pierce County Extension “Bioretention Soil Mix Review and Recommendations for Western Washington,” or equivalent.

(vi) No plants that are included on the King County noxious weed list.

(b) Other parking area landscaping not devoted to storm water management shall consist of the following:

(i) Canopy-type deciduous trees, evergreen trees, evergreen shrubs and groundcovers planted in islands or strips;

(ii) Shrubs that do not exceed a maintained height of 42 inches;

(iii) Groundcover pursuant to SMC 21A.35.080; and

(iv) At least 50 percent of trees are coniferous.

(c) Plantings contained in planting islands or strips shall have an area of at least 100 square feet and with a narrow dimension of no less than five feet. (Ord. O2016-429 § 5 (Att. E); Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.35.070 Landscaping – General standards for all landscape areas.

All new landscape areas proposed for a development shall be subject to the following provisions:

(1) Berms shall not exceed a slope of two horizontal feet to one vertical foot (2:1).

(2) All new turf areas, except all-weather, sand-based athletic fields, shall:

(a) Be augmented with a two-inch layer of stabilized compost material or a four-inch layer of organic material with a minimum of eight percent organic material cultivated a minimum of six inches deep; or

(b) Have an existing organic content of eight percent or more to a depth of six inches as shown in a soil sample analysis. The soil analysis shall include:

(i) Determination of soil texture, indicating percentage of organic matter;

(ii) An approximated soil infiltration rate (either measured or derived from soil/texture/infiltration rate tables). A range of infiltration rates shall be noted where appropriate; and

(iii) Measure pH value.

(3) Landscape areas, except turf or areas of established groundcover, shall be covered with at least two inches of City-approved mulch to minimize evaporation.

(4) Plants having similar water use characteristics shall be grouped together in distinct hydrozones.

(5) Plant selection shall consider adaptability to climatic, geologic, and topographical conditions of the site. Preservation of existing vegetation meeting the requirements of this chapter is required where feasible. (Ord. O2016-429 § 5 (Att. E); Ord. O2009-249 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.35.080 Landscaping – Additional standards for required landscape areas.

In addition to the general standards of SMC 21A.35.070, landscape areas required pursuant to SMC 21A.35.040 through 21A.35.060 shall conform to the following standards:

(1) All plants shall conform to American Association of Nurserymen (AAN) grades and standards as published in the “American Standard for Nursery Stock” manual; provided, that existing healthy vegetation used to augment new plantings shall not be required to meet the standards of this manual. 

(2) Single-stemmed trees required pursuant to this chapter shall at the time of planting conform to the following standards:

(a) In parking area landscaping and in street rights-of-way:

(i) Deciduous trees shall have a minimum caliper of 1.75 inches and a height of 10 feet; and

(ii) Coniferous and broadleaf evergreens shall be at least five feet in height;

(b) In all other required landscape areas:

(i) Deciduous trees shall have a minimum caliper of 1.5 inches and a height of 10 feet; and

(ii) Coniferous and broadleaf evergreen trees shall be at least five feet in height.

(3) Multiple-stemmed trees shall be permitted as an option to single-stemmed trees; provided, that such multiple-stemmed trees are:

(a) At least six feet in height; and

(b) Not allowed within street rights-of-way.

(4) When the width of any landscape strip is 20 feet or greater, the required trees shall be staggered in two or more rows.

(5) Shrubs shall be:

(a) At least an AAN container Class No. 2 size at time of planting in Type II, III and parking area landscaping;

(b) At least 24 inches in height at the time of planting for Type I landscaping; and 

(c) Maintained at a height not exceeding 42 inches when located in Type III or parking area landscaping.

(6) Groundcovers shall be planted and spaced to result in total coverage of the majority of the required landscape area within three years.

(7) All fences shall be placed on the inward side of any required perimeter landscaping along the street frontage.

(8) Required street landscaping may be placed within City of Sammamish street rights-of-way subject to the City of Sammamish public works standards, provided adequate space is maintained along the street line to replant the required landscaping should subsequent street improvements require the removal of landscaping within the rights-of-way.

(9) Required street landscaping may be placed within Washington State rights-of-way subject to permission of the Washington State Department of Transportation.

(10) New landscape material provided within areas of undisturbed vegetation or within the protected area of significant trees shall give preference to utilizing indigenous plant species. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.35.090 Landscaping – Alternative options.

The following alternative landscape options may be allowed, subject to City approval, only if they accomplish equal or better levels of screening, or when existing conditions on or adjacent to the site, such as significant topographic differences, vegetation, structures, or utilities, would render application of this chapter ineffective or result in scenic view obstruction: 

(1) The amount of required landscape area may be reduced to ensure that the total area for required landscaping, and/or the area remaining undisturbed for the purpose of wildlife habitat or corridors does not exceed 15 percent of the net developable area of the site. For the purpose of this subsection, the net developable area of the site shall not include areas deemed unbuildable due to their location within sensitive areas and any associated buffers; 

(2) The average width of the perimeter landscape strip may be reduced up to 25 percent along any portion where: 

(a) Berms at least three feet in height or architectural barriers at least six feet in height are incorporated into the landscape design; or

(b) The landscape materials are incorporated elsewhere on-site; 

(3) In pedestrian district overlays, street perimeter landscaping may be waived provided a site plan, consistent with the applicable adopted area zoning document, is approved that provides street trees and other pedestrian-related amenities;

(4) Landscaping standards for uses located in a rural town or rural business centers designated by the comprehensive plan may be waived or modified by the director if deemed necessary to maintain the historic character of the area. Where a local or subarea plan with design guidelines has been adopted, the director shall base the landscaping modifications on the policies and guidelines of such plan;

(5) When an existing structure precludes installation of the total amount of required site perimeter landscaping, such landscaping material shall be incorporated on another portion of the site;

(6) Single-stemmed deciduous tree species that cannot generally be planted and established in larger sizes may have a caliper of less than one and one-half inches; 

(7) The number of trees and shrubs to be provided in required perimeter and parking area landscaping may be reduced up to 25 percent, subject to approval by the director, when a development retains existing significant trees within required landscaping areas consistent with the provisions of SMC 21A.35.210, Tree retention requirements;

(8) The number of trees and shrubs to be provided in required perimeter and parking area landscaping may be reduced up to 25 percent when a development uses landscaping materials consisting of species typically associated with the Puget Sound basin in the following proportions:

(a) Seventy-five percent of groundcover and shrubs; and

(b) Fifty percent of trees; and

(9) The department shall, pursuant to Chapter 2.55 SMC, develop and maintain an advisory listing of trees recommended for new plantings. Such list shall describe their general characteristics and suitability, and provide guidelines for their inclusion within required landscape areas. (Ord. O2005-175 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.35.100 Landscaping – Plan design, design review, and installation. 

(1) The landscape plan submitted to the department shall be drawn on the same base map as the development plans and shall identify the following:

(a) Total landscape area and separate hydrozones;

(b) Landscape materials botanical/common name and applicable size;

(c) Property lines;

(d) Impervious surfaces;

(e) Natural or manmade water features or bodies;

(f) Existing or proposed structures, fences, and retaining walls;

(g) Natural features or vegetation left in natural state; and

(h) Designated recreational open space areas.

(2) The proposed landscape plan shall be certified by a Washington State registered landscape architect, Washington State certified nurseryman, or Washington State certified landscaper.

(3) An affidavit signed by an individual specified in subsection (2) of this section, certifying that the landscaping has been installed consistent with the approved landscaping plan, shall be submitted to the department within 30 days of installation completion, unless the installed landscaping has been inspected and accepted by the department. 

(4) The required landscaping shall be installed no later than three months after issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the project or project phase. However, the time limit for compliance may be extended to allow installation of such required landscaping during the next appropriate planting season. A financial guarantee shall be required prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy, if landscaping is not installed and inspected prior to occupancy.

(5) A tree retention plan shall be prepared and submitted separately from the proposed landscape plan; provided, that retained trees counted towards site landscaping may be identified on the landscape plan. The tree retention plan shall:

(a) Be reviewed by a certified professional to ensure selection of healthy trees pursuant to SMC 21A.35.210(5), Tree retention requirements; and

(b) Identify trees scheduled for future removal and/or removed within the past year, to the maximum extent feasible. (Ord. O2005-175 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.35.110 Maintenance.

(1) All landscaping shall be maintained for the life of the project, including water conservation practices for turf grass such as annual aeration and dethatching, top dressing and overseeding;

(2) All landscape materials shall be pruned and trimmed as necessary to maintain a healthy growing condition or to prevent primary limb failure;

(3) With the exception of dead, diseased or damaged trees specifically retained to provide wildlife habitat, other dead, diseased, damaged or stolen plantings shall be replaced within three months or during the next planting season if the loss does not occur in a planting season; and

(4) Landscape areas shall be kept free of trash. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.35.120 Financial guarantees.

Financial guarantees shall be required consistent with the provisions of SMC Title 27A. This time period may be extended to one year by the director, if necessary to cover a planting and growing season. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.35.130 Water use – Applicability of water budget for landscape areas.

Irrigation systems of any type are optional components of a landscape area. However, a water budget for irrigation purposes shall be established for all new development, except for:

(1) Individually platted single dwelling (attached or detached) residential lots; provided, that developer-installed landscaping in common areas of residential projects is not exempt; and 

(2) Any project with a total landscaped area less than 500 square feet. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.35.140 Water use – Irrigation water budget calculated.

(1) The water budget (WB) allocation shall be calculated using the following formula:

WB = (ETo) x (AF) x (LA) x (CF)

Eto: Referenced evapotranspiration rate (net seasonal irrigation requirement in inches; see table below)

AF: Adjustment factor value of 0.8 (i.e., 0.5 x (Eto)/0.625 irrigation efficiency coefficient)

LA: Landscape area (square feet)

CF: Conversion factor value of 0.62 (Eto inches to gallons per square foot)

Reference Eto Table – Historical Data* 

	 	Monthly Net Irrigation Requirement (inches)

	January	.00

	February	.00

	March	.00

	April	.00

	May	1.59

	June	3.13

	July	4.46

	August	3.51

	September	1.77

	October	.03

	November	.00

	December	.00

	Season Total	14.49

*These figures are based on a 30-year average of National Weather Service Data and represent the amount of additional irrigation required for turf grass. The figures are adjusted for turf typically used in commercial landscaping.

(2) The City shall periodically undertake an evaluation of the WB calculation formula outlined in subsection (1) of this section. The evaluation shall include a recommendation to retain or modify the adjustment factor or components thereof, and shall be made in consultation with groups including landscape professionals and water purveyors.

(3) The water budget will be calculated upon the total area of the site in landscape areas and in landscape water features (such as decorative ponds, pools or fountains) that are fed by irrigation water. For the purpose of calculating the water budget, “landscape area” shall mean the entire parcel, less:

(a) Sensitive areas and their buffers;

(b) The building footprint;

(c) Driveways;

(d) Paved portions of parking lots; and 

(e) Hardscapes (e.g., decks, patios, sidewalks, and other nonporous areas).

(4) Areas such as playgrounds, sport fields, golf courses, school yards, or other recreational spaces where the turf provides a playing surface or serves other recreational purposes may be allowed additional water beyond the calculated water budget. In order to receive additional water for such turf areas, the applicant shall submit a statement designating such turf areas for recreational purposes and specifying additional water needs above the water budget. This additional water need will be based upon the Eto information for the turfgrass species or species mix used in such turf areas. 

(5) Landscape water features shall not use potable water unless the water feature recirculates water used in its operation. 

(6) The irrigation water use may be monitored by the water purveyor after the date of release of the performance bond. 

(7) Alternative water sources such as recycled wastewater or rainwater are encouraged. Such water sources shall not be subject to the limits of the water budget. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.35.150 Water use – Estimated water use calculated.

The estimated water use shall be calculated using the following provisions.

(1) Estimated water use (EWU) shall be calculated for each hydrozone by using the following formula:

EWU = (Eto) x (PF) x (HA) x (CF)

    IE

Eto: Referenced evapotranspiration rate (net seasonal irrigation requirement in inches. See table in SMC 21A.35.140)

PF: Plant factor value (see subsection (2) of this section)

HA: Hydrozone area (square feet) 

CF: Conversion factor value of 0.62 (Eto inches to gallons per square foot)

IE: Irrigation efficiency value 

(2) Plant factor values shall be as follows, but may be adjusted pursuant to subsection (3) of this section:

0 to 0.3 for low water use plants 

0.4 to 0.6 for average water use plants

0.7 to 1.0 for high water use plants

(3) For each hydrozone, plant factor values may be determined and adjusted by the designer (based on professional judgment and applicable reference materials) considering the relevant factors such as:

(a) Water requirements of the various plant species proposed; 

(b) Density of the plantings; 

(c) Microclimate of the site; and 

(d) Soil conditions. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.35.160 Water use – Irrigation efficiency goals and system design standards.

For purposes of this section, irrigation shall include any means of applying water to landscaped areas. All irrigation is at the applicant’s option. Manually applied irrigation methods shall comply with subsections (1) and (2) of this section. Irrigation applied through installed irrigation systems shall comply with subsections (1) through (3) of this section:

(1) Irrigation water shall be applied with goals of avoiding runoff, low head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where water flows onto adjacent property, nonirrigated areas, and impervious surfaces by:

(a) Considering soil type and infiltration rates;

(b) Using proper irrigation equipment and schedules, including features such as repeat cycles, to closely match application rates with infiltration rates; and 

(c) Considering special problems posed by irrigation on slopes and in median strips. 

(2) All irrigation water outlets, except those using alternative water sources, shall be downstream of the meter used to measure irrigation water use. 

(3) Irrigation systems shall be subject to the following additional provisions:

(a) Systems shall not be located on any:

(i) Turfgrass slopes exceeding a slope of three horizontal feet to one vertical foot (3:1); and 

(ii) Turfgrass portions of median strips less than eight feet width.

(b) Systems in landscape strips less than five feet in width shall be designed to ensure that overspray and/or runoff does not occur by use of system design options such as low volume emitters or microspray systems.

(c) Systems shall be designed to be consistent with the requirements of the hydrozone in which they are located.

(d) Systems shall be designed with the minimum average irrigation efficiency of 0.625 for spray type and 0.925 for low volume, low pressure emitter type systems.

(e) The use of automatic shutoff or override capabilities using rain shutoffs or moisture sensors is encouraged.

(f) Systems shall utilize a master control valve connected to an automatic controller. 

(g) Systems shall make provisions for winterization either by providing:

(i) Manual drains (automatic drain valves are not permitted at all low points); or 

(ii) Means to blow out lines with pressurized air.

(h) Separate valves shall be used to irrigate plants with differing water needs.

(i) Sprinkler heads with consistent application rates shall be selected for proper area coverage, operating pressure, and adjustment capability. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.35.170 Water use – Irrigation system design, design review and audit at installation.

(1) Irrigation plan design shall be certified by an Irrigation Association (IA) certified designer or a registered landscape architect or professional engineer with irrigation design experience. 

(2) The irrigation system must be audited and accepted at installation by an IA-certified irrigation auditor. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.35.180 Water use – Irrigation design plan contents.

Proposed irrigation system design plans shall be drawn on the same base project map as the landscape plan and shall identify:

(1) Location and size of any proposed separate water meters for the landscape serving commercial, multifamily, school, church, or recreation land uses only;

(2) Location, type, and size of all components of the irrigation system;

(3) Static water pressure at the point of connection to the water supply; 

(4) Flow rate (gallons per minute), application rates (inches per hour), and design operating pressure (PSI) for each station; and

(5) Cross connection prevention and/or backflow prevention device in accordance with state standards. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.35.190 Water use – Irrigation schedules. 

Irrigation schedules consistent with the following shall be submitted:

(1) A recommended irrigation program with monthly irrigation schedules based, at a minimum on average monthly Eto, shall be required for before and after establishment.

(2) The irrigation schedule shall:

(a) Include for each station the run time (in minutes per cycle) and cycles per week;

(b) Indicate the amount of applied water (in the applicable billing unit used by a purveyor);

(c) Incorporate use of evapotranspiration data reflecting local microclimates;

(d) Be adjusted for additional water need in recreational areas; 

(e) Incorporate additional operating criteria such as avoiding irrigation at times of high temperatures or winds. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.35.200 Water use – Irrigation system maintenance.

Irrigation systems shall be maintained and inspected periodically to assure proper functioning and in compliance with the calculated water budget for the system. Replacement of components shall be of originally specified parts or materials, or their equivalents. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.35.210 Tree retention requirements.

Repealed by Ord. O2015-395. (Ord. O2005-175 § 1)


21A.35.220 Tree retention incentives.

Repealed by Ord. O2015-395. (Ord. O2005-175 § 1)


21A.35.230 Tree protection standards.

Repealed by Ord. O2015-395. (Ord. O2005-175 § 1)


21A.35.240 Tree replacement and enforcement.

Repealed by Ord. O2015-395. (Ord. O2005-175 § 1)


Chapter 21A.37 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS – TREES

Sections:

21A.37.200    Purpose.

21A.37.210    Approval required.

21A.37.215    Calculations – Rounding.

21A.37.220    Evaluation required.

21A.37.230    Exemptions.

21A.37.240    Removal standards.

21A.37.250    Retention standards.

21A.37.260    Variances.

21A.37.270    Tree protection standards.

21A.37.280    Tree replacement standards.

21A.37.290    Violation – Criminal penalties.


21A.37.200 Purpose.

(1) The purpose of this chapter is to:

(a) Avoid the removal of significant trees, including heritage trees and landmark trees, in order to maintain the quality of Sammamish’s urban environment;

(b) Protect significant trees, heritage trees and landmark trees to the maximum extent possible in the design of new development proposals including, but not limited to, buildings, roadways, and utilities;

(c) Mitigate the environmental and aesthetic consequences of tree removal through on-site and off-site tree replacement to achieve a goal of no net loss of canopy throughout Sammamish;

(d) Provide measures to protect trees that may be impacted during construction;

(e) Maintain and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare; and

(f) Preserve the aesthetic, ecological, and economic benefits of forests and tree-covered areas in Sammamish, which include:

(i) Providing varied and rich habitats for wildlife;

(ii) Absorbing greenhouse gas emissions;

(iii) Moderating the effects of winds and temperatures;

(iv) Stabilizing and enriching the soil;

(v) Slowing runoff from precipitation and reducing soil erosion;

(vi) Improving air quality;

(vii) Improving water quality;

(viii) Masking unwanted sound;

(ix) Providing visual relief and screening buffers;

(x) Providing recreational benefits;

(xi) Enhancing the economic value of developments; and

(xii) Providing a valuable asset to the community as a whole. (Ord. O2015-395 § 3 (Att. A))


21A.37.210 Approval required.

(1) Approval Required. Except as provided in SMC 21A.37.230, Exemptions, any person who desires to cut down or remove any significant tree or who desires to conduct grading activities on a site that will result in the removal of any significant tree, must first obtain approval as required in this chapter. Approval may take the form of a tree removal permit or it may be included in conjunction with another land use approval such as a preliminary plat grading permit.

(2) Forest Practices Permittees. Permittees under Class IV – General forest practice permits issued by the Washington State Department of Natural Resources (DNR) for the conversion of forested lots to developed lots are also required to obtain approval under subsection (1) of this section. For all other forest practice permits (Class II, III, IV – special permit) issued by DNR for the purpose of commercial timber operations, no approval is required but no land use permits will be issued for six years following tree removal. (Ord. O2015-395 § 3 (Att. A))


21A.37.215 Calculations – Rounding.

(1) When calculations result in a fraction, the fraction shall be rounded to the nearest whole number as follows:

(a) Fractions of 0.50 or above shall be rounded up; and

(b) Fractions below 0.50 shall be rounded down. (Ord. O2015-395 § 3 (Att. A))


21A.37.220 Evaluation required.

(1) Professional Evaluation. In determining whether an approval shall be granted, the submittal of a professional evaluation and/or a tree protection plan prepared by a Certified Arborist may be required when the City deems such services are necessary to demonstrate compliance with the standards of this chapter. Such professional evaluation(s) and services may include:

(a) Providing a written evaluation of the anticipated effects of proposed construction on the viability of trees on a site;

(b) Providing a hazardous tree assessment;

(c) Providing a written evaluation of heritage trees and/or landmark trees, as well as significant trees, near environmentally critical areas and associated buffers;

(d) Developing plans for tree protection or replacement, including supervising and/or monitoring implementation of any such plans; and/or

(e) Conducting a post-construction site inspection and evaluation. (Ord. O2015-395 § 3 (Att. A))


21A.37.230 Exemptions.

(1) Removal Exemptions. The following actions are exempt from obtaining approval as required in this chapter:

(a) Emergency removal of any significant tree necessary to remedy an imminent danger as defined in SMC 16.25.190;

(b) Removal of any significant tree in public easements and public rights-of-way; and

Documentation of significant tree removal under this section shall be provided to the City within 21 days of removal.

(2) Retention Exemptions. The following conditions are exempt from retention calculation as required in this chapter:

(a) Significant trees determined to present an imminent danger; or

(b) Significant trees located in public utility easements and public rights-of-way. (Ord. O2015-395 § 3 (Att. A))


21A.37.240 Removal standards.

(1) R-1, R-4 and R-6 Zoned Lots. A lot as defined in SMC 21A.15.725 zoned R-1, R-4 or R-6 as of the effective date of this chapter must obtain a tree removal permit prior to removing any significant tree located on the lot. This requirement does not apply to rights vested to prior land use regulations.

(a) A permit shall be granted for the removal of significant trees as shown in the following table. The number of significant trees allowed for removal shall be limited by the lesser of the percentage column or cumulative number column:

	Lot Size	Percent of significant trees allowed to be removed per 10 years	Number of significant trees allowed to be removed per year	Cumulative number of significant trees allowed to be removed per rolling 10-year period

	< 1/4 ac	50	2	6

	1/4 ac – 1/2 ac	40	4	12

	1/2 ac – 1 ac	30	6	18

	1 ac – 2 ac	20	8	24

	> 2 ac	10	10	30

(b) Within environmentally critical areas and associated buffers, significant trees and other vegetation shall be retained subject to the requirements of Chapter 21A.50 SMC.

(c) Replacement trees shall be planted as provided in SMC 21A.37.280, Tree replacement standards.

(d) An application that seeks to remove trees in excess of the limits specified in subsection (1)(a) of this section may be granted at the discretion of the director subject to double the tree replacement requirements in SMC 21A.37.280. Director approval may be granted for one of the following reasons:

(i) Thinning a heavily wooded area where remaining trees may benefit from the thinning and the lot’s forested look, value, or function is maintained;

(ii) Maintaining the lot’s landscaped areas;

(iii) Building a new structure, excluding a new primary residence, or adding onto an additional structure such as an existing residence, ADU, garage or shed; or

(iv) Installing or maintaining utilities or sources of renewable energy, such as solar panels.

(2) R-8, R-12, R-18, O, NB and CB Zoned Lots. A lot as defined in SMC 21A.15.725 zoned R-8, R-12, R-18, O, NB or CB as of the effective date of this chapter must obtain a tree removal permit prior to removing any significant tree located on the lot. This requirement does not apply to rights vested to prior land use regulations. Permit approval will be based on the following criteria:

(a) A permit shall be granted for the removal of not more than four significant trees per year with a limit of eight significant trees every five years.

(b) Within environmentally critical areas and associated buffers, significant trees and other vegetation shall be retained subject to the requirements of Chapter 21A.50 SMC.

(c) Replacement trees shall be planted as provided in SMC 21A.37.280, Tree replacement standards.

(d) An application that seeks to remove trees in excess of the limits specified in subsection (2)(a) of this section may be authorized at the discretion of the director. Director approval may be granted for one of the following reasons:

(i) Thinning a heavily wooded area where remaining trees may benefit from the thinning and the lot’s forested look, value, or function is maintained;

(ii) Maintaining the lot’s landscaped areas; or

(iii) Installing or maintaining utilities or sources of renewable energy, such as solar panels. (Ord. O2015-395 § 3 (Att. A))


21A.37.250 Retention standards.

(1) Development Proposals on R-1, R-4 and R-6 Zoned Lots. A new primary residence or a type 2, 3 or 4 development proposal on R-1, R-4 and R-6 zoned lots must obtain a land use permit or approval prior to removing any significant tree located on the lot.

(a) Regardless of the zoning designation, erosion hazard areas and areas within the erosion hazards near sensitive water bodies overlay that drain to the no-disturbance area, as well as Pine Lake and Beaver Lake drainage sub-basins as depicted on maps created and maintained by the City shall retain 50 percent of the significant trees within areas unconstrained by wetlands, streams, landslide hazard areas, and associated buffers.

(b) R-1 Zoned Lots. A minimum of 50 percent of the significant trees shall be retained within areas unconstrained by wetlands, streams, landslide hazard areas, and associated buffers.

(c) R-4 and R-6 Zoned Lots. A minimum of 35 percent of the significant trees shall be retained within areas unconstrained by environmentally critical areas and associated buffers.

(d) Replacement trees shall be planted as provided in SMC 21A.37.280, Tree replacement standards.

(e) Trees previously designated for protection or located within a designated open space tract or environmentally critical area tract may not be removed unless they are determined to be hazardous. Any trees qualifying for an exemption under SMC 21A.37.230 are not included in the limits established by this section.

(2) Development Proposals on R-8, R-12, R-18, O, NB and CB Zoned Lots. A new primary residence or a type 2, 3 or 4 development proposal on R-8, R-12, R-18, O, NB and CB zoned lots must obtain a land use permit or approval prior to removing any significant tree located on the lot.

(a) Regardless of the zoning designation, erosion hazard areas and areas within the erosion hazards near sensitive water bodies overlay that drain to the no-disturbance area, as well as Pine Lake and Beaver Lake drainage sub-basins as depicted on maps created and maintained by the City shall retain 50 percent of the significant trees within areas unconstrained by wetlands, streams, landslide hazard areas, and associated buffers.

(b) A minimum of 25 percent of the significant trees shall be retained within R-8, R-12 and R-18 zoned lots in areas unconstrained by environmentally critical areas and associated buffers.

(c) There is no minimum retention requirement for significant trees located within O, NB, and CB zoned lots in areas unconstrained by environmentally sensitive areas and associated buffers.

(d) Replacement trees shall be planted as provided in SMC 21A.37.280, Tree replacement standards, except the replanting requirement shall be doubled for development proposals in the O, NB, and CB zones where tree retention is less than 25 percent.

(e) Trees previously designated for protection or located within a designated open space tract or environmentally critical area tract may not be removed unless they are determined to be hazardous. Any trees qualifying for an exemption under SMC 21A.37.230 are not included in the limits established by this section. (Ord. O2015-395 § 3 (Att. A))


21A.37.260 Variances.

(1) Variances. Where conditions exist that prevent full compliance with this chapter, the applicant may request a variance pursuant to SMC 20.05.020 and the decision criteria as described for such in SMC 21A.110.030. (Ord. O2015-395 § 3 (Att. A))


21A.37.270 Tree protection standards.

(1) Priority. Significant trees identified for retention pursuant to SMC 21A.37.250 shall be selected, to the extent feasible, subject to the following order of priority from most important to least important:

(a) Significant trees part of a continuous canopy adjacent to an environmentally critical area and associated buffer;

(b) Significant trees part of a continuous canopy adjacent to a public park and/or other protected open space;

(c) Significant trees part of any other on-site and/or off-site continuous canopy;

(d) Significant trees providing relief from identified environmental impacts;

(e) Significant trees providing perimeter connectivity and/or off-site screening;

(f) Significant trees able to be incorporated into required landscaping;

(g) An isolated cluster of significant trees;

(h) Individual significant trees.

(2) Designation. Any applicable application and/or plan required for new development shall show all significant trees designated for protection. These areas may be shown by labeling them as “Protected Significant Trees” or such other designation as approved by the director. Protected vegetation, including protected trees, shall not be modified, harmed, or removed except as provided in this section.

(3) Preservation. An approval for new development may require the significant trees to be retained are permanently preserved within a tract, easement or other permanent protective mechanism. When required, the location, purpose, and restrictions of these protected areas shall be shown on the face of the deed, plat, binding site plan, covenant or similar document, and shall be recorded with the King County department of records and elections or its successor. The recorded document shall include the requirement that the protected areas shall not be removed, amended, or modified without the written approval of the City of Sammamish.  

(4) Incentives. The following incentives are available for higher levels of landmark, heritage and significant tree preservation:

(a) Landmark Trees. The permanent preservation of a landmark tree in conjunction with subsection (1) of this section shall receive retention credit as follows:

(i) Two hundred percent credit in conjunction with subsections (1)(a) through (c) of this section.

(ii) One hundred fifty percent credit in conjunction with subsections (1)(d) through (f) of this section.

To qualify for this incentive, all landmark trees proposed for permanent preservation shall be outside of any environmentally critical area and associated buffer.

(b) Heritage Trees: The permanent preservation of a heritage tree in conjunction with subsection (1) of this section shall receive retention credit as follows:

(i) One hundred seventy-five percent credit in conjunction with subsections (1)(a) through (c) of this section.

(ii) One hundred twenty-five percent credit in conjunction with subsections (1)(d) through (f) of this section.

To qualify for this incentive, all heritage trees proposed for permanent preservation shall be outside of any environmentally critical area and associated buffer.

(c) New subdivisions and short plats proposing a minimum 45 percent permanent preservation of significant trees in conjunction with subsections (1)(a) through (c) of this section shall receive a 50 percent reduction of required on-site recreation space. To qualify for this incentive, all significant trees proposed for permanent preservation shall be outside of any environmentally critical area and associated buffer.

(d) New subdivisions and short plats proposing a minimum 40 percent permanent preservation of significant trees in conjunction with subsections (1)(a) through (c) of this section shall receive a 25 percent reduction of required on-site recreation space. To qualify for this incentive, all significant trees proposed for permanent preservation shall be outside of any environmentally critical area and associated buffer.

(5) Protection Measures. To ensure long-term viability of trees identified for protection, permit plans and construction activities shall comply with the following minimum required tree protection:

(a) All minimum required tree protection measures shall be shown on the tree protection and replacement plan.

(b) Tree protection barriers shall be installed five feet beyond the drip line of significant trees to be protected prior to any land disturbance.

(c) Tree protection barriers shall be a minimum of four feet high, constructed of chain link, or polyethylene laminar safety fencing or other material, subject to approval by the director. On large or multiple-project sites, the director may also require that signs requesting subcontractor cooperation and compliance with tree protection standards be posted at site entrances.

(d) Where tree protection areas are remote from areas of land disturbance, and where approved by the director, alternative forms of tree protection may be used in lieu of tree protection barriers, provided that protected trees are completely surrounded with continuous rope or flagging and are accompanied by “Tree Save Area – Keep Out” signs.

(e) Native understory trees, shrubs and other vegetation shall be protected within the designated tree protection area.

(6) Preventative Measures. In addition to the above minimum protection measures, the applicant shall support the protection measures by employing, as appropriate, the following preventative measures, consistent with best management practices for maintaining the health of the tree:

(a) Significant trees shall not be topped;

(b) Excessive pruning shall not be allowed unless necessary to protect life and property;

(c) Visible deadwood on trees to be protected or relocated shall be pruned;

(d) Fertilizer shall be applied to enhance the vigor of stressed trees;

(e) Use soil amendments and soil aeration in planting areas;

(f) Apply mulch over tree drip line areas; and

(g) Ensuring proper water availability before, during and after construction.

(7) Alternative Methods. The director may approve the use of alternative tree protection and/or preventative techniques if a protected tree will be protected to an equal or greater degree than through the techniques listed above. (Ord. O2015-395 § 3 (Att. A))


21A.37.280 Tree replacement standards.

(1) Replacement Required. Any significant tree lawfully removed pursuant to SMC 21A.37.240, Removal standards, or SMC 21A.37.250, Retention standards, shall be subject to the following replacement requirements:

(a) Each landmark tree shall be replaced by three new trees;

(b) Each heritage tree shall be replaced by two new trees;

(c) Each significant tree shall be replaced by one new tree;

(d) Replacement coniferous trees shall be at least eight feet in height;

(e) Replacement deciduous trees shall be at least two and one-half inches in diameter (DBH);

(f) Replacement trees shall be primarily native species to Washington in order to restore and enhance a site as nearly as practicable to its pre-removal character and function;

(g) Nonnative replacement trees shall be recommended by a Certified Arborist as having characteristics suitable to the proposed location of planting, or as otherwise approved by the City;

(h) The condition of replacement trees shall meet or exceed current American Nursery and Landscape Association or equivalent organization’s standards for nursery stock;

(i) Financial guarantees for replacement trees may be required consistent with the provisions of SMC Title 27A;

(j) Installation of required replacement trees shall be in accordance with the International Society of Arboriculture’s best management practices for arboriculture including, but not limited to, soil assessment, sampling, amendments and conservation, which ensure the tree’s long-term health and survival; and

(k) The director may consider smaller-sized replacement trees if the applicant can demonstrate that smaller trees are more suited to the species, the site conditions, and the purposes of this section, and that such trees will be planted in sufficient quantities to meet the intent of this section.

(2) Location for Tree Replacement – On Site. Unless approved for one or more of the alternatives set forth in subsection (3) of this section, replacement trees shall be planted on the site from which significant trees are removed and may be approved for the following areas on site:

(a) On-site replacement trees approved to be located in environmentally critical areas and associated buffers shall receive a 125 percent credit toward the tree replacement requirement.

(b) Each required street tree planted on site shall receive a 50 percent credit and each street tree planted on site in excess of the minimum requirement shall receive a 100 percent credit toward the tree replacement requirement, subject to director approval.

(c) On-site replacement trees approved to be located within the perimeter of a stormwater facility shall receive a 100 percent credit toward the tree replacement requirement.

(d) On-site replacement trees approved to be located in places other than subsections (2)(a) through (c) of this section shall receive a 100 percent credit toward the tree replacement requirement.

(3) Location for Tree Replacement – Alternatives. When on-site replacement cannot be completely achieved, the following alternatives may be considered:

(a) Off-Site Tree Replacement.

(i) The number of replacement trees shall be the same as described in subsection (1) of this section. Replacement costs (material plus labor) shall be at the applicant’s expense.

(ii) Allowable sites for receiving off-site replacement plantings may include public lands, open space areas, open space tracts, delineated environmentally critical areas and associated buffers. A receiving site shall be within the Sammamish City limits or within land owned by the City.

(b) Landscape Restoration. Where appropriate, other measures designed to mitigate the loss of trees by restoring all or parts of the forest landscape and its associated benefits may be considered. Measures, as determined by the director, may include, but are not limited to:

(i) Creation of wildlife snags from trees which would otherwise be removed;

(ii) Replacement of certain ornamental trees with native shrubs and groundcover;

(iii) Replacement of hazardous or short-lived trees with healthy new trees that have a greater chance of long-term survival;

(iv) Daylighting and restoration of stream corridors with native vegetation; and

(v) Protection of nonsignificant trees to provide for the successional stages of forest development.

(4) Tree Replacement Guidelines and Requirements. The following provisions shall be considered for tree replacement:

(a) Replacement trees should be planted to reestablish or enhance tree clusters where they previously existed;

(b) Where possible, replacement trees should be planted within environmentally critical areas and associated buffers. Replacement trees may be planted within a designated open space tract or environmentally critical area tract, where it is determined that such planting enhances and complements existing vegetation and environmental functions;

(c) Replacement trees shall be planted in locations appropriate to the species’ growth habit and horticultural requirements;

(d) Replacement trees shall be located away from areas where damage is likely;

(e) Replacement trees shall be located to provide screening of the development from adjacent properties, where appropriate;

(f) Replacement trees shall be planted in areas that connect or are adjacent to a designated open space tract or environmentally critical area tract or other open space, where appropriate;

(g) Replacement trees shall be integrated into the required landscape plans, if any, for a development; and

(h) Replacement trees to be planted next to or under power lines shall be selected with consideration of the trees’ maturation and maintenance requirements.

(5) Tree Maintenance. All required replacement trees and relocated trees shown on an approved permit, whether located on site or off site, shall be maintained in healthy condition by the applicant throughout the life of the project, unless otherwise approved by the director in a subsequent permit or approval. Healthy condition can be achieved by employing, as appropriate, the following preventative measures, consistent with best management practices for maintaining the health of the tree:

(a) Trees shall not be topped;

(b) Excessive pruning shall not be allowed unless necessary to protect life and property;

(c) Visible deadwood on trees to be protected or relocated shall be pruned;

(d) Fertilizer shall be applied to enhance the vigor of stressed trees;

(e) Use soil amendments and soil aeration in tree protection and planting areas;

(f) Apply mulch over tree drip line areas; and

(g) Ensuring proper water availability during and immediately after construction. (Ord. O2015-395 § 3 (Att. A))


21A.37.290 Violation – Criminal penalties.

(1) Criminal Conduct. Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter or fails to comply with any of the requirements shall be guilty of a gross misdemeanor and subject to the penalties set forth in SMC 1.10.010. In keeping with the City’s concern regarding protection of the environment, the court should consider the imposition of a maximum fine of no more than $5,000 per occurrence and imprisonment not to exceed one year. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate, distinct offense.

As a supplement or alternative to the remedies set forth in this section, the code administrator shall have the authority to seek civil penalties for violation of the provisions of this chapter as provided for in SMC 23.100.010. (Ord. O2015-395 § 3 (Att. A))


Chapter 21A.40 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS –  PARKING AND CIRCULATION

Sections:

21A.40.010    Purpose.

21A.40.020    Authority and application.

21A.40.030    Computation of required off-street parking spaces.

21A.40.040    Shared parking requirements.

21A.40.050    Exceptions for community residential facilities (CRF) and senior citizen assisted housing.

21A.40.055    Parking for new lots created under SMC Title 19A.

21A.40.060    Parking for the disabled.

21A.40.065    Electric vehicle parking stations – Provisions for.

21A.40.070    Loading space requirements.

21A.40.080    Stacking spaces for drive-through facilities.

21A.40.090    Transit and rideshare provisions.

21A.40.100    Pedestrian and bicycle circulation and access.

21A.40.110    Off-street parking plan design standards.

21A.40.120    Off-street parking construction standards.

21A.40.125    Electric vehicle charging spaces.

21A.40.130    Compact car allowance requirements.

21A.40.140    Internal circulation street standards.


21A.40.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide adequate parking for all uses allowed in this title, to reduce demand for parking by encouraging alternative means of transportation including public transit, rideshare and bicycles, and to increase pedestrian mobility in urban areas by:

(1) Setting minimum off-street parking standards for different land uses that assure safe, convenient and adequately sized parking facilities within activity centers;

(2) Providing incentives to rideshare through preferred parking arrangements;

(3) Providing for parking and storage of bicycles;

(4) Providing safe direct pedestrian access from public rights-of-way to structures and between developments; and

(5) Requiring uses that attract large numbers of employees or customers to provide transit stops. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.40.020 Authority and application.

(1) Before an occupancy permit may be granted for any new or enlarged building or for a change of use in any existing building, the use shall be required to meet the provisions of this chapter. 

(2) If this chapter does not specify a parking requirement for a land use, the director shall establish the minimum requirement based on a study of anticipated parking demand. Transportation demand management actions taken at the site shall be considered in determining anticipated demand. If the site is located in an activity center or community business center, the minimum requirement shall be set at a level less than the anticipated demand, but at no less than 75 percent of the anticipated demand. In the study the applicant shall provide sufficient information to demonstrate that the parking demand for a specific land use will be satisfied. Parking studies shall be prepared by a professional engineer with expertise in traffic and parking analyses, or an equally qualified individual as authorized by the director.

(3) If the required amount of off-street parking has been proposed to be provided off-site, the applicant shall provide written contracts with affected landowners showing that required off-street parking shall be provided in a manner consistent with the provisions of this chapter. The contracts shall be reviewed by the director for compliance with this chapter, and if approved, the contracts shall be recorded with the King County records and elections division as a deed restriction on the title to all applicable properties. These deed restrictions may not be revoked or modified without authorization by the director. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.40.030 Computation of required off-street parking spaces. 

(1) Except as modified in SMC 21A.40.070(2) through (4), off-street parking areas shall contain at a minimum the number of parking spaces as stipulated in the following table. Off-street parking ratios expressed as number of spaces per square feet means the usable or net square footage of floor area, exclusive of nonpublic areas. Nonpublic areas include but are not limited to building maintenance areas, storage areas, closets or restrooms. If the formula for determining the number of off-street parking spaces results in a fraction, the number of off-street parking spaces shall be rounded to the nearest whole number with fractions of 0.50 or greater rounding up and fractions below 0.50 rounding down.

	Land Use	Minimum Parking Spaces Required

	Residential (SMC 21A.20.030(A)):

	Single detached/townhouse	2.0 per dwelling unit

	Apartment:	 

	 Studio units	1.2 per dwelling unit

	 One bedroom units	1.5 per dwelling unit

	 Two bedroom units	1.7 per dwelling unit

	 Three bedroom units or larger	2.0 per dwelling unit

	Mobile home park	2.0 per dwelling unit

	Senior citizen assisted	1 per 2 dwelling or sleeping units

	Community residential facilities	1 per 2 bedrooms

	Dormitory, including religious	1 per 2 bedrooms

	Hotel/motel including organizational hotel/lodging	1 per bedroom

	Bed and breakfast guesthouse	1 per guest room, plus 2 per facility

	 

	Recreation/Cultural (SMC 21A.20.040(A)):

	Recreation/culture uses:	1 per 300 square feet

	Exceptions:	 

	Bowling center	5 per lane

	Golf course	3 per hole, plus 1 per 300 square feet of clubhouse facilities

	Tennis club	4 per tennis court plus 1 per 300 square feet of clubhouse facility

	Golf driving range	1 per tee

	Park/playfield	(director)

	Theater	1 per 3 fixed seats

	Conference center	1 per 3 fixed seats, plus 1 per 50 square feet used for assembly purposes without fixed seats, or 1 per bedroom, whichever results in the greater number of spaces

	General Services (SMC 21A.20.050(A)):

	General service uses:	1 per 300 square feet

	Exceptions:	 

	Funeral home/crematory	1 per 50 square feet of chapel area

	Daycare I	2 per facility

	Daycare II	2 per facility, plus 1 space for each 20 children

	Churches, synagogue, temple	1 per 5 fixed seats, plus 1 per 50 square feet of gross floor area without fixed seats used for assembly purposes

	Outpatient and veterinary clinic offices	1 per 300 square feet of office, labs and examination rooms

	Nursing and personal care facilities	1 per 4 beds

	Hospital	1 per bed

	Elementary schools	1 per classroom, plus 1 per 50 students

	Secondary schools:	 

	 Middle/junior high schools	1 per classroom, plus 1 per 50 students

	 High schools	1 per classroom, plus 1 per 10 students

	 High schools with stadiums	Greater of 1 per classroom plus 1 per 10 students, or 1 per 3 fixed seats in stadium

	Vocational schools	1 per classroom, plus 1 per 5 students

	Specialized instruction schools	1 per classroom, plus 1 per 2 students

	Artist studios	0.9 per 1,000 square feet of area used for studios

	 

	Government/Business Services (SMC 21A.20.060(A)):

	Government/business services uses:	1 per 300 square feet

	Exceptions:	 

	Public agency yard	1 per 300 square feet of offices, plus 0.9 per 1,000 square feet of indoor storage or repair areas

	Public agency archives	0.9 per 1,000 square feet of storage area, plus 1 per 50 square feet of waiting/reviewing areas

	Courts	3 per courtroom, plus 1 per 50 square feet of fixed seat or assembly areas

	Police facility	(director)

	Fire facility	(director)

	Construction and trade	1 per 300 square feet of office, plus 1 per 3,000 square feet of storage area

	Warehousing and storage	1 per 300 square feet of office, plus 0.9 per 1,000 square feet of storage area

	Self-service and storage	1 per 3,500 square feet of storage area, plus 2 for any resident director’s unit

	Outdoor advertising services	1 per 300 square feet of office, plus 0.9 per 1,000 square feet of storage area

	Heavy equipment repair	1 per 300 square feet of office, plus 0.9 per 1,000 square feet of indoor repair areas

	Office	1 per 300 square feet

	 

	Retail/Wholesale (SMC 21A.20.070(A)):

	Retail trade uses:	1 per 300 square feet

	Exceptions:	 

	Food stores, less than 15,000 square feet	3 plus 1 per 350 square feet

	Gasoline service stations w/o grocery	3 per facility, plus 1 per service bay

	Gasoline service stations w/grocery, no service bays	1 per facility, plus 1 per 300 square feet of store

	Restaurants	1 per 75 square feet in dining or lounge areas

	Wholesale trade uses	0.9 per 1,000 square feet

	Retail and wholesale trade mixed use	1 per 300 square feet

	 

	Manufacturing (SMC 21A.20.080(A)):

	Manufacturing uses	0.9 per 1,000 square feet

	Winery/brewery	0.9 per 1,000 square feet, plus 1 per 50 square feet of tasting area

	 

	Resources (SMC 21A.20.090(A)):

	Resource uses	(director)

	 

	Regional (SMC 21A.20.100(A)):

	Regional uses	(director)

(2) An applicant may request a modification of the minimum required number of parking spaces by providing that parking demand can be met with a reduced parking requirement. In such cases, the director may approve a reduction of up to 50 percent of the minimum required number of spaces.

(3) When the City has received a shell building permit application, off-street parking requirements shall be based on the possible tenant improvements or uses authorized by the zone designation and compatible with the limitations of the shell permit. When the range of possible uses result in different parking requirements, the director will establish the amount of parking based on a likely range of uses.

(4) Where other provisions of this code stipulate maximum parking allowed or reduced minimum parking requirements, those provisions shall apply.

(5) In any development required to provide six or more parking spaces, bicycle parking shall be provided. Bicycle parking shall be bike rack or locker-type parking facilities unless otherwise specified.

(a) Off-street parking areas shall contain at least one bicycle parking space for every 12 spaces required for motor vehicles except as follows:

(i) The director may reduce bike rack parking facilities for patrons when it is demonstrated that bicycle activity will not occur at that location.

(ii) The director may require additional spaces when it is determined that the use or its location will generate a high volume of bicycle activity. Such a determination will include but not be limited to the following uses:

(A) Park/playfield;

(B) Marina;

(C) Library/museum/arboretum;

(D) Elementary/secondary school;

(E) Sports club; or

(F) Retail business (when located along a developed bicycle trail or designated bicycle route).

(b) Bicycle facilities for patrons shall be located within 100 feet of the building entrance and shall be designed to allow either a bicycle frame or wheels to be locked to a structure attached to the pavement.

(c) All bicycle parking and storage shall be located in safe, visible areas that do not impede pedestrian or vehicle traffic flow, and shall be well lit for nighttime use.

(d) When more than 10 people are employed on site, enclosed locker-type parking facilities for employees shall be provided. The director shall allocate the required number of parking spaces between bike rack parking and enclosed locker-type parking facilities.

(e) One indoor bicycle storage space shall be provided for every two dwelling units in townhouse and apartment residential uses, unless individual garages are provided for every unit. The director may reduce the number of bike rack parking spaces if indoor storage facilities are available to all residents. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.40.040 Shared parking requirements. 

The amount of off-street parking required by SMC 21A.40.030 may be reduced by an amount determined by the director when shared parking facilities for two or more uses are proposed, provided:

(1) The total parking area exceeds 5,000 square feet; 

(2) The parking facilities are designed and developed as a single on-site common parking facility, or as a system of on-site and off-site facilities, if all facilities are connected with improved pedestrian facilities and no building or use involved is more than 800 feet from the most remote shared facility; 

(3) The amount of the reduction shall not exceed 10 percent for each use, unless: 

(a) The normal hours of operation for each use are separated by at least one hour; or 

(b) A parking demand study is prepared by a professional traffic engineer and submitted by the applicant documenting that the hours of actual parking demand for the proposed uses will not conflict and those uses will be served by adequate parking if shared parking reductions are authorized; 

(c) The director will determine the amount of reduction subject to subsection (4) of this section;

(4) The total number of parking spaces in the common parking facility is not less than the minimum required spaces for any single use; 

(5) A covenant or other contract for shared parking between the cooperating property owners is approved by the director. This covenant or contract must be recorded with King County records and elections division as a deed restriction on both properties and cannot be modified or revoked without the consent of the director; and 

(6) If any requirements for shared parking are violated, the affected property owners must provide a remedy satisfactory to the director or provide the full amount of required off-street parking for each use, in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, unless a satisfactory alternative remedy is approved by the director. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.40.050 Exceptions for community residential facilities (CRF) and senior citizen assisted housing.

(1) The minimum requirement of one off-street parking space per two bedrooms for CRFs and one off-street parking space per two senior citizen assisted housing units may be reduced by up to 50 percent, as determined by the director based on the following considerations:

(a) Availability of private, convenient transportation services to meet the needs of the CRF residents;

(b) Accessibility to and frequency of public transportation; and

(c) Pedestrian access to health, medical, and shopping facilities.

(2) If a CRF facility or senior citizen assisted housing is no longer used for such purposes, additional off-street parking spaces shall be required in compliance with this chapter prior to the issuance of a new certificate of occupancy. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.40.055 Parking for new lots created under SMC Title 19A.

All new single-family residential lots, created pursuant to the provisions of SMC Title 19A and located within the R-4 and R-6 zones, shall provide one on-street parking space along the street frontage of each lot within the project’s public or private streets. If, through demonstration of design alternatives considered by the applicant, on-street parking is proven infeasible, required parking may be permitted in alternative locations in the following order of preference: within a common shared space to be managed by the homeowners’ association; or within the driveway that services each new lot. (Ord. O2019-482 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.40.060 Parking for the disabled. 

Off-street parking and access for physically disabled persons shall be provided in accordance with the regulations adopted pursuant to Chapter 19.27 RCW, State Building Code, and Chapter 70.92 RCW, Public Buildings – Provisions for Aged and Disabled. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.40.065 Electric vehicle parking stations – Provisions for.

Where electric vehicle charging stations are provided in parking lots or parking garages, accessible electric vehicle charging stations shall be provided as follows: 

(1) Accessible electric vehicle charging stations shall be provided in the ratios shown on the following table:

	Number of EV Charging Stations	Minimum Accessible EV Charging Stations

	1 – 50	1

	51 – 100	2

	101 – 150	3

	151 – 200	4

	201 – 250	5

	251 – 300	6

(2) Accessible electric vehicle charging stations should be located in close proximity to the building or facility entrance and shall be connected to a barrier-free accessible route of travel. It is not necessary to designate the accessible electric vehicle charging station exclusively for the use of disabled persons. Below are two options for providing for accessible electric vehicle charging stations.

OFF-STREET ACCESSIBLE ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION – OPTION 1


[IMAGE]


OFF-STREET ACCESSIBLE ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION – OPTION 2


[IMAGE]


(Ord. O2011-300 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.40.070 Loading space requirements.

(1) Every nonresidential building engaged in retail, wholesale, manufacturing, or storage activities, excluding self-service storage facilities, shall provide loading spaces in accordance with the standards listed below:

	Gross Floor Area	Required Number of Loading Spaces

	10,000 to 16,000 square feet	1

	16,001 to 40,000 square feet	2

	40,001 to 64,000 square feet	3

	64,001 to 96,000 square feet	4

	96,001 to 128,000 square feet	5

	128,001 to 160,000 square feet	6

	160,001 to 196,000 square feet	7

	For each additional 36,000 square feet	1 additional

(2) Every building engaged in hotel, office building, restaurant, hospital, auditorium, convention hall, exhibition hall, sports arena/stadium or other similar use shall provide loading spaces in accordance with the standards listed below:

	Gross Floor Area	Required Number of Loading Spaces

	40,000 to 60,000 square feet	1

	60,001 to 160,000 square feet	2

	160,001 to 264,000 square feet	3

	264,001 to 388,000 square feet	4

	388,001 to 520,000 square feet	5

	520,001 to 652,000 square feet	6

	652,001 to 784,000 square feet	7

	784,001 to 920,000 square feet	8

	For each additional 140,000 square feet	1 additional

(3) Each loading space required by this section shall be a minimum of 10 feet wide, 30 feet long, and have an unobstructed vertical clearance of 14 feet six inches, and shall be surfaced, improved and maintained as required by this chapter. Loading spaces shall be located so that trucks shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicle traffic movement or project into any public right-of-way. All loading space areas shall be separated from parking areas and shall be designated as truck loading spaces.

(4) Any loading space located within 100 feet of areas zoned for residential use shall be screened and operated as necessary to reduce noise and visual impacts. Noise mitigation measures may include architectural or structural barriers, beams, walls, or restrictions on the hours of operation.

(5) Multi-story self-service storage facilities shall provide two loading spaces, and single story facilities one loading space, adjacent to each building entrance that provides common access to interior storage units. Each loading berth shall measure not less than 25 feet by 12 feet with an unobstructed vertical clearance of 14 feet six inches, and shall be surfaced, improved and maintained as required by this chapter. Any floor area additions or structural alterations to a building shall be required to provide loading space or spaces as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.40.080 Stacking spaces for drive-through facilities.

(1) A stacking space shall be an area measuring eight feet by 20 feet with direct forward access to a service window of a drive-through facility. A stacking space shall be located to prevent any vehicles from extending onto the public right-of-way, or interfering with any pedestrian circulation, traffic maneuvering, or other parking space areas. Stacking spaces for drive-through or drive-in uses may not be counted as required parking spaces.

(2) Uses providing drive-up or drive-through services shall provide vehicle stacking spaces as follows:

(a) For each drive-through lane of a bank/financial institution, business service, or other drive-through use not listed, a minimum of five stacking spaces shall be provided; and 

(b) For each drive-through lane of a restaurant, a minimum of seven stacking spaces shall be provided. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.40.090 Transit and rideshare provisions.

(1) All land uses listed in SMC 21A.20.060(A) (government/business services), and in SMC 21A.20.080(A) (manufacturing), hospitals, high schools, vocational schools, universities, and specialized instruction schools shall be required to reserve one parking space of every 20 required spaces for rideshare parking as follows: 

(a) The parking spaces shall be located closer to the primary employee entrance than any other employee parking except disabled;

(b) Reserved areas shall have markings and signs indicating that the space is reserved; and

(c) Parking in reserved areas shall be limited to vanpools and carpools established through rideshare programs by public agencies and to vehicles meeting minimum rideshare qualifications set by the employer.

(2) The director may reduce the number of required off-street parking spaces when one or more scheduled transit routes provide service within 660 feet of the site. The amount of reduction shall be based on the number of scheduled transit runs between 7:00 to 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 to 6:00 p.m. each business day up to a maximum reduction as follows: 

(a) Four percent for each run serving land uses in SMC 21A.20.060(A) (government/business services) and SMC 21A.20.080(A) (manufacturing) up to a maximum of 40 percent; and 

(b) Two percent for each run serving land uses in SMC 21A.20.040(A) (recreation/culture), 21A.20.050(A) (general services) and 21A.20.060 (A) (retail/wholesale) up to a maximum of 20 percent; and 

(3) All uses that are located on an existing transit route and are required under the computation for required off-street parking spaces in SMC 21A.40.030(1) to provide more than 200 parking spaces may be required to provide transit shelters, bus turnout lanes or other transit improvements as a condition of permit approval. Uses that reduce required parking under subsection (2) of this section shall provide transit shelters if transit routes adjoin the site. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.40.100 Pedestrian and bicycle circulation and access. 

(1) Nonresidential Uses. All permitted nonresidential uses shall provide pedestrian and bicycle access within and onto the site. Access points onto the site shall be provided (a) approximately every 800 to 1,000 feet along existing and proposed perimeter sidewalks and walkways; and (b) at all arrival points to the site, including abutting street intersections, crosswalks, and transit stops. In addition, access points to and from adjacent lots shall be coordinated to provide circulation patterns between developments.

(2) Residential Uses.

(a) All permitted residential uses of five or more dwelling units shall provide pedestrian and bicycle access within and onto the site. Access points onto the site shall be provided (i) approximately every 800 to 1,000 feet along existing and proposed perimeter sidewalks and walkways, and (ii) at all arrival points to the site, including abutting street intersections, crosswalks, and transit and school bus stops. In addition, access points to and from adjacent lots shall be coordinated to provide circulation patterns between sites.

(b) Residential uses of five or more dwelling units shall provide for nonmotorized circulation between cul-de-sacs or groups of buildings to allow pedestrian and bicycle access within and through the development to adjacent activity centers, parks, common tracts, dedicated open space intended for active recreation, schools or other public facilities, transit and school bus stops, and public streets.

(c) Access shall only be required to school bus stops that are within or adjacent to a proposed residential use of five or more dwelling units and that are identified by the affected school district in response to a notice of application. In order to allow school districts to identify school bus stops, the department shall send a notice of application to affected school districts on all applications for residential uses of five or more dwelling units.

(3) Walkways shall form an on-site circulation system that minimizes the conflict between pedestrians and traffic at all points of pedestrian access to on-site parking and building entrances. Walkways shall be provided when the pedestrian access point onto the site, or any parking space, is more than 75 feet from the building entrance or principal on-site destination and as follows:

(a) All developments that contain more than one building shall provide walkways between the principal entrances of the buildings; 

(b) All nonresidential buildings set back more than 100 feet from the public right-of-way shall provide for direct pedestrian access from the building to buildings on adjacent lots; and 

(c) Walkways across parking areas shall be located as follows:

(i) Walkways running parallel to the parking rows shall be provided for every six rows. Rows without walkways shall be landscaped or contain barriers or other means to encourage pedestrians to use the walkways; and


[IMAGE]


Walkways Running Parallel to Parking 

(ii) Walkways running perpendicular to the parking rows shall be no further than 20 parking spaces. Landscaping, barriers or other means shall be provided between the parking rows to encourage pedestrians to use the walkways.


[IMAGE]


Walkways Running Perpendicular to Parking 

(4) Pedestrian and bicycle access and walkways shall meet the following minimum design standards:

(a) Access and walkways shall be well lit and physically separated from driveways and parking spaces by landscaping, berms, barriers, grade separation, or other means to protect pedestrians from vehicular traffic;

(b) Access and walkways shall be a minimum of 48 inches of unobstructed width and meet the surfacing standards of the City of Sammamish public works standards for walkways or sidewalks; 

(c) The minimum standard for walkways required to be accessible for persons with disabilities shall be designed and constructed to comply with the current State Building Code regulations for barrier-free accessibility; 

(d) A crosswalk shall be required when a walkway crosses a driveway or a paved area accessible to vehicles.

(5) Blocks in excess of 660 feet shall be provided with a crosswalk at the approximate midpoint of the block. 

(6) The director may waive or modify the requirements of this section when:

(a) Existing or proposed improvements would create an unsafe condition or security concern;

(b) There are topographical constraints or existing or required structures effectively block access;

(c) The site is in a rural area outside of or not contiguous to an activity center, park, common tract, dedicated open space, school, transit stop, or other public facility;

(d) The land use would not generate the need for pedestrian or bicycle access; or

(e) The public is not allowed access to the subject land use. 

The director’s waiver may not be used to modify or waive the requirements of this section relating to sidewalks and safe walking conditions for students.

(7) The provisions of this section shall not apply on school district property. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.40.110 Off-street parking plan design standards. 

(1) Off-street parking areas shall not be located more than 600 feet from the building they are required to serve for all uses except those specified below; where the off-street parking areas do not abut the buildings they serve, the required maximum distance shall be measured from the nearest building entrance that the parking area serves:

(a) For all single detached dwellings the parking spaces shall be located on the same lot they are required to serve;

(b) For all other residential dwellings at least a portion of parking areas shall be located within 150 feet from the building(s) they are required to serve; 

(c) For all nonresidential uses permitted in residential zones, the parking spaces shall be located on the same lot they are required to serve and at least a portion of parking areas shall be located within 150 feet from the nearest building entrance they are required to serve;

(d) In designated activity, community business, and neighborhood business centers, parking lots should be located to the rear or sides of buildings, when feasible;

(e) Parking lots shall be so arranged as to permit the internal circulation of vehicles between parking aisles without re-entering adjoining public streets; and 

(f) Parking for the disabled shall be provided in accordance with SMC 21A.40.060.

(2) The minimum parking space and aisle dimensions for the most common parking angles are shown on the chart below. For parking angles other than those shown on the chart, the minimum parking space and aisle dimensions shall be determined by the director. Regardless of the parking angle, one-way aisles shall be at least 10 feet wide, and two-way aisles shall be at least 20 feet wide. If dead-end aisles are used in the parking layout, they shall be constructed as two-way aisles. Parking plans for angle parking shall use space widths no less than eight feet six inches for a standard parking space design and eight feet for a compact car parking space design.

MINIMUM PARKING STALL AND AISLE DIMENSIONS *

	A	B	C	D	E	F

	Parking Angle	Stall Width	Curb Length	Stall Depth	Aisle

One-Way 	Width

Two-Way	Unit

One-Way	 Depth

Two-Way

	0	 

Min

Desired	8.0*

8.5

9.0	20.0*

22.5

22.5	8.0

8.5

9.0	12.0

12.0

12.0	20.0

20.0

20.0	**

29.0

30.0	**

37.0

38.0

	30	 

Min

Desired	8.0*

8.5

9.0	16.0*

17.0

18.0	15.0

16.5

17.0	10.0

10.0

10.0	20.0

20.0

20.0	**

42.0

44.0	**

53.0

54.0

	45	 

Min

Desired	8.0*

8.5

9.0	11.5*

12.0

12.5	17.0*	12.0

12.0

12.0	20.0

20.0

20.0	**

50.0

51.0	**

58.0

59.0

	60	 

Min

Desired	8.0*

8.5

9.0	9.6*

10.0

10.5	18.0

20.0

21.0	18.0

18.0

18.0	20.0

20.0

20.0	**

58.0

60.0	**

60.0

62.0

	90	 

Min

Desired	8.0*

8.5

9.0	8.0*

8.5

9.0	16.0*

18.0

18.0	24.0

24.0

24.0	24.0

24.0

24.0	**

60.0

60.0	**

60.0

60.0

*For compact stalls only.

**Variable with compact and standard combinations.


[IMAGE]


(3) Any parking spaces abutting a required landscaped area on the driver or passenger side of the vehicle shall provide an additional 18 inches above the minimum space width requirement to provide a place to step other than in the landscaped area. The additional width shall be separated from the adjacent parking space by a parking space division stripe.

(4) The parking space depth may be reduced when vehicles overhang a walkway or landscaping under the following conditions:

(a) Wheelstops or curbs are installed; 

(b) The remaining walkway provides a minimum of 48 inches of unimpeded passageway for pedestrians;

(c) The amount of space depth reduction is limited to a maximum of 18 inches; and

(d) Landscaping is designed in accordance with SMC 21A.35.060(5).

(5) Driveways providing ingress and egress between off-street parking areas and abutting streets shall be designed, located and constructed in accordance with the provisions of the City of Sammamish public works standards as adopted by Chapter 14A.01 SMC. Driveways for single detached dwellings, no more than 20 feet in width, may cross required setbacks or landscaped areas in order to provide access between the off-street parking areas and the street, provided no more than 15 percent of the required landscaping or setback area is eliminated by the driveway. Joint use driveways may be located within required landscaping or setback areas. Driveways for all other developments may cross or be located within required setbacks or landscaped areas in order to provide access between the off-street parking areas and the street, provided no more than 10 percent of the required landscaping is displaced by the driveway and the driveway is located no closer than five feet from any property line except where intersecting the street.

(6) Parking spaces required per this title shall be located as follows:

(a) For single detached dwelling units the required parking spaces shall be outside of any required setbacks or landscaping, provided driveways crossing setbacks and required landscaping may be used for parking. However, if the driveway is a joint use driveway, no vehicle parked on the driveway shall obstruct any joint user’s access to the driveway or parking spaces;

(b) For all other developments parking spaces may be permitted by the director in setback areas pursuant to an approved landscape plan; and

(c) For nonresidential uses in residential zones, parking is permitted in setback areas.

(7) Lighting shall be provided for safety of traffic and pedestrian circulation on the site. It shall be designed to minimize direct lighting of abutting properties and adjacent streets and pursuant to the provisions of SMC 21A.30.230. The director shall have the authority to waive the requirement to provide lighting.

(8) Tandem or end-to-end parking is allowed in residential developments. Apartment/townhouse developments may have tandem parking areas for each dwelling unit but shall not combine parking for separate dwelling units in tandem parking areas. 

(9) All vehicle parking and storage for single detached dwellings must be in a garage, carport or on an approved impervious surface. Any impervious surface used for vehicle parking or storage must have direct and unobstructed driveway access.

(10) The total number of vehicles parked or stored outside of a building on a single-family lot in the R-4 through R-8 zones, excluding recreational vehicles and trailers, shall not exceed six vehicles on lots 12,500 square feet or less and eight vehicles on lots greater than 12,500 square feet.

(11) Vanpool/carpool parking areas shall meet the following minimum design standards:

(a) A minimum vertical clearance of seven feet three inches shall be provided to accommodate van vehicles if designated vanpool/carpool parking spaces are located in a parking structure; and 

(b) A minimum turning radius of 26 feet four inches with a minimum turning diameter (curb to curb) of 52 feet five inches shall be provided from parking aisles to adjacent carpool/vanpool parking spaces.

(12) Direct access from the street right-of-way to off-street parking areas shall be subject to the requirements of SMC 21A.60.070.

(13) No dead-end alley may provide access to more than eight off-street parking spaces.

(14) Any parking stalls located in enclosed buildings must be totally within the enclosed building.

(15) Parking lot design for nonresidential uses located in the R-1, R-4, R-6, and R-8 zoning designations shall be designed pursuant to the provisions of SMC 21A.30.240.

(16) Daycare I facilities shall provide sufficient area for the loading and unloading of passengers. This area shall:

(a) Allow access to the entrance of the daycare I without crossing a street or travelway, and one of the following, in order of preference:

(i) Be located off street, i.e., not within a public right-of-way or access easement; or

(ii) Be located on street, outside of travel lanes, and adjacent to the daycare I; provided, that on-street loading and unloading of passengers is only allowed on local streets.

(b) All off-street loading spaces shall be designed and constructed consistent with this chapter. All on-street loading spaces shall be designed consistent with the on-street parking space requirements of the adopted Public Works Standards. (Ord. O2018-466 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-408 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.40.120 Off-street parking construction standards. 

(1) Off-street parking areas shall have dust-free, all-weather surfacing. Typical approved sections are illustrated below. Frequently used (at least five days a week) off-street parking areas shall conform to the standards shown in A below or an approved equivalent. If the parking area is to be used more than 30 days per year but less than five days a week, then the standards to be used shall conform to the standards shown in B below or an approved equivalent. An exception to these surfacing requirements may be made for certain uses that require intermittent use of their parking facilities less than 30 days per year, and for permeable pavement, when constructed to the design specifications in the Surface Water Design Manual. Any surface treatment other than these exceptions and those graphically illustrated below must be approved by the director.


[IMAGE]


(2) Grading work for parking areas shall meet the requirements of Chapter 16.15 SMC. Drainage and erosion/sedimentation control facilities shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 9.04 KCC as adopted by SMC Title 13.

(3) Asphalt or concrete surfaced parking areas shall have parking spaces marked by surface paint lines or suitable substitute traffic marking material in accordance with the Washington State Department of Transportation Standards. Wheel stops are required where a parked vehicle would encroach on adjacent property, pedestrian access or circulation areas, right-of-way or landscaped areas. Typically approved markings and wheel stop locations are illustrated below.


[IMAGE]
 

(Ord. O2016-429 § 6 (Att. F); Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.40.125 Electric vehicle charging spaces.

For all parking lots or garages the following shall apply:

(1) There is no minimum number of charging station spaces required.

(2) If electric vehicle charging stations are provided, a minimum of one accessible electric vehicle charging station should be located adjacent to any required designated accessible parking space. The electric vehicle charging space does not have to be designated as an accessible parking space.

(3) Electric vehicle charging stations may be reserved for parking and charging electric vehicles only. The property owner may set hours and conditions of use on the spaces and the charging stations.

(4) Electric vehicles may be parked in any space designated for public parking, subject to the restrictions that would apply to any other vehicle that would park in that space.

(5) When a sign provides notice that a space is a designated electric vehicle charging station, no person shall park or stand any nonelectric vehicle in a designated electric vehicle charging station space. Any nonelectric vehicle is subject to fine or removal. 

(6) Any electric vehicle parked in any designated electric vehicle charging station space parked beyond the days and hours designated on regulatory signs posted at or near the space shall be subject to a fine and/or removal. For purposes of this subsection, “charging” means an electric vehicle is parked at an electric vehicle charging station and is connected to the charging station equipment.

(7) The owner of the property may charge a fee for charging any electric vehicle. (Ord. O2011-300 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.40.130 Compact car allowance requirements. 

In any development containing more than 20 parking spaces, up to 50 percent of the total number of spaces may be sized to accommodate compact cars, subject to the following:

(1) Each space shall be clearly identified as a compact car space by painting the word “COMPACT” in capital letters, a minimum of eight inches high, on the pavement at the base of the parking space and centered between the striping; 

(2) Aisle widths shall conform to the standards set for standard size cars; and

(3) Apartment developments with less than 20 parking spaces may designate up to 40 percent of the required parking spaces as compact spaces. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.40.140 Internal circulation street standards. 

Internal access streets to off-street parking areas shall conform with the surfacing and design requirements for private commercial streets set forth in the City of Sammamish public works standards as adopted by Chapter 14A.01 SMC. (Ord. O2018-466 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O99-29 § 1)


Chapter 21A.45 SIGNAGE

Sections:

21A.45.010    Purpose.

21A.45.020    Permit requirements.

21A.45.030    Exempt signs.

21A.45.040    Prohibited signs.

21A.45.050    Sign area calculation.

21A.45.060    Permanent signs.

21A.45.070    Temporary signs.

21A.45.080    Legal nonconforming signs.

21A.45.090    Variance.

21A.45.100    Enforcement.

Prior legislation: Ords. 099-29, O2004-153, O2005-180, O2009-249, O2009-258, O2009-266 and O2011-305.


21A.45.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to enhance and protect the economic vitality and visual environment of the City, allow for the expression of free speech, and promote general safety and welfare by:

(1) Regulating the type, number, location, size, and illumination of signs; and

(2) Recognizing the purpose of signs for identification and economic well-being of businesses in Sammamish; and

(3) Ensuring a safe driving environment; and

(4) Recognizing and protecting the use of the public right-of-way as a forum for noncommercial speech; and

(5) Facilitating fair and consistent content-neutral enforcement; and

(6) Safeguarding and enhancing property values, attracting new residents, and encouraging orderly development; and

(7) Allowing for limited temporary commercial signage in the public right-of-way, to provide a flow of commercial information to consumers to enable them to make vital decisions of purchasing a home, and to further the critical public goal of providing for equal access to housing; and

(8) Upholding the goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.45.020 Permit requirements.

(1) Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no sign shall be erected, altered, or relocated within the City without a permit issued by the City.

(2) No permit shall be required for repainting, cleaning, or other normal maintenance and repair of a permitted sign, or for sign face and copy changes that do not alter the size or structure of the sign. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.45.030 Exempt signs. 

The following signs or displays are exempted from the permitting requirements of this chapter, but shall conform to the other requirements set out in this chapter:

(1) Historic plaques, gravestones, and address numbers;

(2) Official or legal notices issued and posted by any public agency or court;

(3) Traffic control signs established by the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) or authorized by City of Sammamish department of public works;

(4) Plaques, tablets, or inscriptions which are an integral part of the building structure or are attached flat to the face of the building, which are nonilluminated, and which do not exceed four square feet in surface area;

(5) Incidental signs, which shall not exceed two square feet in surface area; provided, that said size limitation shall not apply to signs when established and maintained by a public agency;

(6) Government flags; and

(7) Nonverbal religious symbols attached to a place of worship. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.45.040 Prohibited signs.

(1) Portable signs including, but not limited to, sandwich/A-frame signs and mobile readerboard signs, and excluding signs permitted under SMC 21A.45.070;

(2) Signs which, by reason of their size, location, movement, content, coloring, or manner of illumination, may be confused with traffic control signs or signals;

(3) Signs located in the public right-of-way, except where permitted in this chapter; provided, that in no case shall temporary signs permitted under SMC 21A.45.070 be located within travel lanes or sidewalks, or be attached to traffic control signs, utility or signal poles;

(4) Posters, pennants, strings of lights, blinking lights, balloons, searchlights, and other displays of a carnival nature; except as architectural features, or on a limited basis as seasonal decorations or as provided for in SMC 21A.45.070 as temporary commercial displays; and

(5) Billboards. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.45.050 Sign area calculation.

(1) Sign area for pole signs shall be calculated by determining the total surface area of the sign as viewed from any single vantage point, excluding support structures.

(2) Sign area for letters or symbols painted or mounted directly on walls or monument signs or on the sloping portion of a roof shall be calculated by measuring the smallest single rectangle that will enclose the combined letters and symbols.

(3) Sign area for signs contained entirely within a cabinet and mounted on a wall, roof, or monument shall be calculated by measuring the front surface area of the cabinet. 

(4) Sign area for temporary signs shall include all portions of the sign attached to the primary supporting structure of the sign, including material additions to the sign. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.45.060 Permanent signs.

(1) Table of Permitted Signs. The table below outlines the regulations for permanent signs in the City of Sammamish. All permanent signs must be approved through the permitting process. Unless otherwise stated herein, all permanent signs must be on site. No permanent sign may be placed in the City’s right-of-way.

Key

X – Prohibited

N/A – Not Applicable – Sign Type Not Allowed in Zone

	 	Residential Zone	Community Business Zone (1)(2)	Neighborhood Business Zone (1)(2)	Office Zone (1)(2)

	 	Freestanding Signs

	Quantity (3)	X (4)	One per street frontage (5)(18)	One per street frontage (18)

	Maximum Sign Area	N/A	85 square feet, + 20 square feet for each additional business in a multiple tenant structure up to 145 square feet	50 square feet

	Combined Sign Area Limit for Lots with Multiple Freestanding Signs (6)	N/A	250 square feet	150 square feet	80 square feet

	Maximum Height	N/A	20 feet	15 feet

	 	Home Business Signs (7)

	Quantity	One	N/A

	Maximum Sign Area	6 square feet	N/A

	 	Permanent Residential Development Identification Signs

	Quantity	Two one-sided signs or one two-sided sign per major entrance (18)	Two one-sided signs or one two-sided sign per major entrance (8)

	Maximum Sign Area 	32 square feet per sign

	Maximum Sign Height	8 feet per sign (9)	8 feet per sign

	 	Projecting or Awning Signs Mounted on the Sloping Portion of Roofs (10)

	Quantity (11)	X	One allowed in lieu of wall sign

	Maximum Sign Area 	N/A	No greater than 15 percent of building facade	No greater than 10 percent of building facade 

	Minimum Clearance above Finished Grade (12)	N/A	8 feet

	Maximum Projection, Perpendicular from Supporting Building Facade	N/A	6 feet

	 	Signs on Property with Public Agency Facilities (13)

	Quantity 	Two per facility	X

	Maximum Sign Area 	30 square feet	N/A

	Maximum Height 	6 feet	N/A

	 	Sign on Residentially Zoned Property with Nonresidential Use (14)

	Quantity 	One 	X

	Maximum Sign Area	25 square feet	N/A

	Maximum Height	6 feet	N/A

	 	Wall Signs

	Maximum Sign Area (15)	N/A (16)	15 percent of building facade	10 percent of building facade	10 percent of building facade (17)

Development Conditions.

1.    Directional signs for surface parking areas or parking structures located in the R, CB, NB, and O zones shall not be included in the sign area or number limitations stated in this table; provided, that they shall not exceed six square feet in surface area and are limited to one for each entrance or exit.

2.    Fuel price signs shall not be included in sign area or number limitations referenced in this table, provided such signs do not exceed 20 square feet per street frontage.

3.    Corner lots with a street frontage of less than 100 feet on each street shall be permitted only one freestanding sign.

4.    Freestanding signs are allowed in residential zones as home business signs, permanent residential development identification signs, signs on property with public agency facilities, and signs on residentially zoned property with nonresidential use.

5.    Multiple tenant developments in the CB and NB zones that have more than 300 feet of street frontage on one street may have one additional freestanding sign for each 300 feet of street frontage, or portion thereof. Such signs shall be separated from one another by a minimum of 150 feet, if located on the same street frontage.

6.    On lots where more than one freestanding sign is permitted, the sign area permitted for individual freestanding signs may be combined.

7.    Home business signs may be wall signs, monument signs, or A-frame signs.

8.    Permanent residential identification signs are only allowed in the NB, CB, and O zones as part of a mixed-use development.

9.    Applicable only to monument signs.

10.    Any sign attached to the sloping surface of a roof shall be installed or erected in such a manner that there are no visible support structures, shall appear to be part of the building itself, and shall not extend above the roof ridge line of the portion of the roof upon which the sign is attached.

11.    Maximum height for awning signs shall not extend above the height of the awning upon which the awning sign is located.

12.    Maximum height for projecting signs shall not extend above the highest exterior wall upon which the projecting sign is located.

13.    See SMC 21A.15.915 for a list of permitted public agencies.

14.    Nonresidential uses of residential property as outlined in Chapter 21A.20 SMC.

15.    Maximum height for wall signs and changing message center signs shall not extend above the highest exterior wall or structure upon which the sign is located.

16.    Wall signs are allowed in residential zones to identify public agency facilities, home businesses, and other nonresidential uses, subject to the regulations listed in this table.

17.    Only on building facades with street frontage.

18.    Permanent residential development identification signs in residential zones may only be monument signs. 

(2) Illumination of Permanent Signs. The table below outlines the regulations for illumination of permanent signs in the City of Sammamish. Temporary signs, governed by SMC 21A.45.070, shall not be illuminated. All permanent signs, including the requested illumination, must be approved through the permitting process. All electrical components for signs shall be governed by Chapter 19.28 RCW and WAC 296-46-910.

KEY

P – Permitted, pursuant to permit issued by City

X – Prohibited

	 	R Zone	CB Zone	NB Zone	O Zone

	Internal Illumination (1)	X	P

	Indirect Illumination (1)(2)	P

Development Conditions.

1.    The light source for indirectly illuminated signs shall be no farther away from the sign than the height of the sign.

2.    Indirectly illuminated signs shall be arranged so that no direct rays of light are projected from such artificial source into residences or any street right-of-way. 

(Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.45.070 Temporary signs.

The following temporary signs or displays are permitted and, except as required by the International Building Code; Chapter 16.20 SMC, Construction Administrative Code; or as otherwise required in this chapter, do not require a sign permit, subject to the requirements set out in this chapter. All temporary signs shall not obstruct sight distances and shall follow the regulations prescribed by Chapter 14A.01 SMC, Public Works Standards Adopted, and by SMC 21A.25.220, Sight distance requirements. No temporary signs shall be located within center medians or within roundabouts and the amenity zone along the outside turning edge of a roundabout, traffic circles, or islands. Temporary signs shall not be illuminated.

(1) Noncommercial Temporary Signs. No sign permit is required to post a noncommercial temporary sign in the public right-of-way or on private property if it meets the requirements in this section and in the following table. Noncommercial temporary signs not conforming to the regulations of this section may be approved through a right-of-way permit.

(a) On roads that only have a shoulder and do not have a sidewalk, noncommercial temporary signs must be placed beyond the edge of the asphalt, and may not be placed so that any part of the sign extends over the asphalt.

(b) Noncommercial temporary signs shall not be placed in a manner that negatively affects the health of trees, shrubs, or other landscaping.

	 	Noncommercial Temporary Sign Type I – Placed in Public Right-of-Way (Non-A-Frame)	Noncommercial Temporary Sign Type II – Placed in Public Right-of-Way (A-Frame)	Noncommercial Temporary Sign Type III – Private Property (All Sign Types) (1)

	Size Limit	4 square feet	6 square feet	32 square feet 

	Height Limit	3 feet above grade	3.5 feet	8 feet

	Duration	180 consecutive days per calendar year	5 consecutive days 	180 consecutive days per calendar year

Development Conditions.

1. Placement of off-premises noncommercial temporary signs on private property is subject to the landowner’s authorization.

(2) Temporary Commercial Displays. Signs, posters, pennants, strings of lights, blinking lights, balloons, and searchlights are permitted for a period of up to 30 consecutive days once each calendar year at businesses located in Sammamish in the CB, NB, or O zone. Temporary commercial displays shall meet the placement and dimensional standards for the sign type utilized. 

(3) Signs Located on Property with Active Construction.

(a) One nonilluminated, double-faced sign is permitted for each public street upon which the project fronts;

(b) No sign shall exceed 32 square feet in surface area or 10 feet in height, or be located closer than 30 feet from the property line of the adjoining property; and

(c) Signs must be removed by the date of first occupancy of the premises or one year after placement of the sign, whichever occurs first.

(4) Signs Associated with Properties for Sale or Rent.

	 	Signs Located on Property with Individual Unit for Sale or Rent

	Sign Quantity	One per public or private street frontage

	Permitted Location	Public or private street frontage

	Permitted Duration	Signs shall be removed within five days after closing of the sale, lease or rental of the property

	Maximum Sign Area	8 square feet

	Maximum Height	6 feet

	 	Signs Located Off-Site of Property with Individual Unit for Sale or Rent (1)

	Sign Quantity	One (2)

	Permitted Location	Public right-of-way adjacent to the intersection of the primary vehicle entrance to the property and closest public street

	Permitted Duration	Signs shall be removed within five days after closing of the sale, lease or rental of the property

	Maximum Sign Area	6 square feet

	 	Portable Off-Premises Residential Directional Signs for Active Open Houses for Sale or Rent (3)

	Sign Quantity	4 per open house

	Maximum Sign Area	6 square feet

	Maximum Height	42 inches

	 	Signs on Property with Commercial or Industrial Property for Sale or Rent

	Sign Quantity	One 

	Permitted Location	Public or private street frontage

	Maximum Sign Area	32 square feet

	Maximum Height	12 feet

	 	Signs on Newly Constructed Residential Developments for Sale

	Sign Quantity	One 

	Permitted Location	Public or private street frontage

	Maximum Sign Area	32 square feet

	Maximum Height	12 feet

	 	Directional Signs Located Off-Site of Newly Constructed Residential Developments for Sale

	Sign Quantity	Two 

	Permitted Location	Private property (with permission); public right-of-way

	Maximum Sign Area	16 square feet

	Maximum Height	6 feet

Development Conditions.

1. Only allowed for properties with a unit for sale or rent that is not located adjacent to a public street.

2. When more than three off-site real estate signs are proposed for a location, the fourth proposed sign owner shall install and make available to other licensed real estate agents a frame, designed to allow for a minimum of six signs to be hung in a stacked fashion, to accommodate multiple signs; frames installed to hold multiple real estate signs shall not exceed a height of six feet. Off-site signs located on a frame shall individually not exceed a height of one and one-half feet, a width of two feet, and an area of three square feet.

3. Such signs shall be permitted only when the agent or seller is in attendance at the property for sale or rent. 

(Ord. O2018-466 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.45.080 Legal nonconforming signs.

(1) Any sign located within the City limits on the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this title, or located in an area annexed to the City thereafter, which does not conform with the provisions of this code, shall be considered a legal nonconforming sign and is permitted, provided it also meets the following requirements:

(a) The sign was covered by a permit on the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this title if one was required under applicable law; or

(b) If no permit was required under applicable law for the sign in question, the sign was in all respects compliant with applicable law on the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this title.

(2) Loss of Legal Nonconforming Status. Nonconforming signs shall not be altered in size, shape, height, location, or structural components without being brought to compliance with the requirements of this code. Repair and maintenance are allowable, but may require a permit if structural components require repair or replacement. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.45.090 Variance.

(1) A sign variance is categorized as a Type 1 land use application and shall be subject to the requirements of SMC 21A.110.030. Variances from the terms of this chapter may be granted by director of community development upon proper application. Variances may be granted when, because of unique circumstances applicable to the property, including size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings, the strict interpretation of the regulations of this chapter deprives such property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and under identical zoning classifications.

(2) The variance shall not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with a limitation upon uses of other properties in the vicinity and zone in which such property is situated. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.45.100 Enforcement.

(1) Compliance with Other Applicable Codes. All signs erected or altered under this chapter must comply with all applicable federal, state and local regulations relating to signs, including without limitation the provisions of the International Building Code as adopted in SMC 16.05.070 by the City. If any provision of this code is found to be in conflict with any provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance or code of the City, the provision which establishes the higher standard shall prevail.

(2) Sign Maintenance. All permanent and temporary signs must be kept in good repair and in a safe manner at all times. The sign owner must repair damaged or deteriorated signs within 30 days of notification by the City. The area surrounding freestanding signs must be kept free of litter and debris at all times.

(3) Inspection. Code enforcement officers are authorized to inspect any sign covered by this chapter for the purpose of inspection of the sign, its structural and electrical connections, and to ensure compliance with the provisions of this code. Such inspections shall be carried out during business hours, unless an emergency exists.

(4) Abatement. In addition to the abatement authority provided by proceedings under SMC 21A.115.030, the City or its agents may summarily remove any sign placed on a right-of-way or public property in violation of the terms of this chapter under the following circumstances:

(a) When a sign is determined by the City engineer or director of community development to present an immediate threat to the safety, health, and welfare of the public;

(b) When a sign is illegally placed pursuant to SMC 21A.45.070, within the public right-of-way, within a landscape median, landscape island, traffic circle, attached to a utility pole or city traffic sign, upon public sidewalks or roadway, or on any public building or structure when such facilities are located on public property or within public right-of-way;

(c) When a sign is determined by the City to be abandoned; provided, that the City must first provide 14 days’ notice to the underlying property owner or business owner that the sign is deemed abandoned.

(5) Disposal of Signs. When a sign has been removed by the City as authorized by this section, the City shall take the following actions:

(a) The City shall hold a sign for at least seven days. After seven days the City may dispose of the sign without prior notice to the sign owner. The City shall not be responsible for damage or loss during removal or storage of any signs in violation of this code. Sign owners wishing to reacquire possession of removed signs prior to their disposal shall pay an impoundment fee pursuant to SMC 23.100.010.

(b) For signs with a fair market value exceeding $500.00, the City shall provide notice by mail to the following:

(i) Sign Owner. If the mailing address can be determined by the City after reasonable efforts in investigation. “Reasonable efforts” shall include investigation efforts that take no longer than one-half hour of staff time.

(ii) Underlying Property Owner. If the address of the sign owner cannot be reasonably ascertained, the City shall mail the notice to the underlying real property owner, as identified in the records of the King County assessor’s office. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A))


Chapter 21A.50 ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS

Sections:

21A.50.010    Purpose.

21A.50.020    Applicability.

21A.50.030    Appeals.

21A.50.040    Critical areas rules.

21A.50.045    Fees.

21A.50.050    Complete exemptions.

21A.50.060    Allowances for existing urban development and other uses.

21A.50.070    Exceptions.

21A.50.090    Critical area maps and inventories.

21A.50.100    Disclosure by applicant.

21A.50.110    Critical area review.

21A.50.120    Critical areas study requirement.

21A.50.130    Contents of critical areas study.

21A.50.140    Mitigation, maintenance, monitoring and contingency.

21A.50.145    Mitigation plan requirements.

21A.50.150    Financial guarantees.

21A.50.160    Vegetation management plan.

21A.50.170    Critical area markers, signs and fencing.

21A.50.180    Notice on title.

21A.50.190    Critical area tracts and designations on site plans.

21A.50.200    Recodified.

21A.50.210    Building setbacks.

21A.50.220    Erosion hazard areas – Development standards and permitted alterations.

21A.50.230    Frequently flooded areas.

21A.50.240    21A.50.260    Landslide hazard areas – Development standards and permitted alterations.

21A.50.270    Seismic hazard areas – Development standards and permitted alterations.

21A.50.280    Critical aquifer recharge areas – Development standards.

21A.50.290    Wetlands – Development standards.

21A.50.300    Wetlands – Permitted alterations.

21A.50.310    Wetlands – Mitigation requirements.

21A.50.315    Wetlands – Alternative mitigation.

21A.50.320    Wetlands – Development flexibilities.

21A.50.322    Wetland management area – Special district overlay.

21A.50.325    Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas – Development standards.

21A.50.327    Fish and wildlife habitat corridors.

21A.50.330    Streams – Development standards.

21A.50.340    Streams – Permitted alterations.

21A.50.350    Streams – Mitigation requirements.

21A.50.351    Repealed.

21A.50.352    Repealed.

21A.50.355    Lake management areas – Special district overlay.

21A.50.360    –    

21A.50.400    Repealed.


21A.50.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to implement the goals and policies of the Washington State Growth Management Act, Chapters 36.70A and 36.70B RCW, the State Environmental Policy Act, Chapter 43.21C RCW, and the City of Sammamish Comprehensive Plan, as amended, that call for protection of the functions and values of the natural environment and the public health and safety by:

(1) Establishing development standards to protect defined critical areas;

(2) Protecting members of the public and public resources and facilities from injury, loss of life, property damage or financial loss due to flooding, erosion, landslides, seismic events, soil subsidence or steep slope failures;

(3) Protecting unique, fragile, and valuable elements of the environment including, but not limited to, wildlife and its habitat;

(4) Requiring mitigation of unavoidable impacts on environmentally critical areas by regulating alterations in or near critical areas;

(5) Preventing cumulative adverse environmental impacts on water availability, water quality, groundwater, wetlands, and streams;

(6) Measuring the quantity and quality of wetland and stream resources and preventing overall net loss of wetland and stream functions and values;

(7) Protecting the public trust as to navigable waters and aquatic resources;

(8) Meeting the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program and maintaining the City as an eligible community for federal flood insurance benefits;

(9) Alerting members of the public including, but not limited to, appraisers, owners, potential buyers or lessees to the development limitations of critical areas;

(10) Establishing special district overlays with alternative development standards for increasing minimum requirements to address unique site characteristics in areas of increased sensitivity;

(11) Providing City officials with sufficient information to protect critical areas; and

(12) Providing the public with a clear review and approval process for the development of sites constrained by critical areas. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O2005-172 § 4; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.020 Applicability.

(1) The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all land uses in the City of Sammamish, and all persons within the City shall comply with the requirements of this chapter.

(2) The City shall not approve any development proposal or otherwise issue any authorization to alter the condition of any land, water or vegetation or to construct or alter any structure or improvement without first assuring compliance with the requirements of this chapter.

(3) Approval of a development proposal pursuant to the provisions of this chapter does not discharge the obligation of the applicant to comply with the provisions of this chapter.

(4) When any provision of any other chapter of the Sammamish Municipal Code conflicts with this chapter or when the provisions of this chapter are in conflict, that provision that provides more protection to environmentally critical areas shall apply unless specifically provided otherwise in this chapter or unless such provision conflicts with federal or state laws or regulations.

(5) The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all forest practices over which the City has jurisdiction pursuant to Chapter 76.09 RCW and WAC Title 222. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.030 Appeals. 

Any decision to approve, condition or deny a development proposal based on the requirements of this chapter may be appealed according to and as part of the appeal procedure for the permit or approval involved. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.040 Critical areas rules.

Applicable departments within the City are authorized to adopt, pursuant to Chapter 2.55 SMC, such administrative rules and regulations as are necessary and appropriate to implement this chapter and to prepare and require the use of such forms as are necessary to its administration. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.045 Fees.

(1) Consistent with the City’s adopted fee schedule, the City shall establish fees for the application filing, review and other services provided by the City for critical areas review. Basis for these fees shall include, but not be limited to, the cost of engineering and planning review time, cost of inspection time, costs for administration, costs for third-party peer review, and any other special costs attributable to the critical areas review process.

(2) Unless otherwise indicated in this title, the applicant shall be responsible for the initiation, preparation, submission, and expense of all required reports, assessments, studies, plans, reconnaissances, or other work prepared in support of or necessary to review the application. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1)


21A.50.050 Complete exemptions.

The following are exempt from the provisions of this chapter and any administrative rules promulgated thereunder except as provided in SMC 25.01.070 which excludes specific environmentally critical areas rules from application within the City of Sammamish shoreline jurisdiction:

(1) Alterations in response to emergencies that threaten the public health, safety, and welfare or that pose an imminent risk of damage to private property as long as any alteration undertaken pursuant to this subsection is reported to the department immediately. The director shall confirm that an emergency exists and determine what, if any, mitigation shall be required to protect the health, safety, welfare and environment and to repair any resource damage;

(2) Public water, electric, and natural gas distribution, public sewer collection, cable communications, telephone utility, and related activities undertaken pursuant to City-approved best management practices, as follows:

(a) Normal and routine maintenance or repair of existing utility structures or rights-of-way;

(b) Relocation of electric facilities, lines, equipment or appurtenances, not including substations, with an associated voltage of 55,000 volts or less, only when required by a local governmental agency that approves the new location of the facilities;

(c) Replacement, operation, repair, modification, installation, or construction in existing developed utility corridors, an improved City street right-of-way or City-authorized private street of all electric facilities, lines, equipment, or appurtenances, not including substations;

(d) Relocation of public sewer local collection, public water local distribution, natural gas, cable communication or telephone facilities, lines, pipes, mains, equipment, or appurtenances, only when required by a local governmental agency that approves the new location of the facilities; and

(e) Replacement, operation, repair, modification, installation, or construction of public sewer local collection, public water local distribution, natural gas, cable communication or telephone facilities, lines, pipes, mains, equipment, or appurtenances when such facilities are located within an improved public right-of-way or authorized private street;

(3) Maintenance, operation, repair, modification, or replacement of publicly improved streets as long as any such alteration does not involve the expansion of streets or related improvements into previously unimproved rights-of-way or portions of rights-of-way;

(4) Maintenance, operation, or repair of parks, trails and publicly improved recreation areas as long as any such alteration does not involve the expansion of improvements into previously unimproved areas or new clearing of native vegetation beyond routine pruning and related activities; and

(5) All clearing and grading activities that are exempt from the requirement for a clearing and grading permit as specified in SMC 16.15.050, unless these activities require other permits or authorizations as specified in SMC 21A.50.020. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O2005-172 § 4; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.060 Allowances for existing urban development and other uses.

Subject to the limitations set forth in subsection (1) of this section the following developments, activities, and uses are allowed in critical areas and associated buffers and building setbacks as specified in the following subsections, provided such activities are otherwise consistent with this program and other applicable regulations. The director may apply conditions to an underlying permit or approval to ensure that the activities are consistent with the provisions of this chapter.

(1) Change of Use and Existing Improvements. Approval of a preliminary subdivision, short subdivision or binding site plan shall require that an existing improvement, or nonconformance, as that term is defined in SMC 21A.15.800, be removed or discontinued prior to recording of the final plat, final short plat, or binding site plan resulting in five or more lots in the following circumstances:

(a) The existing improvement or nonconformance is located within environmentally critical areas or buffers. This includes, but is not limited to, a nonconformance within an area proposed to be included in an averaged or reduced buffer; and

(b) Removal of the existing improvement or nonconformance will result in a reduced impact to environmentally critical areas; or

(c) One of or more of the following criteria are met:

(i) Removal or discontinuance of the existing improvement or nonconformance is necessary to meet water quality, drainage, or revegetation requirements or to qualify for incentives.

(ii) The existing improvement or nonconformance is a use no longer allowed in the zoning designation or would be incompatible with a proposed use.

(iii) Removal or discontinuance of the existing improvement or nonconformance is necessary for public health, safety, or welfare, including but not limited to adequate sanitation, access, and/or safe walking conditions for school children.

(2) Maintenance of Existing Improvements. Existing single detached dwelling units, other structures, landscaping, and other existing uses that do not meet the requirements of this chapter, which were legally established according to the regulations in place at their time of establishment, may be maintained and no critical areas study or review is required.

(3) Modifications of Existing Improvements. Addition, expansion, reconstruction or revision of existing building(s) or other structures is subject to the following:

(a) Modification or Replacement. Structural modification or replacement of legally established structures that do not meet the building setback or buffer requirements for wetlands, streams, fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas, wildlife habitat corridors, or landslide hazard areas is allowed if the modification, replacement or related activity does not increase the existing footprint of the structure lying within the critical area, buffer or building setback area, and there is no increased risk to life or property.

(b) Expansions of Single Detached Dwelling Units and Accessory Dwelling Units. Structural modification of, addition to, or replacement of legally created single detached dwelling unit(s) and accessory dwelling unit(s) and associated impervious surfaces that do not meet the applicable building setback or buffer requirements for wetlands, streams, fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas, or landslide hazard areas are allowed a one-time up to 1,000 square foot increase in the existing total footprint of the single detached dwelling unit(s) and accessory dwelling unit(s) and associated impervious surface areas lying within the buffer or building setback subject to the following:

(i) If the existing legally created single detached dwelling unit(s) and accessory dwelling unit(s) and associated impervious surfaces are located within the building setback or buffer required for a landslide hazard area, a critical areas study must be supplied consistent with the provisions of SMC 21A.50.130 and approved by the City that demonstrates that there will be no increased risk to life or property by the proposed footprint expansion;

(ii) If the existing legally created single detached dwelling unit(s) and accessory dwelling unit(s) and associated impervious surfaces are located over or within a wetland, stream, or landslide hazard area, no further expansion within the wetland, stream, or landslide hazard area is allowed; and

(iii) If an existing legally created single detached dwelling unit and an accessory dwelling unit and associated impervious surfaces are located within the building setback or buffer for a stream or wetland, or within a fish and wildlife habitat conservation area:

(A) No portion of the modification, addition or replacement may be located closer to a wetland or stream than the nearest extent of the existing single detached dwelling unit, except as provided under subsection (2)(b)(iii)(B) of this section.

(B) When there is an intervening single detached dwelling unit(s) or accessory dwelling unit(s) on a perpendicular line in between the subject wetland or stream and a single detached dwelling unit or accessory dwelling unit that is proposed to be modified, added to, or replaced, the modification, addition or replacement may be located closer to the wetland or stream, provided no portion of the modification, addition or replacement is located closer than 50 feet to the wetland or stream.

(C) Modifications, additions, or replacements authorized under this subsection shall meet the following criteria:

(1) A critical areas study approved by the City demonstrates a net improvement in hydrologic and habitat values to the subject affected wetland, stream, fish and wildlife habitat conservation area through restoration of degraded areas and/or buffer or through provision of additional vegetated buffer; and

(2) Mitigation of impacts to disturbed critical areas or buffers is provided in accordance with this chapter.

(c) Expansions of Buildings in Commercial Zoning Districts. Structural modification of, addition to, or replacement of legally created buildings and associated impervious surfaces located in the community business, neighborhood business, office, and Town Center A zones, that do not meet the applicable building setback or buffer requirements for wetlands, streams, fish and wildlife habitat conservation area, or landslide hazard areas are allowed a one-time up to 1,000 square foot increase in the existing total footprint of the building and associated impervious surface areas lying within the buffer or building setback subject to the following:

(i) If the existing legally created building(s) and associated impervious surfaces are located within the building setback or buffer required for a landslide hazard area, a critical areas study must be supplied consistent with the provisions of SMC 21A.50.130 and approved by the City that demonstrates that there will be no increased risk to life or property by the proposed footprint expansion;

(ii) If the existing legally created building(s) and associated impervious surfaces are located over or within a wetland, stream, or landslide hazard area, no further expansion within the wetland, stream, or landslide hazard area is allowed; and

(iii) If an existing legally created building(s), and associated impervious surfaces, are located within the building setback or buffer for a stream or wetland, or within a fish and wildlife habitat conservation area:

(A) No portion of the modification, addition or replacement may be located closer to a wetland or stream than the nearest extent of the existing building(s), except as provided under subsection (2)(c)(iii)(B) of this section.

(B) When there is an intervening building(s) on a perpendicular line in between the subject wetland or stream and building(s) that is proposed to be modified, added to, or replaced, the modification, addition or replacement may be located closer to the wetland or stream, provided no portion of the modification, addition or replacement is located closer than 50 feet to the wetland or stream.

(C) Modifications, additions, or replacements authorized under this subsection shall meet the following criteria:

(1) A critical areas study approved by the City demonstrates that the proposed modification, addition, or replacements authorized by this subsection will also result in a net improvement in hydrologic and habitat values to the subject affected wetland, stream, fish and wildlife habitat conservation area through restoration of degraded areas and/or buffer or through provision of additional vegetated buffer; and

(2) Mitigation of impacts to disturbed critical areas or buffers is provided in accordance with this chapter.

(4) Revisions to existing legally established landscaping are allowed subject to the following:

(a) The landscaped area shall not be increased within the critical area or buffer; and

(b) Landscaping features may be revised or replaced with similar features or features with less impact to the critical area or buffer, such that the remaining functions of the critical area and/or buffer are maintained or improved (e.g., plant material replaced with alternate plant material, hardscape replaced with alternate hardscape, hardscape replaced with plant material, etc.); and

(c) Revisions authorized under this subsection shall not require a critical areas study.

(5) Conservation, preservation, restoration and/or enhancement is allowed within critical areas or buffers subject to the following:

(a) Conservation and preservation of soil, water, vegetation, and other fish and wildlife habitat is allowed where it does not include alteration of the location, size, dimensions or functions of an existing critical area or buffer.

(b) Restoration and enhancement of critical areas or buffers is allowed; provided, that actions do not alter the location, dimensions or size of the critical area or buffer, that actions improve and do not reduce the existing quality or functions of the critical areas or buffers, and that actions are implemented according to a restoration or enhancement plan that has been approved by the City of Sammamish.

(6) Select Vegetation Removal Activities.

(a) Removal of nonnative or invasive Washington State and/or King County listed noxious weeds in an area of up to 2,500 square feet within a critical area or buffer is allowed with no permit requirement if the following provisions are met:

(i) The plants are removed using hand labor and/or light equipment;

(ii) Soil disturbance is minimized and no filling or modification of soil contours occurs;

(iii) Water quality is protected and there is no modification of hydrology patterns within the critical area or buffer;

(iv) Native plants are protected from removal or damage;

(v) Appropriate erosion-control measures are used;

(vi) The area is replanted with a like kind and density of native vegetation following nonnative plant removal. For example, if dense nonnative blackberry is removed, at a minimum, dense native shrubs must be replanted following blackberry removal, though native trees and groundcover could also be included and are encouraged if desired; and

(vii) Removal of nonnative or invasive plants authorized under this subsection shall not require a critical areas study.

(b) For removal of nonnative vegetation in an area greater than 2,500 square feet, a clearing and grading permit is required and must be accompanied by a native plant restoration plan in accordance with applicable provisions of this chapter. A critical areas study may be required by the director.

(7) Reconstruction or replacement of the exterior footprint of an existing, legally established structure not meeting current regulations is allowed; provided, that the addition or reconstruction does not increase the noncompliance to current regulations. A critical areas study may be required by the director.

(a) Replacement may be allowed in a different location not meeting current regulations if a determination is made by the City that the new location results in less impact to environmentally critical area functions and values than replacement in the existing footprint.

(b) Existing structures that were legally established but which are not meeting current regulations may be maintained, reconstructed, or repaired; provided, that the maintenance/reconstruction/repair does not increase the extent of noncompliance with current regulations by encroaching upon or extending into the environmentally critical areas or other area where new construction or use would not be allowed.

(c) If a structure not meeting current regulations is damaged by fire, explosion, or other casualty and/or natural disaster or is otherwise demolished, it may be reconstructed to match the footprint that existed immediately prior to the time the damage occurred or in accordance with subsection (6)(a) of this section; provided, that all of the following criteria are met:

(i) The owner(s) submit a complete application within 24 months of the date the damage occurred; and

(ii) All permits are issued within two years of initial submittal of the complete application, and the restoration is completed within two years of permit issuance. This period may be extended for one additional year by the director if the applicant has submitted the applications necessary to establish the use or activity and has provided written justification for the extension.

(d) A structure not meeting current regulations that is moved outside the existing footprint must be brought into conformance with this chapter, except as allowed by subsection (6)(a) of this section.

(8) A permit or approval sought as part of a development proposal where previous critical areas review has been completed is exempt from the provisions of this chapter and any administrative rules promulgated thereunder, except for the notice on title provisions, SMC 21A.50.180 and 21A.50.190, if:

(a) The City previously reviewed all critical areas on the site;

(b) There is no material change in the development proposal since the prior review that would affect a critical area;

(c) There is no new information available that is important to any critical area review of the site or particular critical area;

(d) No more than five years have lapsed since the issuance of the permit or approval under which the prior review was conducted; provided, that the director may allow a longer time period if new review would be unlikely to provide new information about the critical area; and

(e) The prior permit or approval, including any conditions, has been complied with. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2009-264 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.070 Exceptions.

Except as prohibited in the City of Sammamish shoreline jurisdiction under SMC 25.01.070, the following are exceptions from the provisions of this chapter when applicable criteria and performance standards are met:

(1) Public Agency and Utility Exception. If the application of this chapter would prohibit an activity or a development proposal by a public agency or utility, the agency or utility may apply for an exception pursuant to this section:

(a) The public agency or utility shall apply to the department and shall make available to the department other related project documents such as permit applications to other agencies, special studies and SEPA documents.

(b) The director may approve alterations to critical areas, buffers and critical area setbacks by an agency or utility not otherwise allowed by this chapter when the following criteria are met:

(i) There is no other reasonable alternative to the activity or proposed development with less impact on the critical area; and

(ii) The activity or development proposal is designed to avoid, minimize, and mitigate the impact on environmentally critical areas consistent with the avoidance and mitigation sequencing requirements in this chapter; and, if applicable:

(iii) The proposed development or activity is of a linear nature and is on an existing corridor or connects to public lands, trails, utility corridors, rights-of-way or other public infrastructure, or is required for functional reasons such as gravity flow.

(c) The department shall process exceptions, provide public notice, provide opportunity for the public to request a public hearing, and provide an appeal process consistent with the provisions of Chapter 20.05 SMC.

(2) Reasonable Use Exception. If the application of this chapter would deny all reasonable use of the property, the applicant may apply for an exception pursuant to this subsection:

(a) The director may approve alterations to critical areas, critical area buffers and setbacks to allow a reasonable use not otherwise allowed by this chapter when the following criteria are met:

(i) The application of this chapter would deny all reasonable use of the property;

(ii) There is no other reasonable use with less impact on the critical area;

(iii) The proposed development does not pose an unreasonable threat to the public health, safety, or welfare on or off the development proposal site and is consistent with the general purposes of this chapter and the public interest; and

(iv) Any alterations permitted to the critical area or buffer shall be the minimum necessary to allow for reasonable use of the property; and any authorized alteration of a critical area under this subsection shall be subject to conditions established by the department including, but not limited to, mitigation under an approved mitigation plan. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O2005-172 § 4; Ord. O99-29 § 1)

(Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.090 Critical area maps and inventories.

Not all of the critical areas in the City of Sammamish are fully mapped. Field verification and, if appropriate, evaluation and mapping by a qualified professional of the location of critical areas will be required. The distribution of many environmentally critical areas in the City of Sammamish is displayed in the City’s critical areas map folio, as amended. Additionally, the following maps are referenced and/or maintained by the City:

(1) Many of the wetlands located within the City’s boundaries are inventoried in the King County wetlands inventory notebooks.

(2) Flood hazard areas are mapped by the Federal Insurance Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled “The Flood Insurance Study for King County.”

(3) The wetland management, erosion hazard near sensitive water bodies, critical aquifer recharge area, and lake management special overlay districts are designated on maps maintained by the City of Sammamish department of community development.

All maps are deemed advisory with the exception of the critical aquifer recharge area, flood insurance study for King County, wetland management area and erosion hazard near sensitive water bodies overlay maps. If there is a conflict among the advisory maps, inventory and/or site-specific features, the department of community development shall verify the actual presence or absence of the features defined in this title as environmentally critical areas. The determination may be challenged by the property owner pursuant to Chapter 21A.05 SMC. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.100 Disclosure by applicant.

(1) The applicant shall disclose to the City the presence of critical areas on the development proposal site and any mapped or identifiable critical areas within the distance equal to the largest potential required buffer applicable to the development proposal area on the applicant’s property.

(2) If the development proposal site contains or is within a critical area or buffer, the applicant shall submit an affidavit that declares whether the applicant has knowledge of any illegal alteration to any or all critical areas or their buffers on the development proposal site and whether the applicant previously has been found in violation of this chapter, pursuant to SMC Title 23. If the applicant previously has been found in violation, the applicant shall declare whether such violation has been corrected to the satisfaction of the City. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.110 Critical area review.

(1) The City shall perform a critical area review prior to issuing any approval for a development proposal permit application or other request for permission to proceed with an alteration on a site that includes a critical area or is within an identified critical area buffer or building setback area.

(2) As part of the critical area review, the City shall:

(a) Confirm whether critical areas or buffers have been mapped or identified within the distance equal to the largest potential required buffer applicable to the development proposal area;

(b) Confirm the nature and type of the critical area;

(c) Determine whether a critical areas study is required;

(d) Evaluate the critical areas study and require third party review, if necessary;

(e) Determine whether the development proposal is consistent with this chapter;

(f) Determine whether any proposed alteration to the critical area is necessary; and

(g) Determine if the mitigation and monitoring plans and bonding measures proposed by the applicant are sufficient to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, consistent with the goals, purposes, objectives, and requirements of this chapter. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.120 Critical areas study requirement.

(1) An applicant for a development proposal where impacts to or alteration of an environmentally critical area or modification or reduction of a buffer associated with an environmentally critical area is proposed or may occur as a consequence of proposed actions shall submit a critical areas study at a level determined by the director to adequately evaluate the proposal and probable impacts.

(2) The director may waive or modify the requirement for a critical areas study if the applicant shows, to the director’s satisfaction, that:

(a) There will be no alteration of the critical area or buffer;

(b) The development proposal will not have an impact on the critical area in a manner contrary to the goals, purposes, objectives, and requirements of this chapter; and

(c) The minimum standards required by this chapter are met; or

(d) Critical areas are located off site and access to applicable off-site property is restricted.

(3) If the development proposal will affect only a part of the development proposal site, the department may limit the scope of the required critical areas study to include only that area that is affected by the development proposal.

(4) If necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter, the director may require additional information from the applicant, separate from the critical areas study.

(5) A development proposal may be allowed to utilize past studies from neighboring properties, if confirmed that the study findings remain accurate and applicable to proposed development.

(6) A wetland delineation completed over five years ago needs to be revisited. Revisiting a wetland delineation that is five or more years old does not necessarily mean that a new wetland delineation needs to be completed. It means that a field verification by the City may need to be performed to determine whether the delineation is still accurate or whether it needs to be redone based on existing conditions. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.130 Contents of critical areas study.

(1) The critical areas study shall be in the form of a written report prepared by a qualified professional using guidance based on best available science per Chapter 36.70A RCW and shall contain the following, as determined to be applicable by the director:

(a) The applicant shall disclose to the City the presence of critical areas on the development proposal site and any mapped or identifiable critical areas within the distance equal to the largest potential required buffer applicable to the development proposal area on the applicant’s property;

(b) Assessment of the impacts or risks to an environmentally critical area or buffer:

(i) Related to the development proposal and associated alterations to the subject property; and

(ii) Affecting other properties and any environmentally critical areas or buffers located on them;

(c) A description of efforts made to apply mitigation sequencing pursuant to SMC 21A.50.135 to avoid, minimize and mitigate impacts to environmentally critical areas;

(d) Studies that propose adequate mitigation, maintenance, monitoring, and contingency plans and bonding measures as necessary to offset impacts to the critical area from the development proposal;

(e) A scale map of the development proposal site;

(f) Photographic records of the site before the proposed alteration occurs;

(g) Detailed studies, as required by this chapter, for individual critical areas or as otherwise deemed necessary for critical areas protection by the director;

(h) Assessment of potential impacts that may occur downstream or downhill from the development site, such as sedimentation or erosion, where applicable;

(i) Assessment of potential impacts to wetland management areas, lake management areas, and other areas designated for special protection, where applicable; and

(j) Consideration of the protection recommendations of the East Lake Sammamish Basin and Nonpoint Action Plan (1994), the Lake Washington/Cedar/Sammamish Watershed Chinook Salmon Conservation Plan – WRIA 8 Steering Committee, and adopted sub-basin plans.

(2) A critical areas study may be combined with any studies required by other laws and regulations. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.135 Avoiding impacts to critical areas.

(1) Except as otherwise provided in SMC 21A.50.060, an applicant for a development proposal, activity, or alteration shall document the consideration of and subsequently shall implement the following sequential measures, which appear in order of preference, to avoid, minimize, and mitigate impacts to environmentally critical areas and associated buffers:

(a) Avoiding the impact or hazard by not taking a certain action, or redesigning the proposal to eliminate the impact. The applicant shall consider reasonable, affirmative steps and make best efforts to avoid critical area impacts. However, avoidance shall not be construed to mean mandatory withdrawal or denial of the development proposal or activity if the proposal or activity is an allowed, permitted, conditional, or special use in the SMC. In determining the extent to which the proposal should be redesigned to avoid the impact, the department may consider the purpose, effectiveness, engineering feasibility, commercial availability of technology, best management practices, safety and cost of the proposal and identified modifications to the proposal.

The department may also consider the extent to which the avoidance of one type or location of an environmentally critical area could require or lead to impacts to other types or locations of nearby or adjacent environmentally critical areas. The department should seek to avoid, minimize and mitigate overall impacts based on the functions and values of all of the relevant environmentally critical areas and based on the recommendations of a critical areas study. If impacts cannot be avoided through redesign, or because of site conditions or project requirements, the applicant shall then proceed with the sequence of steps in subsections (1)(b) through (g) of this section.

(b) Minimizing the impact or hazard by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action or impact with appropriate technology or by changing the timing of the action.

(c) Restoring the impacted critical areas by repairing, rehabilitating or restoring the affected critical area or its buffer.

(d) Minimizing or eliminating the hazard by restoring or stabilizing the hazard area through plantings, engineering or other methods.

(e) Reducing or eliminating the impact or hazard over time by preservation or maintenance operations during the life of the development proposal, activity or alteration.

(f) Compensating for the adverse impact by enhancing critical areas and their buffers or creating substitute critical areas and their buffers as required in the SMC.

(g) Monitoring the impact, hazard or success of required mitigation and taking remedial action based upon findings over time.

(2) In addition to the above steps, the specific development standards, permitted alteration requirements, and mitigation requirements of this chapter and elsewhere in the SMC apply.

(3) The department shall document the decision-making process used under this section as a part of the critical areas review conducted pursuant to SMC 21A.50.110. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1)


21A.50.140 Mitigation, maintenance, monitoring and contingency.

(1) When mitigation is required by this chapter to compensate for adverse impacts, unless otherwise provided, mitigation, maintenance, monitoring measures and contingency plans shall be in place to protect critical areas and buffers from alterations occurring on the development proposal site.

(2) Where monitoring reveals a significant deviation from predicted impacts or a failure of mitigation or maintenance measures, the applicant shall be responsible for appropriate corrective action which, when approved, shall be subject to further monitoring.

(3) Mitigation shall be in kind and on site where on-site mitigation is feasible, sufficient to maintain critical area and buffer functions, and where applicable to prevent risk from a hazard posed by a critical area.

(4) The City may approve off-site mitigation if an applicant demonstrates that:

(a) It is not feasible to mitigate on the development proposal site; and

(b) The off-site mitigation will achieve equivalent or greater hydrological, water quality and wetland or aquatic area habitat functions.

(5) When off-site mitigation is authorized, the City shall give priority to locations in the following order of preference:

(a) Within the same drainage sub-basin;

(b) Within the City limits;

(c) Within the Sammamish service area boundaries of an approved fee-in-lieu mitigation program;

(d) Within the Sammamish service area boundaries of an approved mitigation bank program.

(6) Mitigation shall not be implemented until after the City of Sammamish approves the applicable critical areas study, mitigation plan and any required permits. Following City approval, mitigation shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of the approved critical areas study and mitigation plan. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.145 Mitigation plan requirements.

When mitigation is required, the applicant shall submit, for approval by the City of Sammamish, a mitigation plan as part of, or in addition to, the critical areas study. The mitigation plan shall include, or be accompanied by, a report with the following information as determined to be applicable by the director:

(1) Existing Conditions and Proposed Impacts. A description of existing critical area(s) and/or buffer(s) conditions, functions, and values and a description of the anticipated impacts;

(2) Proposed Mitigation. A description of proposed mitigating actions and mitigation site selection criteria;

(3) Environmental Goals and Objectives. A description of the goals and objectives of proposed mitigation. The goals and objectives shall be related to the functions and values of the impacted critical area(s) and/or buffer(s);

(4) Best Available Science. A review of the best available science supporting proposed mitigation, a description of the plan/report author’s experience to date in restoring or creating the type of critical area proposed, and an analysis of the likelihood of success of the mitigation project;

(5) Performance Standards. A description of specific measurable criteria for evaluating whether or not the goals and objectives of the mitigation plan have been successfully attained and whether or not the requirements of this chapter have been met;

(6) Detailed Construction Plans. Detailed site diagrams, cross-sectional drawings, topographic elevations at one- or two-foot contours, slope percentage, final grade elevations, and any other drawings appropriate to show construction techniques or anticipated final outcome. In addition, plans should include specifications and descriptions of:

(a) Proposed construction sequence, timing, and duration;

(b) Grading and excavation details;

(c) Erosion and sediment control features;

(d) A planting plan specifying plant species, quantities, locations, size, spacing, and density; and

(e) Measures to protect and maintain plants until established;

(7) Monitoring Program. Mitigation plans shall include a program for monitoring construction of the compensation project, and for assessing a completed project. A protocol shall be included that outlines the schedule for site monitoring and how the monitoring data will be evaluated to determine if the performance standards are being met. A monitoring report shall be submitted as needed to document milestones, successes, problems, and contingency actions of the compensation project. The compensation project shall be monitored for a period necessary to establish that performance standards have been met. The monitoring period shall be five years; provided, that the director may approve a greater period when needed to ensure mitigation success or a lesser period for minor mitigation;

(8) Contingency Plan. The mitigation plan shall include identification of potential courses of action, and any corrective measures to be taken if monitoring or evaluation indicates project performance standards are not being met; and

(9) Fee-in-Lieu Program. If fee-in-lieu mitigation is proposed, a critical areas study shall be supplied that demonstrates how proposed impacts and mitigation meet the requirements of SMC 21A.50.140 and 21A.50.310 or 21A.50.350, whichever is applicable, and also the specific requirements of the fee-in-lieu mitigation program to be utilized. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O2005-172 § 4)


21A.50.150 Financial guarantees.

Financial guarantees shall be required consistent with the provisions of SMC Title 27A. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.160 Vegetation management plan.

(1) For all development proposals where preservation of existing vegetation is required by this chapter, a vegetation management plan shall be submitted and approved prior to issuance of the permit or other request for permission to proceed with an alteration.

(2) The vegetation management plan shall identify the proposed clearing limits for the project and any areas where vegetation in a critical area or its buffer is proposed to be disturbed.

(3) Where clearing includes cutting any merchantable stand of timber, as defined in WAC 222-16-010(28), the vegetation management plan shall include a description of proposed logging practices that demonstrates how all critical areas will be protected in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

(4) Clearing limits as shown on the plan shall be marked in the field in a prominent and durable manner. Proposed methods of field marking shall be reviewed and approved by the City prior to any site alteration. Field marking shall remain in place until the certificate of occupancy or final project approval is granted.

(5) The vegetation management plan may be incorporated into a temporary erosion and sediment control plan or landscaping plan where either of these plans is required by other laws or regulations.

(6) Submittal requirements for vegetation management plans shall be set forth by the department. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.170 Critical area markers, signs and fencing.

(1) Markers. Permanent survey stakes delineating the boundary between adjoining property and critical area tracts shall be set, using markers capable of being magnetically located and as established by current survey standards.

(2) Signs. Development proposals approved by the City shall require that the boundary between a critical area buffer and contiguous land shall be identified with permanent signs. Permanent signs shall be a City-approved type designed for high durability. Signs must be posted at an interval of one per lot or every 50 feet, whichever is less, and must be maintained by the property owner or homeowners’ association in perpetuity. The wording, number and placement of the signs may be modified by the director based on specific site conditions.

(3) Fencing. Permanent fencing shall be required at the outer edge of the critical area buffer under the following circumstances:

(a) As part of any development proposal for:

(i) Plats;

(ii) Short plats;

(iii) Parks;

(iv) Other development proposals, including but not limited to multifamily, mixed use, and commercial development where the director determines that such fencing is necessary to protect the functions of the critical area;

(b) When buffer reductions are employed as part of a development proposal;

(c) When buffer averaging is employed as part of a development proposal; and

(d) At the director’s discretion to protect the values and functions of a critical area.

Fencing installed in accordance with this section shall be designed to not interfere with fish and wildlife migration and shall be constructed in a manner that minimizes critical areas impacts. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.180 Notice on title.

(1) The owner of any property containing critical areas or buffers on which a development proposal is submitted or any property on which mitigation is established as a result of development, except a public right-of-way or the site of a permanent public facility, shall file a notice approved by the City with the records and elections division of King County. The required contents and form of the notice shall be determined by the director. The notice shall inform the public of the presence of critical areas, buffers or mitigation sites on the property, of the application of this chapter to the property and that limitations on actions in or affecting such critical areas or buffers may exist. The notice shall run with the land.

(2) The applicant shall submit proof that the notice has been filed for public record before the City shall approve any development proposal for the property or, in the case of subdivisions, short subdivisions and binding site plans, at or before recording. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.190 Critical area tracts and designations on site plans.

(1) Critical area tracts shall be used to delineate and protect those critical areas and buffers listed below in development proposals for subdivisions, short subdivisions, or binding site plans and shall be recorded on all documents of title of record for all affected lots:

(a) All landslide hazard areas and buffers that are one acre or greater in size;

(b) All wetlands and buffers;

(c) All streams and buffers; and

(d) All fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas and buffers.

(2) Any required critical area tract shall be held in an undivided interest by each owner of a building lot within the development with this ownership interest passing with the ownership of the lot or shall be held by an incorporated homeowners’ association or other legal entity which assures the ownership, maintenance, and protection of the tract, or dedicated to the City of Sammamish, at the City’s discretion.

(3) Site plans submitted as part of development proposals for building permits, master plan developments, and clearing and grading permits shall include and delineate all flood hazard areas (if they have been mapped by FEMA or if a critical areas study is required), landslide hazard areas, streams and wetlands, buffers, and building setbacks. If only a part of the development site has been mapped pursuant to SMC 21A.50.120(3), the part of the site that has not been mapped shall be clearly identified and labeled on the site plans. The site plans shall be attached to the notice on title required by SMC 21A.50.180. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.200 Alteration.

Recodified to SMC 21A.15.056 by Ord. O2005-172. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.210 Building setbacks.

Unless otherwise provided, buildings and other structures shall be set back a distance of 15 feet from the edges of a critical area buffer. The following may be allowed in the building setback area:

(1) Landscaping;

(2) Uncovered decks, less than 18 inches above grade;

(3) Building overhangs if such overhangs do not extend more than 18 inches into the setback area;

(4) Impervious ground surfaces, such as driveways and patios; provided, that such improvements may be subject to special drainage provisions adopted for the various critical areas; and

(5) Trails. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2009-264 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O2005-172 § 4; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.220 Erosion hazard areas – Development standards and permitted alterations. 

(1) Land clearing, grading, filling, and foundation work in an erosion hazard area is allowed only from May 1st to September 30th, except that:

(a) Construction outside of this seasonal development limitation may be authorized if the director determines that the hazard area will not be adversely impacted by the proposed construction work or the applicant demonstrates that erosion hazards will be fully mitigated through a temporary erosion and sediment control management plan that includes:

(i) The minimum requirements from the adopted surface water design manual and SMC Title 13, Surface Water Management:

(A) Provisions to store site construction runoff and treat runoff sufficiently to meet water quality standards prior to discharge;

(B) Daily and post-storm inspections of temporary erosion and sediment control best management practices;

(C) Establishment of a manager, who is a Certified Erosion and Sediment Control Lead (CESCL) in the state of Washington, and will be available on call to respond to temporary erosion and sediment control noncompliance;

(D) A water-quality monitoring plan for site discharges, where the applicant is responsible for measuring turbidity of storm water released from the site and maintaining records of monitoring data that shall be available upon request by the City or Ecology. Monitoring protocols shall conform to the monitoring requirements of the construction storm water general permit;

(E) A contingency plan incorporated into the temporary erosion and sediment control plan that identifies corrective actions and BMPs that will be implemented if monitoring shows discharge water quality exceeds water quality standards, and that specifies materials to be stockpiled on site for use in an erosion and sediment control response;

(F) A seasonal suspension plan for suspending work until the end of the rainy season if temporary erosion and sediment control measures are found to be inadequate;

(ii) Pre-design site inspection by a licensed engineer or geologist to identify erosion hazard areas, no-disturbance areas, other environmentally critical areas, and resources downstream of the site that are to be protected;

(iii) Construction storm water systems and temporary erosion and sediment control best management practices are to be sized for a minimum of a 10-year storm interval;

(iv) The owner must provide a financial guarantee in accordance with Chapter 27A.15 SMC, and in an amount sufficient to cover all costs of implementing the approved temporary erosion and sediment control plan, monitoring site discharges, permanently stabilizing the site, and restoring any off-site impacts, including materials, labor, and City costs, and include a mechanism allowing the City to use the financial guarantee if the development is stalled or not completed;

(v) Preparation and implementation of site grading, stabilization, and restoration plans by a licensed engineer, with certification by a geotechnical engineer that these plans are sufficient to prevent erosion and sedimentation of susceptible soils; and

(vi) Preparation of a vegetation management plan by a qualified professional for establishment of permanent vegetation on the site following completion of clearing and grading work.

(b) In addition to the requirements of subsection (1)(a) of this section, the director may require additional studies of the site hydrology, soils and storm water retention, and may also require grading, structural improvements, erosion control measures, restoration plans, and/or an indemnification/release agreement.

(c) Timber harvest may be allowed pursuant to an approved forest practice Type II and III permit issued by the Washington Department of Natural Resources.

(d) Construction activity associated with subdivisions, short subdivisions, and similar projects that drain to Lake Sammamish during the wet season shall provide water quality monitoring reports to the City consistent with SMC 21A.50.225(5)(g), and shall include monitoring of water temperature.

(e) The director may halt wet season construction as necessary to protect the hazard area and/or to prevent downstream impacts.

(2) All development proposals on sites containing erosion hazard areas shall include a temporary erosion and sediment control plan as specified in subsection (1)(a) of this section consistent with this section and other laws and regulations prior to receiving approval. Specific requirements for such plans shall be set forth in the adopted surface water design manual and SMC Title 13, Surface Water Management, or as otherwise specified by the department.

(3) All subdivisions, short subdivisions, or binding site plans on sites with erosion hazard areas shall comply with the following additional requirements:

(a) Except as provided in this section, existing vegetation shall be retained on all lots until building permits are approved for development on individual lots;

(b) If any vegetation on the lots is damaged or removed during construction of the subdivision infrastructure, the applicant shall be required to submit a restoration plan to the department for review and approval. Following approval, the applicant shall be required to implement the plan;

(c) Clearing of vegetation on lots will not be allowed unless the City determines that:

(i) Such clearing is a necessary part of a large-scale grading plan;

(ii) It is not a reasonable alternative to perform such grading on an individual lot basis; and

(iii) Drainage from the graded area will meet water quality standards to be established by the adopted surface water design manual and SMC Title 13, Surface Water Management.

(4) Where the City determines that erosion from a development site poses a significant risk of damage to downstream receiving waters, based either on the size of the project, the proximity to the receiving water or the sensitivity of the receiving water, the applicant shall be required to provide regular monitoring of surface water discharge from the site as required by the adopted surface water design manual and City of Sammamish addendum. If the project does not meet the applicable provisions of the adopted water quality standards as established by law, the City may suspend further development work on the site until such standards are met.

(5) The use of hazardous substances, pesticides, and fertilizers in erosion hazard areas may be prohibited by the City. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.225 Erosion hazards near sensitive water bodies overlay.

(1) The purpose of the erosion hazards near sensitive water bodies overlay is to provide a means to designate sloped areas posing erosion hazards that drain directly to lakes or streams of high resource value that are particularly sensitive to the impacts of increased erosion and the resulting sediment loads from development.

(2) General Development Standards. The following development standards shall be applied to all properties within the erosion hazard near sensitive water body overlay:

(a) The one-acre exemption in the storm water design manual addendum shall not apply within the erosion hazards near sensitive water body overlay.

(b) If the application of this section would deny all reasonable use of property, the applicant may apply for a reasonable use exception pursuant to SMC 21A.50.070(2).

(c) The director may modify the property-specific development standards required by this section when a critical areas study is conducted by the applicant and approved by the director which demonstrates that the proposed development substantially improves water quality by showing all of the following:

(i) Water quality on site is improved through site enhancements and/or other innovative management techniques;

(ii) The development project will not subject downstream channels to increased risk of landslide or erosion; and

(iii) The development project will not subject the nearest sensitive water body to additional hazards resulting from erosion.

(3) No-Disturbance Area Development Standards. The following development standards shall be applied, in addition to all applicable requirements of this chapter, to development proposals located within the no-disturbance area:

(a) Development shall not occur in the no-disturbance area, except for the development activities listed in subsection (3)(a)(i) of this section. Development activities listed in subsection (3)(a)(i) of this section shall only be permitted if they meet the requirements of subsection (3)(a)(ii) of this section.

(i) Development activities may be permitted as follows:

(A) For single-family residences, associated landscaping and any appurtenances on preexisting separate lots;

(B) For utility corridors to service existing development along existing rights-of-way including any vacated portions of otherwise contiguous rights-of-way, or for the construction of utility corridors identified within an adopted water, storm water, or sewer comprehensive plan;

(C) For streets providing sole access to buildable property and associated utility facilities within those streets; or

(D) For public park facilities including parking lots, restrooms or recreational structures and pedestrian trails/sidewalks.

(ii) The development activities listed in subsection (3)(a)(i) of this section may be permitted only if the following requirements are met:

(A) Where applicable under SMC 21A.50.120, a report that meets the requirements of SMC 21A.50.130 shall show that the development activities will not subject the area to risk of landslide or erosion and that the purpose of the no-disturbance area is not compromised in any way;

(B) The development activities shall be mitigated, monitored and bonded consistent with the mitigation requirements applicable to environmentally critical areas;

(C) The development activities are limited to the minimal area and duration necessary for construction; and

(D) The development activities are consistent with this chapter.

(b) New single-family home construction or modifications or additions to existing single-family homes on existing legal lots that will result in a total site impervious surface of more than 2,000 square feet shall provide a drainage design, using the following sequential measures, which appear in order of preference:

(i) Infiltration of all site runoff shall be required to the maximum extent technically feasible in existing soil conditions, consistent with the infiltration system design requirements of the KCSWDM;

(ii) Development proposals that meet the goals of low impact development, as follows:

(A) Sixty-five percent of the site shall remain as open space.

(B) No more than 10 percent of the gross site area may be covered with impervious surface.

(C) The development proposal’s storm water system shall limit storm water discharge volumes to match the average annual volume discharged from the predeveloped forested site conditions as determined using a calibrated continuous simulation hydrologic model based on the EPA’s HSPF program or an approved equivalent model. The City may modify these requirements based upon site-specific analysis of the feasibility of required improvements, standards and specifications. Such analysis shall include evaluation of site and vicinity soils, hydrology, and other factors, as determined by the City, affecting the successful design of the storm water or low impact development improvements. The City shall consider purpose, effectiveness, engineering feasibility, commercial availability of technology, best management practices, safety and cost of the proposal when evaluating a waiver or modification request. The applicant shall bear the burden of proof that a waiver or modification is warranted;

(iii) For development proposals that cannot infiltrate all site runoff, the applicant shall design a drainage system that provides a drainage outlet designed using the best available science techniques in addition to the applicable flow control and water quality treatment standards of the adopted surface water design manual to minimize the risk of landslide or erosion within the no-disturbance area and minimize the risk of water quality impacts to any sensitive water body located downstream of the no-disturbance area; and

(iv) Structural modification of, addition to or replacement of legally created single detached residences and improvements in existence before January 1, 2006, that do not increase the existing total footprint of the residence and associated impervious surface by more than 400 square feet over that existing before January 1, 2006, shall be exempt from the provisions of this subsection.

(4) Development Standards for Properties Draining to the No-Disturbance Area. The following development standards shall be applied, in addition to all applicable requirements of this chapter, to development proposals located within the erosion hazards near sensitive water body overlay that drain to a no-disturbance area:

(a) New proposed subdivisions, short subdivisions, public institutions, commercial site development permits, and binding site plans for sites that drain predeveloped runoff to the no-disturbance zone shall evaluate the suitability of on-site soils for infiltration. All runoff from newly constructed impervious surfaces shall be retained on site unless this requirement precludes a proposed subdivision or short subdivision from achieving 75 percent of the maximum net density as identified in Chapter 21A.25 SMC. When 75 percent of the maximum net density cannot be met, the applicant shall retain runoff on site and a perforated tightline (per the adopted surface water design manual and SMC Title 13, Surface Water Management) shall be used to connect each lot to the central drainage system. The following drainage systems shall be evaluated, using the following sequential measures, which appear in order of preference:

(i) Infiltration of all site runoff shall be required in granular soils as defined in the adopted surface water design manual and SMC Title 13, Surface Water Management;

(ii) Infiltration of downspouts shall be required in granular soils and in soil conditions defined as allowable in the KCSWDM when feasible to fit the required trench lengths on site. All flows not going to an individual infiltration system shall be detained on site using the most restrictive flow control standard; and

(iii) When infiltration of downspouts is not feasible, the applicant shall design a drainage system that will detain flows on site using the applicable flow control standard and shall install an outlet from the drainage system designed using the best available science techniques to limit the risk of landslide or erosion to the no-disturbance area; provided, that in no case shall development proposals generating more than 2,000 square feet of impervious surface create point discharges in or upstream of the no-disturbance or landslide hazard areas.

(b) For the portions of proposed subdivisions, short subdivisions and binding site plans that cannot infiltrate runoff up to the 100-year peak flow, at least 25 percent of the portion of the site that cannot infiltrate shall remain undisturbed and set aside in an open space tract consistent with SMC 21A.50.160 through 21A.50.190. The open space tract shall be located adjacent to any required critical area tracts and shall be designed to maximize the amount of separation between the critical area and the proposed development. If no critical areas tracts are required, the open space tract shall be located to provide additional protection to the no-disturbance area.

(c) For the portions of all subdivisions and short subdivisions that cannot infiltrate runoff up to the 100-year peak flow, no more than 35 percent of the gross site area shall be covered by impervious surfaces. For new subdivisions and short subdivisions, maximum lot coverage should be specified for subsequent residential building permits on individual lots. (Ord. O2017-453 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2009-250 § 1; Ord. O2005-193 § 1)


21A.50.230 Frequently flooded areas.

(1) Frequently flooded areas include all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the City of Sammamish. The areas of special flood hazard are identified by the Federal Insurance Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled “the Flood Insurance Study for King County,” as amended, as stated in SMC 15.10.060. The flood insurance study is on file at Sammamish City Hall. The best available information for flood hazard area identification as outlined in SMC 15.10.130(2) shall be the basis for regulation until a new flood insurance rate map (FIRM) is issued that incorporates the data utilized under SMC 15.10.130(2).

(2) Development in frequently flooded areas shall be subject to the provisions in Chapter 15.10 SMC. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.240 Flood hazard areas – Certification by engineer or surveyor.

Repealed by Ord. O2005-193. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


Channel relocation and stream meander areas.

Repealed by Ord. O2005-193. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


Chapter 21A.50 ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS

Sections:

21A.50.010    Purpose.

21A.50.020    Applicability.

21A.50.030    Appeals.

21A.50.040    Critical areas rules.

21A.50.045    Fees.

21A.50.050    Complete exemptions.

21A.50.060    Allowances for existing urban development and other uses.

21A.50.070    Exceptions.

21A.50.090    Critical area maps and inventories.

21A.50.100    Disclosure by applicant.

21A.50.110    Critical area review.

21A.50.120    Critical areas study requirement.

21A.50.130    Contents of critical areas study.

21A.50.140    Mitigation, maintenance, monitoring and contingency.

21A.50.145    Mitigation plan requirements.

21A.50.150    Financial guarantees.

21A.50.160    Vegetation management plan.

21A.50.170    Critical area markers, signs and fencing.

21A.50.180    Notice on title.

21A.50.190    Critical area tracts and designations on site plans.

21A.50.200    Recodified.

21A.50.210    Building setbacks.

21A.50.220    Erosion hazard areas – Development standards and permitted alterations.

21A.50.230    Frequently flooded areas.

21A.50.240    21A.50.260    Landslide hazard areas – Development standards and permitted alterations.

21A.50.270    Seismic hazard areas – Development standards and permitted alterations.

21A.50.280    Critical aquifer recharge areas – Development standards.

21A.50.290    Wetlands – Development standards.

21A.50.300    Wetlands – Permitted alterations.

21A.50.310    Wetlands – Mitigation requirements.

21A.50.315    Wetlands – Alternative mitigation.

21A.50.320    Wetlands – Development flexibilities.

21A.50.322    Wetland management area – Special district overlay.

21A.50.325    Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas – Development standards.

21A.50.327    Fish and wildlife habitat corridors.

21A.50.330    Streams – Development standards.

21A.50.340    Streams – Permitted alterations.

21A.50.350    Streams – Mitigation requirements.

21A.50.351    Repealed.

21A.50.352    Repealed.

21A.50.355    Lake management areas – Special district overlay.

21A.50.360    –    

21A.50.400    Repealed.


21A.50.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to implement the goals and policies of the Washington State Growth Management Act, Chapters 36.70A and 36.70B RCW, the State Environmental Policy Act, Chapter 43.21C RCW, and the City of Sammamish Comprehensive Plan, as amended, that call for protection of the functions and values of the natural environment and the public health and safety by:

(1) Establishing development standards to protect defined critical areas;

(2) Protecting members of the public and public resources and facilities from injury, loss of life, property damage or financial loss due to flooding, erosion, landslides, seismic events, soil subsidence or steep slope failures;

(3) Protecting unique, fragile, and valuable elements of the environment including, but not limited to, wildlife and its habitat;

(4) Requiring mitigation of unavoidable impacts on environmentally critical areas by regulating alterations in or near critical areas;

(5) Preventing cumulative adverse environmental impacts on water availability, water quality, groundwater, wetlands, and streams;

(6) Measuring the quantity and quality of wetland and stream resources and preventing overall net loss of wetland and stream functions and values;

(7) Protecting the public trust as to navigable waters and aquatic resources;

(8) Meeting the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program and maintaining the City as an eligible community for federal flood insurance benefits;

(9) Alerting members of the public including, but not limited to, appraisers, owners, potential buyers or lessees to the development limitations of critical areas;

(10) Establishing special district overlays with alternative development standards for increasing minimum requirements to address unique site characteristics in areas of increased sensitivity;

(11) Providing City officials with sufficient information to protect critical areas; and

(12) Providing the public with a clear review and approval process for the development of sites constrained by critical areas. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O2005-172 § 4; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.020 Applicability.

(1) The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all land uses in the City of Sammamish, and all persons within the City shall comply with the requirements of this chapter.

(2) The City shall not approve any development proposal or otherwise issue any authorization to alter the condition of any land, water or vegetation or to construct or alter any structure or improvement without first assuring compliance with the requirements of this chapter.

(3) Approval of a development proposal pursuant to the provisions of this chapter does not discharge the obligation of the applicant to comply with the provisions of this chapter.

(4) When any provision of any other chapter of the Sammamish Municipal Code conflicts with this chapter or when the provisions of this chapter are in conflict, that provision that provides more protection to environmentally critical areas shall apply unless specifically provided otherwise in this chapter or unless such provision conflicts with federal or state laws or regulations.

(5) The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all forest practices over which the City has jurisdiction pursuant to Chapter 76.09 RCW and WAC Title 222. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.030 Appeals. 

Any decision to approve, condition or deny a development proposal based on the requirements of this chapter may be appealed according to and as part of the appeal procedure for the permit or approval involved. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.040 Critical areas rules.

Applicable departments within the City are authorized to adopt, pursuant to Chapter 2.55 SMC, such administrative rules and regulations as are necessary and appropriate to implement this chapter and to prepare and require the use of such forms as are necessary to its administration. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.045 Fees.

(1) Consistent with the City’s adopted fee schedule, the City shall establish fees for the application filing, review and other services provided by the City for critical areas review. Basis for these fees shall include, but not be limited to, the cost of engineering and planning review time, cost of inspection time, costs for administration, costs for third-party peer review, and any other special costs attributable to the critical areas review process.

(2) Unless otherwise indicated in this title, the applicant shall be responsible for the initiation, preparation, submission, and expense of all required reports, assessments, studies, plans, reconnaissances, or other work prepared in support of or necessary to review the application. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1)


21A.50.050 Complete exemptions.

The following are exempt from the provisions of this chapter and any administrative rules promulgated thereunder except as provided in SMC 25.01.070 which excludes specific environmentally critical areas rules from application within the City of Sammamish shoreline jurisdiction:

(1) Alterations in response to emergencies that threaten the public health, safety, and welfare or that pose an imminent risk of damage to private property as long as any alteration undertaken pursuant to this subsection is reported to the department immediately. The director shall confirm that an emergency exists and determine what, if any, mitigation shall be required to protect the health, safety, welfare and environment and to repair any resource damage;

(2) Public water, electric, and natural gas distribution, public sewer collection, cable communications, telephone utility, and related activities undertaken pursuant to City-approved best management practices, as follows:

(a) Normal and routine maintenance or repair of existing utility structures or rights-of-way;

(b) Relocation of electric facilities, lines, equipment or appurtenances, not including substations, with an associated voltage of 55,000 volts or less, only when required by a local governmental agency that approves the new location of the facilities;

(c) Replacement, operation, repair, modification, installation, or construction in existing developed utility corridors, an improved City street right-of-way or City-authorized private street of all electric facilities, lines, equipment, or appurtenances, not including substations;

(d) Relocation of public sewer local collection, public water local distribution, natural gas, cable communication or telephone facilities, lines, pipes, mains, equipment, or appurtenances, only when required by a local governmental agency that approves the new location of the facilities; and

(e) Replacement, operation, repair, modification, installation, or construction of public sewer local collection, public water local distribution, natural gas, cable communication or telephone facilities, lines, pipes, mains, equipment, or appurtenances when such facilities are located within an improved public right-of-way or authorized private street;

(3) Maintenance, operation, repair, modification, or replacement of publicly improved streets as long as any such alteration does not involve the expansion of streets or related improvements into previously unimproved rights-of-way or portions of rights-of-way;

(4) Maintenance, operation, or repair of parks, trails and publicly improved recreation areas as long as any such alteration does not involve the expansion of improvements into previously unimproved areas or new clearing of native vegetation beyond routine pruning and related activities; and

(5) All clearing and grading activities that are exempt from the requirement for a clearing and grading permit as specified in SMC 16.15.050, unless these activities require other permits or authorizations as specified in SMC 21A.50.020. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O2005-172 § 4; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.060 Allowances for existing urban development and other uses.

Subject to the limitations set forth in subsection (1) of this section the following developments, activities, and uses are allowed in critical areas and associated buffers and building setbacks as specified in the following subsections, provided such activities are otherwise consistent with this program and other applicable regulations. The director may apply conditions to an underlying permit or approval to ensure that the activities are consistent with the provisions of this chapter.

(1) Change of Use and Existing Improvements. Approval of a preliminary subdivision, short subdivision or binding site plan shall require that an existing improvement, or nonconformance, as that term is defined in SMC 21A.15.800, be removed or discontinued prior to recording of the final plat, final short plat, or binding site plan resulting in five or more lots in the following circumstances:

(a) The existing improvement or nonconformance is located within environmentally critical areas or buffers. This includes, but is not limited to, a nonconformance within an area proposed to be included in an averaged or reduced buffer; and

(b) Removal of the existing improvement or nonconformance will result in a reduced impact to environmentally critical areas; or

(c) One of or more of the following criteria are met:

(i) Removal or discontinuance of the existing improvement or nonconformance is necessary to meet water quality, drainage, or revegetation requirements or to qualify for incentives.

(ii) The existing improvement or nonconformance is a use no longer allowed in the zoning designation or would be incompatible with a proposed use.

(iii) Removal or discontinuance of the existing improvement or nonconformance is necessary for public health, safety, or welfare, including but not limited to adequate sanitation, access, and/or safe walking conditions for school children.

(2) Maintenance of Existing Improvements. Existing single detached dwelling units, other structures, landscaping, and other existing uses that do not meet the requirements of this chapter, which were legally established according to the regulations in place at their time of establishment, may be maintained and no critical areas study or review is required.

(3) Modifications of Existing Improvements. Addition, expansion, reconstruction or revision of existing building(s) or other structures is subject to the following:

(a) Modification or Replacement. Structural modification or replacement of legally established structures that do not meet the building setback or buffer requirements for wetlands, streams, fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas, wildlife habitat corridors, or landslide hazard areas is allowed if the modification, replacement or related activity does not increase the existing footprint of the structure lying within the critical area, buffer or building setback area, and there is no increased risk to life or property.

(b) Expansions of Single Detached Dwelling Units and Accessory Dwelling Units. Structural modification of, addition to, or replacement of legally created single detached dwelling unit(s) and accessory dwelling unit(s) and associated impervious surfaces that do not meet the applicable building setback or buffer requirements for wetlands, streams, fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas, or landslide hazard areas are allowed a one-time up to 1,000 square foot increase in the existing total footprint of the single detached dwelling unit(s) and accessory dwelling unit(s) and associated impervious surface areas lying within the buffer or building setback subject to the following:

(i) If the existing legally created single detached dwelling unit(s) and accessory dwelling unit(s) and associated impervious surfaces are located within the building setback or buffer required for a landslide hazard area, a critical areas study must be supplied consistent with the provisions of SMC 21A.50.130 and approved by the City that demonstrates that there will be no increased risk to life or property by the proposed footprint expansion;

(ii) If the existing legally created single detached dwelling unit(s) and accessory dwelling unit(s) and associated impervious surfaces are located over or within a wetland, stream, or landslide hazard area, no further expansion within the wetland, stream, or landslide hazard area is allowed; and

(iii) If an existing legally created single detached dwelling unit and an accessory dwelling unit and associated impervious surfaces are located within the building setback or buffer for a stream or wetland, or within a fish and wildlife habitat conservation area:

(A) No portion of the modification, addition or replacement may be located closer to a wetland or stream than the nearest extent of the existing single detached dwelling unit, except as provided under subsection (2)(b)(iii)(B) of this section.

(B) When there is an intervening single detached dwelling unit(s) or accessory dwelling unit(s) on a perpendicular line in between the subject wetland or stream and a single detached dwelling unit or accessory dwelling unit that is proposed to be modified, added to, or replaced, the modification, addition or replacement may be located closer to the wetland or stream, provided no portion of the modification, addition or replacement is located closer than 50 feet to the wetland or stream.

(C) Modifications, additions, or replacements authorized under this subsection shall meet the following criteria:

(1) A critical areas study approved by the City demonstrates a net improvement in hydrologic and habitat values to the subject affected wetland, stream, fish and wildlife habitat conservation area through restoration of degraded areas and/or buffer or through provision of additional vegetated buffer; and

(2) Mitigation of impacts to disturbed critical areas or buffers is provided in accordance with this chapter.

(c) Expansions of Buildings in Commercial Zoning Districts. Structural modification of, addition to, or replacement of legally created buildings and associated impervious surfaces located in the community business, neighborhood business, office, and Town Center A zones, that do not meet the applicable building setback or buffer requirements for wetlands, streams, fish and wildlife habitat conservation area, or landslide hazard areas are allowed a one-time up to 1,000 square foot increase in the existing total footprint of the building and associated impervious surface areas lying within the buffer or building setback subject to the following:

(i) If the existing legally created building(s) and associated impervious surfaces are located within the building setback or buffer required for a landslide hazard area, a critical areas study must be supplied consistent with the provisions of SMC 21A.50.130 and approved by the City that demonstrates that there will be no increased risk to life or property by the proposed footprint expansion;

(ii) If the existing legally created building(s) and associated impervious surfaces are located over or within a wetland, stream, or landslide hazard area, no further expansion within the wetland, stream, or landslide hazard area is allowed; and

(iii) If an existing legally created building(s), and associated impervious surfaces, are located within the building setback or buffer for a stream or wetland, or within a fish and wildlife habitat conservation area:

(A) No portion of the modification, addition or replacement may be located closer to a wetland or stream than the nearest extent of the existing building(s), except as provided under subsection (2)(c)(iii)(B) of this section.

(B) When there is an intervening building(s) on a perpendicular line in between the subject wetland or stream and building(s) that is proposed to be modified, added to, or replaced, the modification, addition or replacement may be located closer to the wetland or stream, provided no portion of the modification, addition or replacement is located closer than 50 feet to the wetland or stream.

(C) Modifications, additions, or replacements authorized under this subsection shall meet the following criteria:

(1) A critical areas study approved by the City demonstrates that the proposed modification, addition, or replacements authorized by this subsection will also result in a net improvement in hydrologic and habitat values to the subject affected wetland, stream, fish and wildlife habitat conservation area through restoration of degraded areas and/or buffer or through provision of additional vegetated buffer; and

(2) Mitigation of impacts to disturbed critical areas or buffers is provided in accordance with this chapter.

(4) Revisions to existing legally established landscaping are allowed subject to the following:

(a) The landscaped area shall not be increased within the critical area or buffer; and

(b) Landscaping features may be revised or replaced with similar features or features with less impact to the critical area or buffer, such that the remaining functions of the critical area and/or buffer are maintained or improved (e.g., plant material replaced with alternate plant material, hardscape replaced with alternate hardscape, hardscape replaced with plant material, etc.); and

(c) Revisions authorized under this subsection shall not require a critical areas study.

(5) Conservation, preservation, restoration and/or enhancement is allowed within critical areas or buffers subject to the following:

(a) Conservation and preservation of soil, water, vegetation, and other fish and wildlife habitat is allowed where it does not include alteration of the location, size, dimensions or functions of an existing critical area or buffer.

(b) Restoration and enhancement of critical areas or buffers is allowed; provided, that actions do not alter the location, dimensions or size of the critical area or buffer, that actions improve and do not reduce the existing quality or functions of the critical areas or buffers, and that actions are implemented according to a restoration or enhancement plan that has been approved by the City of Sammamish.

(6) Select Vegetation Removal Activities.

(a) Removal of nonnative or invasive Washington State and/or King County listed noxious weeds in an area of up to 2,500 square feet within a critical area or buffer is allowed with no permit requirement if the following provisions are met:

(i) The plants are removed using hand labor and/or light equipment;

(ii) Soil disturbance is minimized and no filling or modification of soil contours occurs;

(iii) Water quality is protected and there is no modification of hydrology patterns within the critical area or buffer;

(iv) Native plants are protected from removal or damage;

(v) Appropriate erosion-control measures are used;

(vi) The area is replanted with a like kind and density of native vegetation following nonnative plant removal. For example, if dense nonnative blackberry is removed, at a minimum, dense native shrubs must be replanted following blackberry removal, though native trees and groundcover could also be included and are encouraged if desired; and

(vii) Removal of nonnative or invasive plants authorized under this subsection shall not require a critical areas study.

(b) For removal of nonnative vegetation in an area greater than 2,500 square feet, a clearing and grading permit is required and must be accompanied by a native plant restoration plan in accordance with applicable provisions of this chapter. A critical areas study may be required by the director.

(7) Reconstruction or replacement of the exterior footprint of an existing, legally established structure not meeting current regulations is allowed; provided, that the addition or reconstruction does not increase the noncompliance to current regulations. A critical areas study may be required by the director.

(a) Replacement may be allowed in a different location not meeting current regulations if a determination is made by the City that the new location results in less impact to environmentally critical area functions and values than replacement in the existing footprint.

(b) Existing structures that were legally established but which are not meeting current regulations may be maintained, reconstructed, or repaired; provided, that the maintenance/reconstruction/repair does not increase the extent of noncompliance with current regulations by encroaching upon or extending into the environmentally critical areas or other area where new construction or use would not be allowed.

(c) If a structure not meeting current regulations is damaged by fire, explosion, or other casualty and/or natural disaster or is otherwise demolished, it may be reconstructed to match the footprint that existed immediately prior to the time the damage occurred or in accordance with subsection (6)(a) of this section; provided, that all of the following criteria are met:

(i) The owner(s) submit a complete application within 24 months of the date the damage occurred; and

(ii) All permits are issued within two years of initial submittal of the complete application, and the restoration is completed within two years of permit issuance. This period may be extended for one additional year by the director if the applicant has submitted the applications necessary to establish the use or activity and has provided written justification for the extension.

(d) A structure not meeting current regulations that is moved outside the existing footprint must be brought into conformance with this chapter, except as allowed by subsection (6)(a) of this section.

(8) A permit or approval sought as part of a development proposal where previous critical areas review has been completed is exempt from the provisions of this chapter and any administrative rules promulgated thereunder, except for the notice on title provisions, SMC 21A.50.180 and 21A.50.190, if:

(a) The City previously reviewed all critical areas on the site;

(b) There is no material change in the development proposal since the prior review that would affect a critical area;

(c) There is no new information available that is important to any critical area review of the site or particular critical area;

(d) No more than five years have lapsed since the issuance of the permit or approval under which the prior review was conducted; provided, that the director may allow a longer time period if new review would be unlikely to provide new information about the critical area; and

(e) The prior permit or approval, including any conditions, has been complied with. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2009-264 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.070 Exceptions.

Except as prohibited in the City of Sammamish shoreline jurisdiction under SMC 25.01.070, the following are exceptions from the provisions of this chapter when applicable criteria and performance standards are met:

(1) Public Agency and Utility Exception. If the application of this chapter would prohibit an activity or a development proposal by a public agency or utility, the agency or utility may apply for an exception pursuant to this section:

(a) The public agency or utility shall apply to the department and shall make available to the department other related project documents such as permit applications to other agencies, special studies and SEPA documents.

(b) The director may approve alterations to critical areas, buffers and critical area setbacks by an agency or utility not otherwise allowed by this chapter when the following criteria are met:

(i) There is no other reasonable alternative to the activity or proposed development with less impact on the critical area; and

(ii) The activity or development proposal is designed to avoid, minimize, and mitigate the impact on environmentally critical areas consistent with the avoidance and mitigation sequencing requirements in this chapter; and, if applicable:

(iii) The proposed development or activity is of a linear nature and is on an existing corridor or connects to public lands, trails, utility corridors, rights-of-way or other public infrastructure, or is required for functional reasons such as gravity flow.

(c) The department shall process exceptions, provide public notice, provide opportunity for the public to request a public hearing, and provide an appeal process consistent with the provisions of Chapter 20.05 SMC.

(2) Reasonable Use Exception. If the application of this chapter would deny all reasonable use of the property, the applicant may apply for an exception pursuant to this subsection:

(a) The director may approve alterations to critical areas, critical area buffers and setbacks to allow a reasonable use not otherwise allowed by this chapter when the following criteria are met:

(i) The application of this chapter would deny all reasonable use of the property;

(ii) There is no other reasonable use with less impact on the critical area;

(iii) The proposed development does not pose an unreasonable threat to the public health, safety, or welfare on or off the development proposal site and is consistent with the general purposes of this chapter and the public interest; and

(iv) Any alterations permitted to the critical area or buffer shall be the minimum necessary to allow for reasonable use of the property; and any authorized alteration of a critical area under this subsection shall be subject to conditions established by the department including, but not limited to, mitigation under an approved mitigation plan. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O2005-172 § 4; Ord. O99-29 § 1)

(Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.090 Critical area maps and inventories.

Not all of the critical areas in the City of Sammamish are fully mapped. Field verification and, if appropriate, evaluation and mapping by a qualified professional of the location of critical areas will be required. The distribution of many environmentally critical areas in the City of Sammamish is displayed in the City’s critical areas map folio, as amended. Additionally, the following maps are referenced and/or maintained by the City:

(1) Many of the wetlands located within the City’s boundaries are inventoried in the King County wetlands inventory notebooks.

(2) Flood hazard areas are mapped by the Federal Insurance Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled “The Flood Insurance Study for King County.”

(3) The wetland management, erosion hazard near sensitive water bodies, critical aquifer recharge area, and lake management special overlay districts are designated on maps maintained by the City of Sammamish department of community development.

All maps are deemed advisory with the exception of the critical aquifer recharge area, flood insurance study for King County, wetland management area and erosion hazard near sensitive water bodies overlay maps. If there is a conflict among the advisory maps, inventory and/or site-specific features, the department of community development shall verify the actual presence or absence of the features defined in this title as environmentally critical areas. The determination may be challenged by the property owner pursuant to Chapter 21A.05 SMC. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.100 Disclosure by applicant.

(1) The applicant shall disclose to the City the presence of critical areas on the development proposal site and any mapped or identifiable critical areas within the distance equal to the largest potential required buffer applicable to the development proposal area on the applicant’s property.

(2) If the development proposal site contains or is within a critical area or buffer, the applicant shall submit an affidavit that declares whether the applicant has knowledge of any illegal alteration to any or all critical areas or their buffers on the development proposal site and whether the applicant previously has been found in violation of this chapter, pursuant to SMC Title 23. If the applicant previously has been found in violation, the applicant shall declare whether such violation has been corrected to the satisfaction of the City. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.110 Critical area review.

(1) The City shall perform a critical area review prior to issuing any approval for a development proposal permit application or other request for permission to proceed with an alteration on a site that includes a critical area or is within an identified critical area buffer or building setback area.

(2) As part of the critical area review, the City shall:

(a) Confirm whether critical areas or buffers have been mapped or identified within the distance equal to the largest potential required buffer applicable to the development proposal area;

(b) Confirm the nature and type of the critical area;

(c) Determine whether a critical areas study is required;

(d) Evaluate the critical areas study and require third party review, if necessary;

(e) Determine whether the development proposal is consistent with this chapter;

(f) Determine whether any proposed alteration to the critical area is necessary; and

(g) Determine if the mitigation and monitoring plans and bonding measures proposed by the applicant are sufficient to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, consistent with the goals, purposes, objectives, and requirements of this chapter. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.120 Critical areas study requirement.

(1) An applicant for a development proposal where impacts to or alteration of an environmentally critical area or modification or reduction of a buffer associated with an environmentally critical area is proposed or may occur as a consequence of proposed actions shall submit a critical areas study at a level determined by the director to adequately evaluate the proposal and probable impacts.

(2) The director may waive or modify the requirement for a critical areas study if the applicant shows, to the director’s satisfaction, that:

(a) There will be no alteration of the critical area or buffer;

(b) The development proposal will not have an impact on the critical area in a manner contrary to the goals, purposes, objectives, and requirements of this chapter; and

(c) The minimum standards required by this chapter are met; or

(d) Critical areas are located off site and access to applicable off-site property is restricted.

(3) If the development proposal will affect only a part of the development proposal site, the department may limit the scope of the required critical areas study to include only that area that is affected by the development proposal.

(4) If necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter, the director may require additional information from the applicant, separate from the critical areas study.

(5) A development proposal may be allowed to utilize past studies from neighboring properties, if confirmed that the study findings remain accurate and applicable to proposed development.

(6) A wetland delineation completed over five years ago needs to be revisited. Revisiting a wetland delineation that is five or more years old does not necessarily mean that a new wetland delineation needs to be completed. It means that a field verification by the City may need to be performed to determine whether the delineation is still accurate or whether it needs to be redone based on existing conditions. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.130 Contents of critical areas study.

(1) The critical areas study shall be in the form of a written report prepared by a qualified professional using guidance based on best available science per Chapter 36.70A RCW and shall contain the following, as determined to be applicable by the director:

(a) The applicant shall disclose to the City the presence of critical areas on the development proposal site and any mapped or identifiable critical areas within the distance equal to the largest potential required buffer applicable to the development proposal area on the applicant’s property;

(b) Assessment of the impacts or risks to an environmentally critical area or buffer:

(i) Related to the development proposal and associated alterations to the subject property; and

(ii) Affecting other properties and any environmentally critical areas or buffers located on them;

(c) A description of efforts made to apply mitigation sequencing pursuant to SMC 21A.50.135 to avoid, minimize and mitigate impacts to environmentally critical areas;

(d) Studies that propose adequate mitigation, maintenance, monitoring, and contingency plans and bonding measures as necessary to offset impacts to the critical area from the development proposal;

(e) A scale map of the development proposal site;

(f) Photographic records of the site before the proposed alteration occurs;

(g) Detailed studies, as required by this chapter, for individual critical areas or as otherwise deemed necessary for critical areas protection by the director;

(h) Assessment of potential impacts that may occur downstream or downhill from the development site, such as sedimentation or erosion, where applicable;

(i) Assessment of potential impacts to wetland management areas, lake management areas, and other areas designated for special protection, where applicable; and

(j) Consideration of the protection recommendations of the East Lake Sammamish Basin and Nonpoint Action Plan (1994), the Lake Washington/Cedar/Sammamish Watershed Chinook Salmon Conservation Plan – WRIA 8 Steering Committee, and adopted sub-basin plans.

(2) A critical areas study may be combined with any studies required by other laws and regulations. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.135 Avoiding impacts to critical areas.

(1) Except as otherwise provided in SMC 21A.50.060, an applicant for a development proposal, activity, or alteration shall document the consideration of and subsequently shall implement the following sequential measures, which appear in order of preference, to avoid, minimize, and mitigate impacts to environmentally critical areas and associated buffers:

(a) Avoiding the impact or hazard by not taking a certain action, or redesigning the proposal to eliminate the impact. The applicant shall consider reasonable, affirmative steps and make best efforts to avoid critical area impacts. However, avoidance shall not be construed to mean mandatory withdrawal or denial of the development proposal or activity if the proposal or activity is an allowed, permitted, conditional, or special use in the SMC. In determining the extent to which the proposal should be redesigned to avoid the impact, the department may consider the purpose, effectiveness, engineering feasibility, commercial availability of technology, best management practices, safety and cost of the proposal and identified modifications to the proposal.

The department may also consider the extent to which the avoidance of one type or location of an environmentally critical area could require or lead to impacts to other types or locations of nearby or adjacent environmentally critical areas. The department should seek to avoid, minimize and mitigate overall impacts based on the functions and values of all of the relevant environmentally critical areas and based on the recommendations of a critical areas study. If impacts cannot be avoided through redesign, or because of site conditions or project requirements, the applicant shall then proceed with the sequence of steps in subsections (1)(b) through (g) of this section.

(b) Minimizing the impact or hazard by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action or impact with appropriate technology or by changing the timing of the action.

(c) Restoring the impacted critical areas by repairing, rehabilitating or restoring the affected critical area or its buffer.

(d) Minimizing or eliminating the hazard by restoring or stabilizing the hazard area through plantings, engineering or other methods.

(e) Reducing or eliminating the impact or hazard over time by preservation or maintenance operations during the life of the development proposal, activity or alteration.

(f) Compensating for the adverse impact by enhancing critical areas and their buffers or creating substitute critical areas and their buffers as required in the SMC.

(g) Monitoring the impact, hazard or success of required mitigation and taking remedial action based upon findings over time.

(2) In addition to the above steps, the specific development standards, permitted alteration requirements, and mitigation requirements of this chapter and elsewhere in the SMC apply.

(3) The department shall document the decision-making process used under this section as a part of the critical areas review conducted pursuant to SMC 21A.50.110. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1)


21A.50.140 Mitigation, maintenance, monitoring and contingency.

(1) When mitigation is required by this chapter to compensate for adverse impacts, unless otherwise provided, mitigation, maintenance, monitoring measures and contingency plans shall be in place to protect critical areas and buffers from alterations occurring on the development proposal site.

(2) Where monitoring reveals a significant deviation from predicted impacts or a failure of mitigation or maintenance measures, the applicant shall be responsible for appropriate corrective action which, when approved, shall be subject to further monitoring.

(3) Mitigation shall be in kind and on site where on-site mitigation is feasible, sufficient to maintain critical area and buffer functions, and where applicable to prevent risk from a hazard posed by a critical area.

(4) The City may approve off-site mitigation if an applicant demonstrates that:

(a) It is not feasible to mitigate on the development proposal site; and

(b) The off-site mitigation will achieve equivalent or greater hydrological, water quality and wetland or aquatic area habitat functions.

(5) When off-site mitigation is authorized, the City shall give priority to locations in the following order of preference:

(a) Within the same drainage sub-basin;

(b) Within the City limits;

(c) Within the Sammamish service area boundaries of an approved fee-in-lieu mitigation program;

(d) Within the Sammamish service area boundaries of an approved mitigation bank program.

(6) Mitigation shall not be implemented until after the City of Sammamish approves the applicable critical areas study, mitigation plan and any required permits. Following City approval, mitigation shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of the approved critical areas study and mitigation plan. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.145 Mitigation plan requirements.

When mitigation is required, the applicant shall submit, for approval by the City of Sammamish, a mitigation plan as part of, or in addition to, the critical areas study. The mitigation plan shall include, or be accompanied by, a report with the following information as determined to be applicable by the director:

(1) Existing Conditions and Proposed Impacts. A description of existing critical area(s) and/or buffer(s) conditions, functions, and values and a description of the anticipated impacts;

(2) Proposed Mitigation. A description of proposed mitigating actions and mitigation site selection criteria;

(3) Environmental Goals and Objectives. A description of the goals and objectives of proposed mitigation. The goals and objectives shall be related to the functions and values of the impacted critical area(s) and/or buffer(s);

(4) Best Available Science. A review of the best available science supporting proposed mitigation, a description of the plan/report author’s experience to date in restoring or creating the type of critical area proposed, and an analysis of the likelihood of success of the mitigation project;

(5) Performance Standards. A description of specific measurable criteria for evaluating whether or not the goals and objectives of the mitigation plan have been successfully attained and whether or not the requirements of this chapter have been met;

(6) Detailed Construction Plans. Detailed site diagrams, cross-sectional drawings, topographic elevations at one- or two-foot contours, slope percentage, final grade elevations, and any other drawings appropriate to show construction techniques or anticipated final outcome. In addition, plans should include specifications and descriptions of:

(a) Proposed construction sequence, timing, and duration;

(b) Grading and excavation details;

(c) Erosion and sediment control features;

(d) A planting plan specifying plant species, quantities, locations, size, spacing, and density; and

(e) Measures to protect and maintain plants until established;

(7) Monitoring Program. Mitigation plans shall include a program for monitoring construction of the compensation project, and for assessing a completed project. A protocol shall be included that outlines the schedule for site monitoring and how the monitoring data will be evaluated to determine if the performance standards are being met. A monitoring report shall be submitted as needed to document milestones, successes, problems, and contingency actions of the compensation project. The compensation project shall be monitored for a period necessary to establish that performance standards have been met. The monitoring period shall be five years; provided, that the director may approve a greater period when needed to ensure mitigation success or a lesser period for minor mitigation;

(8) Contingency Plan. The mitigation plan shall include identification of potential courses of action, and any corrective measures to be taken if monitoring or evaluation indicates project performance standards are not being met; and

(9) Fee-in-Lieu Program. If fee-in-lieu mitigation is proposed, a critical areas study shall be supplied that demonstrates how proposed impacts and mitigation meet the requirements of SMC 21A.50.140 and 21A.50.310 or 21A.50.350, whichever is applicable, and also the specific requirements of the fee-in-lieu mitigation program to be utilized. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O2005-172 § 4)


21A.50.150 Financial guarantees.

Financial guarantees shall be required consistent with the provisions of SMC Title 27A. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.160 Vegetation management plan.

(1) For all development proposals where preservation of existing vegetation is required by this chapter, a vegetation management plan shall be submitted and approved prior to issuance of the permit or other request for permission to proceed with an alteration.

(2) The vegetation management plan shall identify the proposed clearing limits for the project and any areas where vegetation in a critical area or its buffer is proposed to be disturbed.

(3) Where clearing includes cutting any merchantable stand of timber, as defined in WAC 222-16-010(28), the vegetation management plan shall include a description of proposed logging practices that demonstrates how all critical areas will be protected in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

(4) Clearing limits as shown on the plan shall be marked in the field in a prominent and durable manner. Proposed methods of field marking shall be reviewed and approved by the City prior to any site alteration. Field marking shall remain in place until the certificate of occupancy or final project approval is granted.

(5) The vegetation management plan may be incorporated into a temporary erosion and sediment control plan or landscaping plan where either of these plans is required by other laws or regulations.

(6) Submittal requirements for vegetation management plans shall be set forth by the department. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.170 Critical area markers, signs and fencing.

(1) Markers. Permanent survey stakes delineating the boundary between adjoining property and critical area tracts shall be set, using markers capable of being magnetically located and as established by current survey standards.

(2) Signs. Development proposals approved by the City shall require that the boundary between a critical area buffer and contiguous land shall be identified with permanent signs. Permanent signs shall be a City-approved type designed for high durability. Signs must be posted at an interval of one per lot or every 50 feet, whichever is less, and must be maintained by the property owner or homeowners’ association in perpetuity. The wording, number and placement of the signs may be modified by the director based on specific site conditions.

(3) Fencing. Permanent fencing shall be required at the outer edge of the critical area buffer under the following circumstances:

(a) As part of any development proposal for:

(i) Plats;

(ii) Short plats;

(iii) Parks;

(iv) Other development proposals, including but not limited to multifamily, mixed use, and commercial development where the director determines that such fencing is necessary to protect the functions of the critical area;

(b) When buffer reductions are employed as part of a development proposal;

(c) When buffer averaging is employed as part of a development proposal; and

(d) At the director’s discretion to protect the values and functions of a critical area.

Fencing installed in accordance with this section shall be designed to not interfere with fish and wildlife migration and shall be constructed in a manner that minimizes critical areas impacts. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.180 Notice on title.

(1) The owner of any property containing critical areas or buffers on which a development proposal is submitted or any property on which mitigation is established as a result of development, except a public right-of-way or the site of a permanent public facility, shall file a notice approved by the City with the records and elections division of King County. The required contents and form of the notice shall be determined by the director. The notice shall inform the public of the presence of critical areas, buffers or mitigation sites on the property, of the application of this chapter to the property and that limitations on actions in or affecting such critical areas or buffers may exist. The notice shall run with the land.

(2) The applicant shall submit proof that the notice has been filed for public record before the City shall approve any development proposal for the property or, in the case of subdivisions, short subdivisions and binding site plans, at or before recording. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.190 Critical area tracts and designations on site plans.

(1) Critical area tracts shall be used to delineate and protect those critical areas and buffers listed below in development proposals for subdivisions, short subdivisions, or binding site plans and shall be recorded on all documents of title of record for all affected lots:

(a) All landslide hazard areas and buffers that are one acre or greater in size;

(b) All wetlands and buffers;

(c) All streams and buffers; and

(d) All fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas and buffers.

(2) Any required critical area tract shall be held in an undivided interest by each owner of a building lot within the development with this ownership interest passing with the ownership of the lot or shall be held by an incorporated homeowners’ association or other legal entity which assures the ownership, maintenance, and protection of the tract, or dedicated to the City of Sammamish, at the City’s discretion.

(3) Site plans submitted as part of development proposals for building permits, master plan developments, and clearing and grading permits shall include and delineate all flood hazard areas (if they have been mapped by FEMA or if a critical areas study is required), landslide hazard areas, streams and wetlands, buffers, and building setbacks. If only a part of the development site has been mapped pursuant to SMC 21A.50.120(3), the part of the site that has not been mapped shall be clearly identified and labeled on the site plans. The site plans shall be attached to the notice on title required by SMC 21A.50.180. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.200 Alteration.

Recodified to SMC 21A.15.056 by Ord. O2005-172. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.210 Building setbacks.

Unless otherwise provided, buildings and other structures shall be set back a distance of 15 feet from the edges of a critical area buffer. The following may be allowed in the building setback area:

(1) Landscaping;

(2) Uncovered decks, less than 18 inches above grade;

(3) Building overhangs if such overhangs do not extend more than 18 inches into the setback area;

(4) Impervious ground surfaces, such as driveways and patios; provided, that such improvements may be subject to special drainage provisions adopted for the various critical areas; and

(5) Trails. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2009-264 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O2005-172 § 4; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.220 Erosion hazard areas – Development standards and permitted alterations. 

(1) Land clearing, grading, filling, and foundation work in an erosion hazard area is allowed only from May 1st to September 30th, except that:

(a) Construction outside of this seasonal development limitation may be authorized if the director determines that the hazard area will not be adversely impacted by the proposed construction work or the applicant demonstrates that erosion hazards will be fully mitigated through a temporary erosion and sediment control management plan that includes:

(i) The minimum requirements from the adopted surface water design manual and SMC Title 13, Surface Water Management:

(A) Provisions to store site construction runoff and treat runoff sufficiently to meet water quality standards prior to discharge;

(B) Daily and post-storm inspections of temporary erosion and sediment control best management practices;

(C) Establishment of a manager, who is a Certified Erosion and Sediment Control Lead (CESCL) in the state of Washington, and will be available on call to respond to temporary erosion and sediment control noncompliance;

(D) A water-quality monitoring plan for site discharges, where the applicant is responsible for measuring turbidity of storm water released from the site and maintaining records of monitoring data that shall be available upon request by the City or Ecology. Monitoring protocols shall conform to the monitoring requirements of the construction storm water general permit;

(E) A contingency plan incorporated into the temporary erosion and sediment control plan that identifies corrective actions and BMPs that will be implemented if monitoring shows discharge water quality exceeds water quality standards, and that specifies materials to be stockpiled on site for use in an erosion and sediment control response;

(F) A seasonal suspension plan for suspending work until the end of the rainy season if temporary erosion and sediment control measures are found to be inadequate;

(ii) Pre-design site inspection by a licensed engineer or geologist to identify erosion hazard areas, no-disturbance areas, other environmentally critical areas, and resources downstream of the site that are to be protected;

(iii) Construction storm water systems and temporary erosion and sediment control best management practices are to be sized for a minimum of a 10-year storm interval;

(iv) The owner must provide a financial guarantee in accordance with Chapter 27A.15 SMC, and in an amount sufficient to cover all costs of implementing the approved temporary erosion and sediment control plan, monitoring site discharges, permanently stabilizing the site, and restoring any off-site impacts, including materials, labor, and City costs, and include a mechanism allowing the City to use the financial guarantee if the development is stalled or not completed;

(v) Preparation and implementation of site grading, stabilization, and restoration plans by a licensed engineer, with certification by a geotechnical engineer that these plans are sufficient to prevent erosion and sedimentation of susceptible soils; and

(vi) Preparation of a vegetation management plan by a qualified professional for establishment of permanent vegetation on the site following completion of clearing and grading work.

(b) In addition to the requirements of subsection (1)(a) of this section, the director may require additional studies of the site hydrology, soils and storm water retention, and may also require grading, structural improvements, erosion control measures, restoration plans, and/or an indemnification/release agreement.

(c) Timber harvest may be allowed pursuant to an approved forest practice Type II and III permit issued by the Washington Department of Natural Resources.

(d) Construction activity associated with subdivisions, short subdivisions, and similar projects that drain to Lake Sammamish during the wet season shall provide water quality monitoring reports to the City consistent with SMC 21A.50.225(5)(g), and shall include monitoring of water temperature.

(e) The director may halt wet season construction as necessary to protect the hazard area and/or to prevent downstream impacts.

(2) All development proposals on sites containing erosion hazard areas shall include a temporary erosion and sediment control plan as specified in subsection (1)(a) of this section consistent with this section and other laws and regulations prior to receiving approval. Specific requirements for such plans shall be set forth in the adopted surface water design manual and SMC Title 13, Surface Water Management, or as otherwise specified by the department.

(3) All subdivisions, short subdivisions, or binding site plans on sites with erosion hazard areas shall comply with the following additional requirements:

(a) Except as provided in this section, existing vegetation shall be retained on all lots until building permits are approved for development on individual lots;

(b) If any vegetation on the lots is damaged or removed during construction of the subdivision infrastructure, the applicant shall be required to submit a restoration plan to the department for review and approval. Following approval, the applicant shall be required to implement the plan;

(c) Clearing of vegetation on lots will not be allowed unless the City determines that:

(i) Such clearing is a necessary part of a large-scale grading plan;

(ii) It is not a reasonable alternative to perform such grading on an individual lot basis; and

(iii) Drainage from the graded area will meet water quality standards to be established by the adopted surface water design manual and SMC Title 13, Surface Water Management.

(4) Where the City determines that erosion from a development site poses a significant risk of damage to downstream receiving waters, based either on the size of the project, the proximity to the receiving water or the sensitivity of the receiving water, the applicant shall be required to provide regular monitoring of surface water discharge from the site as required by the adopted surface water design manual and City of Sammamish addendum. If the project does not meet the applicable provisions of the adopted water quality standards as established by law, the City may suspend further development work on the site until such standards are met.

(5) The use of hazardous substances, pesticides, and fertilizers in erosion hazard areas may be prohibited by the City. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.225 Erosion hazards near sensitive water bodies overlay.

(1) The purpose of the erosion hazards near sensitive water bodies overlay is to provide a means to designate sloped areas posing erosion hazards that drain directly to lakes or streams of high resource value that are particularly sensitive to the impacts of increased erosion and the resulting sediment loads from development.

(2) General Development Standards. The following development standards shall be applied to all properties within the erosion hazard near sensitive water body overlay:

(a) The one-acre exemption in the storm water design manual addendum shall not apply within the erosion hazards near sensitive water body overlay.

(b) If the application of this section would deny all reasonable use of property, the applicant may apply for a reasonable use exception pursuant to SMC 21A.50.070(2).

(c) The director may modify the property-specific development standards required by this section when a critical areas study is conducted by the applicant and approved by the director which demonstrates that the proposed development substantially improves water quality by showing all of the following:

(i) Water quality on site is improved through site enhancements and/or other innovative management techniques;

(ii) The development project will not subject downstream channels to increased risk of landslide or erosion; and

(iii) The development project will not subject the nearest sensitive water body to additional hazards resulting from erosion.

(3) No-Disturbance Area Development Standards. The following development standards shall be applied, in addition to all applicable requirements of this chapter, to development proposals located within the no-disturbance area:

(a) Development shall not occur in the no-disturbance area, except for the development activities listed in subsection (3)(a)(i) of this section. Development activities listed in subsection (3)(a)(i) of this section shall only be permitted if they meet the requirements of subsection (3)(a)(ii) of this section.

(i) Development activities may be permitted as follows:

(A) For single-family residences, associated landscaping and any appurtenances on preexisting separate lots;

(B) For utility corridors to service existing development along existing rights-of-way including any vacated portions of otherwise contiguous rights-of-way, or for the construction of utility corridors identified within an adopted water, storm water, or sewer comprehensive plan;

(C) For streets providing sole access to buildable property and associated utility facilities within those streets; or

(D) For public park facilities including parking lots, restrooms or recreational structures and pedestrian trails/sidewalks.

(ii) The development activities listed in subsection (3)(a)(i) of this section may be permitted only if the following requirements are met:

(A) Where applicable under SMC 21A.50.120, a report that meets the requirements of SMC 21A.50.130 shall show that the development activities will not subject the area to risk of landslide or erosion and that the purpose of the no-disturbance area is not compromised in any way;

(B) The development activities shall be mitigated, monitored and bonded consistent with the mitigation requirements applicable to environmentally critical areas;

(C) The development activities are limited to the minimal area and duration necessary for construction; and

(D) The development activities are consistent with this chapter.

(b) New single-family home construction or modifications or additions to existing single-family homes on existing legal lots that will result in a total site impervious surface of more than 2,000 square feet shall provide a drainage design, using the following sequential measures, which appear in order of preference:

(i) Infiltration of all site runoff shall be required to the maximum extent technically feasible in existing soil conditions, consistent with the infiltration system design requirements of the KCSWDM;

(ii) Development proposals that meet the goals of low impact development, as follows:

(A) Sixty-five percent of the site shall remain as open space.

(B) No more than 10 percent of the gross site area may be covered with impervious surface.

(C) The development proposal’s storm water system shall limit storm water discharge volumes to match the average annual volume discharged from the predeveloped forested site conditions as determined using a calibrated continuous simulation hydrologic model based on the EPA’s HSPF program or an approved equivalent model. The City may modify these requirements based upon site-specific analysis of the feasibility of required improvements, standards and specifications. Such analysis shall include evaluation of site and vicinity soils, hydrology, and other factors, as determined by the City, affecting the successful design of the storm water or low impact development improvements. The City shall consider purpose, effectiveness, engineering feasibility, commercial availability of technology, best management practices, safety and cost of the proposal when evaluating a waiver or modification request. The applicant shall bear the burden of proof that a waiver or modification is warranted;

(iii) For development proposals that cannot infiltrate all site runoff, the applicant shall design a drainage system that provides a drainage outlet designed using the best available science techniques in addition to the applicable flow control and water quality treatment standards of the adopted surface water design manual to minimize the risk of landslide or erosion within the no-disturbance area and minimize the risk of water quality impacts to any sensitive water body located downstream of the no-disturbance area; and

(iv) Structural modification of, addition to or replacement of legally created single detached residences and improvements in existence before January 1, 2006, that do not increase the existing total footprint of the residence and associated impervious surface by more than 400 square feet over that existing before January 1, 2006, shall be exempt from the provisions of this subsection.

(4) Development Standards for Properties Draining to the No-Disturbance Area. The following development standards shall be applied, in addition to all applicable requirements of this chapter, to development proposals located within the erosion hazards near sensitive water body overlay that drain to a no-disturbance area:

(a) New proposed subdivisions, short subdivisions, public institutions, commercial site development permits, and binding site plans for sites that drain predeveloped runoff to the no-disturbance zone shall evaluate the suitability of on-site soils for infiltration. All runoff from newly constructed impervious surfaces shall be retained on site unless this requirement precludes a proposed subdivision or short subdivision from achieving 75 percent of the maximum net density as identified in Chapter 21A.25 SMC. When 75 percent of the maximum net density cannot be met, the applicant shall retain runoff on site and a perforated tightline (per the adopted surface water design manual and SMC Title 13, Surface Water Management) shall be used to connect each lot to the central drainage system. The following drainage systems shall be evaluated, using the following sequential measures, which appear in order of preference:

(i) Infiltration of all site runoff shall be required in granular soils as defined in the adopted surface water design manual and SMC Title 13, Surface Water Management;

(ii) Infiltration of downspouts shall be required in granular soils and in soil conditions defined as allowable in the KCSWDM when feasible to fit the required trench lengths on site. All flows not going to an individual infiltration system shall be detained on site using the most restrictive flow control standard; and

(iii) When infiltration of downspouts is not feasible, the applicant shall design a drainage system that will detain flows on site using the applicable flow control standard and shall install an outlet from the drainage system designed using the best available science techniques to limit the risk of landslide or erosion to the no-disturbance area; provided, that in no case shall development proposals generating more than 2,000 square feet of impervious surface create point discharges in or upstream of the no-disturbance or landslide hazard areas.

(b) For the portions of proposed subdivisions, short subdivisions and binding site plans that cannot infiltrate runoff up to the 100-year peak flow, at least 25 percent of the portion of the site that cannot infiltrate shall remain undisturbed and set aside in an open space tract consistent with SMC 21A.50.160 through 21A.50.190. The open space tract shall be located adjacent to any required critical area tracts and shall be designed to maximize the amount of separation between the critical area and the proposed development. If no critical areas tracts are required, the open space tract shall be located to provide additional protection to the no-disturbance area.

(c) For the portions of all subdivisions and short subdivisions that cannot infiltrate runoff up to the 100-year peak flow, no more than 35 percent of the gross site area shall be covered by impervious surfaces. For new subdivisions and short subdivisions, maximum lot coverage should be specified for subsequent residential building permits on individual lots. (Ord. O2017-453 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2009-250 § 1; Ord. O2005-193 § 1)


21A.50.230 Frequently flooded areas.

(1) Frequently flooded areas include all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the City of Sammamish. The areas of special flood hazard are identified by the Federal Insurance Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled “the Flood Insurance Study for King County,” as amended, as stated in SMC 15.10.060. The flood insurance study is on file at Sammamish City Hall. The best available information for flood hazard area identification as outlined in SMC 15.10.130(2) shall be the basis for regulation until a new flood insurance rate map (FIRM) is issued that incorporates the data utilized under SMC 15.10.130(2).

(2) Development in frequently flooded areas shall be subject to the provisions in Chapter 15.10 SMC. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.240 Flood hazard areas – Certification by engineer or surveyor.

Repealed by Ord. O2005-193. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


Channel relocation and stream meander areas.

Repealed by Ord. O2005-193. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.260 Landslide hazard areas – Development standards and permitted alterations.

A development proposal containing, or within 50 feet of, a landslide hazard area shall meet the following requirements:

(1) A minimum buffer of 50 feet shall be established from the top and toe of the landslide hazard area. The buffer shall be extended as required to mitigate a landslide or erosion hazard or as otherwise necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.

(a) The buffer may be reduced to a minimum of 15 feet if, based on a critical areas study, the City determines that the reduction will adequately protect the proposed development and other properties, the critical area and other critical areas off site.

(b) For single-family residential building permits only, the City may reduce the scope of the critical areas study if other development in the area has already provided sufficient information or if such information is otherwise readily available.

(2) In addition to the general requirements for critical areas studies that may be required consistent with SMC 21A.50.130, the critical areas study for a landslide hazard area shall include a geotechnical report prepared by a qualified professional consistent with SMC 21A.15.545, unless otherwise approved by the City, which also includes the following:

(a) A description of the extent and type of vegetative cover;

(b) A description of subsurface conditions based on data from site-specific explorations;

(c) Descriptions of surface and groundwater conditions, public and private sewage disposal systems, fills and excavations, and all structural improvements;

(d) An estimate of the bluff retreat rate that recognizes and reflects potential catastrophic events such as seismic activity or a 100-year storm event;

(e) Consideration of the run-out hazard of landslide debris and/or the impacts of landslide run-out on downslope properties;

(f) Recommendations for building siting limitations;

(g) An analysis of proposed surface and subsurface drainage, and the vulnerability of the site to erosion; and

(h) A comprehensive study of slope stability including an analysis of proposed cuts, fills, and other site grading and construction effects where the overall minimum factor of safety for slope stability is 1.5 for static conditions and 1.1 for seismic conditions as based on current building code seismic design conditions.

(3) Unless otherwise provided herein or as part of an approved alteration, removal of any vegetation from a landslide hazard area or buffer shall be prohibited, except for limited removal of vegetation necessary for surveying purposes and for the removal of hazard trees determined to be unsafe by the City. The City may require the applicant to submit a report prepared by a certified arborist to confirm hazard tree conditions. Notice to the City shall be provided prior to any vegetation removal permitted by this subsection.

(4) Vegetation on slopes within a landslide hazard area or buffer that has been damaged by human activity or infested by noxious weeds may be replaced with native vegetation pursuant to an enhancement plan approved by the City pursuant to SMC 21A.50.060. The use of hazardous substances, pesticides, and fertilizers in landslide hazard areas and their buffers may be prohibited by the City.

(5) Alterations to landslide hazard areas and buffers may be allowed only as follows:

(a) A landslide hazard area located on a slope 40 percent or steeper may be altered only if the alteration meets the following standards and limitations:

(i) Approved surface water conveyances, as specified in the adopted surface water design manual and SMC Title 13, Surface Water Management, may be allowed in a landslide hazard area if they are installed in a manner to minimize disturbance to the slope and vegetation;

(ii) Public and private trails may be allowed in a landslide hazard area subject to the standards and mitigations contained in this chapter, development standards in Chapter 21A.30 SMC, and requirements elsewhere in the SMC, when locating outside of the hazard area is not feasible;

(iii) Utility corridors may be allowed in a landslide hazard area if a critical areas study shows that such alteration will not subject the area to the risk of landslide or erosion;

(iv) Limited trimming and pruning of vegetation may be allowed in a landslide hazard area pursuant to an approved vegetation management plan for the creation and maintenance of views if the soils are not disturbed;

(v) Stabilization of sites where erosion or landsliding threatens public or private structures, utilities, roads, driveways or trails, or where erosion and landsliding threaten any lake, stream, wetland, or shoreline. Stabilization work shall be performed in a manner that causes the least possible disturbance to the slope and its vegetative cover; and

(vi) Reconstruction, remodeling, or replacement of an existing structure upon another portion of an existing impervious surface that was established pursuant to City ordinances and regulations may be allowed; provided:

(A) If within the buffer, the structure is located no closer to the landslide hazard area than the existing structure; and

(B) The existing impervious surface within the buffer or landslide hazard area is not expanded as a result of the reconstruction or replacement.

(b) A landslide hazard area located on a slope less than 40 percent may be altered only if the alteration meets the following requirements:

(i) The development proposal will not decrease slope stability on contiguous properties; and

(ii) Mitigation based on the best available engineering and geological practices is implemented that either eliminates or minimizes the risk of damage, death, or injury resulting from landslides.

(c) Neither buffers nor a critical area tract shall be required if the alteration meets the standards of subsection (5)(b) of this section.

(6) The following are exempt from the provisions of this section:

(a) Slopes that are 40 percent or steeper with a vertical elevation change of up to 20 feet if no adverse impact will result from the exemption based on the City’s review of and concurrence with a soils report prepared by a licensed geologist or geotechnical engineer; and

(b) The approved regrading of any slope that was created through previous legal grading activities. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2009-250 § 1; Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.270 Seismic hazard areas – Development standards and permitted alterations.

A development proposal containing a seismic hazard area shall meet the following requirements:

(1) All applicable building code requirements; and

(2) Alterations to seismic hazard areas may be allowed only as follows:

(a) The evaluation of site-specific subsurface conditions shows that the proposed development site is not located in a seismic hazard area; or

(b) Mitigation based on the best available engineering and geological practices is implemented that either eliminates or minimizes the risk of damage, death, or injury resulting from seismically induced settlement or soil liquefaction. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.280 Critical aquifer recharge areas – Development standards.

(1) Groundwater Quantity Protection Standards. For developments in all CARA classes, the applicant shall provide surface water infiltration as follows:

(a) Seventy-five percent of on-site storm water volume generated from the proposed development shall be infiltrated; provided, that a lesser standard may apply or on-site infiltration may be waived when:

(i) The applicant demonstrates that infiltration is not a reasonable alternative due to site-specific soil and/or geologic conditions;

(ii) It is determined that increased saturation of soils would result in an increased risk to existing facilities and/or adjacent properties;

(iii) Infiltration would result in significant unavoidable impacts to other critical areas or result in an excessive loss of native vegetation; or

(iv) The applicant proposes an addition of no more than 700 square feet of total new impervious surface compared cumulatively to 2005 levels.

(b) If infiltration is not feasible or required, then storm water facilities shall be constructed in accordance with City standards.

(c) The design and implementation of infiltration facilities shall follow the ecology infiltration guidelines specified in the Western Washington Stormwater Manual (2005), or other technical guidance as approved by the City.

(d) To prevent groundwater contamination, storm water infiltration may be prohibited for all or a portion of a site that includes use of hazardous substances.

(2) Groundwater Quality Protection Standards. The following provisions shall apply to development in all CARA classes:

(a) Activities may only be permitted in a critical aquifer recharge area if the proposed activity will not result in a significant increased risk of contamination of drinking water supplies;

(b) The City shall impose development conditions when necessary to prevent degradation of groundwater. Conditions to permits shall be based on known, available and reasonable methods of prevention, control and treatment; and

(c) The proposed activity must comply with the water source protection requirements and recommendations of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, State Department of Ecology, State Department of Health, and the Seattle-King County health district.

(3) Regulation of Facilities Handling and Storing Hazardous Materials Regulated by the State Department of Ecology.

(a) New and existing commercial and industrial land uses and activities located in Class 1 and Class 2 CARAs shall submit a hazardous materials inventory statement with a development proposal.

(b) Report Requirement. Commercial and industrial land uses and activities that involve the use, storage, transport or disposal of hazardous materials as regulated by the state of Washington, in quantities equal to or greater than 20 gallons or the equivalent of 200 pounds, located in Class 1 and Class 2 CARAs, shall submit a critical areas study in accordance with SMC 21A.50.130 including, as necessary, a hydrogeologic critical area assessment report, spill containment and response plan and/or groundwater monitoring plan, except for the following uses/activities:

(i) Retail sale of containers five gallons or less in size, where there are less than 500 total gallons; and

(ii) Hazardous materials of no risk to the aquifer.

(c) A hydrogeologic critical area assessment report, when required by subsection (3)(b) of this section, shall be prepared by a qualified professional to determine potential impacts of contaminants on the aquifer. The report shall include the following site- and proposal-related information, at a minimum:

(i) Information regarding geologic and hydrogeologic characteristics of the site including the surface location of all CARA classes located on site or immediately adjacent to the site and permeability of the unsaturated/vadose zone;

(ii) Groundwater depth, flow direction and gradient;

(iii) Data on wells and springs within 1,300 feet of the project area;

(iv) Location of other critical areas, including surface waters, within 1,300 feet of the project area;

(v) Historic hydrogeologic data for the area to be affected by the proposed activity;

(vi) Best management practices (BMPs) and integrated pest management (IPM) proposed to be used; and

(vii) Discussion of the effects of the proposed project on the groundwater quality and quantity, including:

(A) Predictive evaluation of groundwater withdrawal and recharge effects on nearby wells and surface water features;

(B) Predictive evaluation of contaminant transport based on potential releases to groundwater; and

(C) Predictive evaluation of changes in the infiltration/recharge rate.

(d) A spill containment and response plan, when required by subsection (3)(b) of this section, is required to identify equipment and/or structures that could fail and shall include provisions for inspection as required by the applicable state regulations, repair and replacement of structures and equipment that could fail.

(e) A groundwater monitoring plan, when required by subsection (3)(b) of this section, may be required to monitor quality and quantity of groundwater, surface water runoff, and/or site soils. The City may require the owner of a facility to install one or more groundwater monitoring wells to accommodate the required groundwater monitoring.

(i) Criteria used to determine the need for site monitoring shall include, but not be limited to, the proximity of the facility to production or monitoring wells, the type and quantity of hazardous materials on site, and whether or not the hazardous materials are stored in underground vessels.

(ii) The City may employ an outside consultant at the applicant’s expense to review the monitoring plan and analysis, to ensure that the monitoring plan is followed, and that corrective actions are completed.

(4) Prohibited Uses. Where land uses or materials prohibited in this section are allowed in the Table of Permitted Land Uses (Chapter 21A.20 SMC), this section shall control and the use shall be prohibited.

(a) Table 21A.50.280a identifies land uses and materials prohibited in Class 1, 2 and 3 CARAs for new uses; and

(b) Table 21A.50.280b identifies land uses and materials that should be discontinued, removed and decommissioned where existing in Class 1, 2 and 3 CARAs. The City shall require discontinuation, removal and decommissioning of these uses from Class 1, 2 and 3 CARAs at the time of development and redevelopment, in proportion to the degree and nature of the proposal.

Table 21A.50.280a  

	Prohibited Land Uses and Materials (New Uses/Activities)	Class 1 (1- and 5-year WHPA)	 Class 2 (10-year WHPA)	Class 3 (High Recharge Areas)

	Hazardous liquid transmission pipelines	prohibited	allowed subject to compliance with federal and state standards

	Mining, processing and reclamation of any type	prohibited	prohibited	reviewed under development permit

	Processing, storage, and disposal of radioactive substances (except certain medical uses)	prohibited	prohibited	prohibited

	Underground storage tanks (UST)	prohibited 	prohibited	prohibited

	UST with double walls, vault and monitor	prohibited	allowed subject to compliance with federal and state standards

	Above ground storage tanks for hazardous substances or hazardous waste with primary and secondary containment area and spill protection plan	allowed subject to compliance with federal and state standards

	Wells for class B and private water systems, when located in a water service area	prohibited	prohibited	allowed subject to compliance with federal and state standards

	Golf courses	prohibited	**	**

	Land use activities that require the use of nitrates, phosphorus, pesticides, and other chemicals that have a potential to degrade groundwater and surface water quality when used inappropriately or in excess	prohibited	**	**

	Closed loop geothermal/heat exchange wells used to recirculate a chemical heat transfer fluid other than potable water	prohibited	prohibited

	Closed loop geothermal/heat exchange wells used to recirculate potable water*	prohibited	**

	Open loop geothermal/heat exchange wells	prohibited	prohibited

	Closed loop geothermal/heat exchange systems (surface)	allowed subject to compliance with federal and state standards**	**

	Injection wells (storm water or reclaimed water)	prohibited	prohibited	**

	Cemeteries	prohibited	**	**

	Wrecking yards	prohibited	prohibited	prohibited

	Landfills with hazardous waste, municipal solid waste, or special waste	prohibited	prohibited	prohibited

	Dry cleaning using chlorinated solvents	prohibited	prohibited	prohibited

*    Closed loop geothermal/heat exchange wells shall register their location with the City.

**    Best management practices (BMPs) and integrated pest management (IPM), as applicable, are required for these uses.

Table 21A.50.280b  

	Restricted Land Uses and Materials – (Existing Uses/Activities)	Class 1 (1- and 5-year WHPA)	 Class 2 (10-year WHPA)	Class 3 (High Recharge Areas)

	UST (underground storage tank)	Remove, decommission or upgrade to comply with federal and state standards

	Abandoned wells	Decommission to comply with federal and state standards

	Existing uses that have a long-term potential to degrade water quality in the WHPA	Discontinue, remove or mitigate potential impacts

(5) Requirements for Specific Uses and Activities.

(a) Commercial Vehicle Repair and Servicing.

(i) In all CARA classes, vehicle repair and servicing must be conducted over impermeable pads, with containment curbs, and within a covered structure capable of withstanding normally expected weather conditions. Chemicals used in the process of vehicle repair and servicing must be stored in a manner that protects them from weather and provides containment should leaks occur.

(ii) In all CARA classes, no dry wells shall be allowed on sites used for vehicle repair and servicing. Dry wells existing on the site prior to facility establishment must be abandoned using techniques approved by the State Department of Ecology prior to commencement of the proposed activity.

(b) Use of Pesticides, Herbicides, and Fertilizers.

(i) Residential Use. In all CARA classes, application of household pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers shall not exceed times, rates, concentrations and locations specified on the packaging.

(ii) Other Uses. In Class 1 and 2 CARA areas, proposed developments with maintained landscape areas greater than 10,000 square feet in area shall prepare an operations and maintenance manual using best management practices (BMPs) and integrated pest management (IPM) for fertilizer and pesticide/herbicide applications. The BMPs shall include recommendations on the quantity, timing and type of fertilizers applied to lawns and gardens to protect groundwater quality.

(c) Spreading or Injection of Storm Water or Reclaimed Water. Water reuse projects for reclaimed water and storm water are regulated in accordance with the adopted water, sewer or storm water comprehensive plans that have been approved by the Departments of Ecology and Health. Injection wells are prohibited in Class 1 and 2 CARA areas. Injection wells are allowed, subject to City review and approval, in Class 3 CARA areas provided injection wells shall comply with the requirements of Chapters 173-200 and 173-218 WAC and the Sammamish Municipal Code.

(d) Construction Activity. In all CARA classes, if construction vehicles will be refueled on a construction site and/or the quantity of hazardous materials that will be used or stored on a site exceeds 20 gallons, exclusive of the quantity of hazardous materials contained in fuel or fluid reservoirs of construction vehicles, then persons obtaining construction permits shall provide information to the public works department regarding the types and quantities of hazardous materials that will be on site and then use BMPs to prevent and respond to spills. Construction site refueling must be conducted over impermeable pads, with containment curbs. The operator of the site shall immediately report to the City any spills and is responsible for complete recovery and cleanup.

(e) Fill Quality Standards and Imported Fill Source Statement. In all CARA classes, fill material shall not contain concentrations of contaminants that exceed cleanup standards for soil as specified in the Model Toxics Control Act (MTCA). An imported fill source statement is required for all projects where more than 100 cubic yards of fill will be imported to a site. The City may require analytical results to demonstrate that fill materials do not exceed cleanup standards. The imported fill source statement shall include:

(i) Source location of imported fill;

(ii) Previous land uses of the source location; and

(iii) Whether or not fill to be imported is native, undisturbed soil.

(f) In Class 1 and 2 CARAs, on lots smaller than one acre, new on-site septic systems are prohibited, unless:

(i) The system is approved by the Washington State Department of Health and the system either uses an upflow media filter system or a proprietary packed-bed filter system or is designed to achieve approximately 80 percent total nitrogen removal for typical domestic wastewater; or

(ii) The Seattle-King County department of public health determines that the systems required under subsection (5)(f)(i) of this section will not function on the site.

(g) Geothermal/heat exchange wells are allowed, subject to City review and approval, provided:

(i) The system is approved by the Washington Department of Ecology as compliant with the provisions of Chapter 173-160 WAC; and

(ii) A notice on title is recorded documenting the maintenance requirements of the geothermal/heat exchange wells. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O2005-172 § 4; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.290 Wetlands – Development standards.

A development proposal on a parcel or parcels containing a wetland or associated buffer of a wetland located on site or off site shall meet the following requirements:

(1) Wetlands shall be rated according to the Washington State Wetland Rating System for Western Washington (Department of Ecology, 2014, or as may be amended or revised by the Department from time to time). This document contains the definitions, methods and a rating form for determining the categorization of wetlands described below:

(a) Category 1. Category 1 wetlands include those that receive a score of greater than or equal to 23 through 27 points based on functions, or those that are rated Category 1 based on special characteristics as defined in the rating form.

(b) Category 2. Category 2 wetlands include those that receive a score of 20 through 22 points based on functions, or those that are rated Category 2 based on special characteristics as defined in the rating form.

(c) Category 3. Category 3 wetlands include those that receive a score of 16 through 19 points based on functions.

(d) Category 4. Category 4 wetlands that score equal to or less than 15 points based on functions.

(2) The following standard buffers shall be established from the wetland edge:

	Wetland Category	Standard Buffer Width (ft)

	Category I:	Natural heritage or bog wetlands	 215

	Habitat score 8 – 9	200

	Habitat score 5 – 7	150

	Not meeting above criteria	125

	Category II:	Habitat score 8 – 9	150

	Habitat score 5 – 7	100

	Not meeting above criteria	75

	Category III:	Habitat score 8 – 9	75

	Not meeting above criteria	50

	Category IV:	 	All land use types – 50

	Category III and IV: 	Subject to SMC 21A.50.320

(a) Where a legally established and constructed street transects a wetland buffer, the department may approve a modification of the standard buffer width to the edge of the street if the isolated part of the buffer does not provide additional protection of the wetland and provides insignificant biological, geological or hydrological buffer functions relating to the wetland. If the resulting buffer distance is less than 50 percent of the standard buffer for the applicable wetland category, no further reduction shall be allowed.

(b) In addition to the provisions of SMC 21A.50.060, where a buffer has been previously established on a legally created parcel or tract that was legally established according to the regulations in place at the time of establishment, and is permanently recorded on title or placed within a separate tract, the buffer shall remain as previously established, provided it is equal to or greater than 50 percent of the current required standard buffer distance for the applicable wetland category.

(c) Where wetland functions have been improved due to voluntary implementation of an approved stewardship, restoration and/or enhancement plan that is not associated with required mitigation or enforcement, the standard wetland buffer width shall be determined based on the previously established wetland category and habitat score as documented in the approved stewardship and enhancement plan.

(3) Removal of any native vegetation or woody debris from a wetland or wetland buffer may be allowed only as part of an approved alteration. Only native vegetation can be planted in wetland or buffer areas, unless the planting is otherwise allowed by SMC 21A.50.060, Allowances for existing urban development and other uses.

(4) Activities and uses shall be prohibited from wetlands and associated buffers, except as provided for in this chapter.

(5) Any wetland restored, relocated, replaced, or enhanced because of a wetland alteration shall have the buffer required for the highest wetland class involved.

(6) For a wetland buffer that includes a landslide hazard area, the buffer width shall be the greater of either the buffer width required by the wetland’s category in this section or 25 feet beyond the top of the landslide hazard area.

(7) Buffer Averaging. Buffer width averaging may be allowed by the department if:

(a) It will provide additional protection to wetlands or enhance their functions, as long as the total area contained in the buffer on the development proposal site does not decrease (see also SMC 21A.30.210(5) for buffer compensation requirements for trails);

(b) The wetland contains variations in sensitivity due to existing physical characteristics or the character of the buffer varies in slope, soils, or vegetation, and the wetland would benefit from a wider buffer in places and would not be adversely impacted by a narrower buffer in other places;

(c) The buffer width is not reduced to less than 50 percent of the standard buffer width at any location;

(d) The buffer width is decreased on one part of a wetland and increased on another part of the same wetland feature; and

(e) The buffer is associated with a development proposal and it will not further encumber a neighboring property not owned by the applicant.

(f) Buffer averaging may be used in conjunction with buffer reduction options in this section, provided the total combined reduction does not reduce the buffer to less than 50 percent of standard buffer width at any location.

(8) Increased Buffers. Increased buffer widths may be required by a distance necessary to protect wetland functions and provide connectivity to other wetland and habitat areas when the following occur:

(a) When a Category 1 or 2 wetland with a habitat score of greater than 29 points (per Washington State Wetland Rating System for Western Washington – Department of Ecology 2009 or as revised) is located within 200 feet of the wetland subject to the increased buffer;

(b) Fish and wildlife habitat conservation area and habitat connections are present;

(c) Landslide or erosion hazard areas are contiguous to wetlands;

(d) Groundwater recharge and discharge areas are at risk;

(e) Or to offset buffer impacts, such as trail and utility corridors; and

(f) Ecological wetland functions are at risk including, but not limited to, the following:

(i) Habitat complexity, connectivity and biological functions;

(ii) Seasonal hydrological dynamics as provided in the adopted surface water design manual;

(iii) Sediment removal and erosion control;

(iv) Pollutant removal;

(v) Large wood debris (LWD) recruitment;

(vi) Water temperature;

(vii) Wildlife habitat; and

(viii) Microclimate.

(9) Buffer Reduction. Buffers may be reduced when buffer reduction impacts are mitigated and result in equal or greater protection of the wetland functions. Prior to considering buffer reductions, the applicant shall demonstrate application of mitigation sequencing as required in SMC 21A.50.135. A plan for mitigating buffer-reduction impacts must be prepared using selected incentive-based mitigation options from the list below. The following incentive options for reducing standard buffer widths shall be considered cumulative up to a maximum reduction of 50 percent of the standard buffer width. In all circumstances where a substantial portion of the remaining buffer is degraded, the buffer reduction plan shall include replanting with native vegetation in the degraded portions of the remaining buffer area and shall include a five-year monitoring and maintenance plan.

(a) Up to 20 percent reduction in the standard buffer width may be allowed if water quality is improved in excess of the requirements of the adopted surface water design manual and SMC Title 13, Surface Water Management, through the use of created and/or enhanced wetlands, or ponds supplemental to existing storm drainage and water quality requirements.

(b) Removal of existing impervious surfaces:

(i) Up to 10 percent reduction in standard buffer width if impervious surfaces within the to-be-remaining buffer area are reduced by at least 50 percent; or

(ii) Up to 20 percent reduction in standard buffer width if the to-be-remaining buffer area is presently more than 50 percent impervious and all of it is to be removed.

(c) Removal of invasive, nonnative vegetation: up to 10 percent reduction in standard buffer width for the removal and extended (minimum five-year) monitoring and continued-removal maintenance of relatively dense stands of invasive, nonnative vegetation from significant portions of the remaining buffer area.

(d) Restoration, preservation and maintenance of the existing wetland and buffer vegetation if the following conditions are present and/or attainable as a result of action:

(i) An undisturbed vegetated buffer is preserved in the remaining buffer width; and

(ii) Existing buffer conditions are degraded such that more than 40 percent of the buffer is covered by nonnative/invasive plant species and the buffer is restored according to a City-approved restoration plan to improve wetland buffer functions; and

(iii) Native tree or shrub vegetation covers less than 25 percent of the total buffer area and the area will be revegetated according to a City-approved restoration plan with native trees and shrubs; and

(iv) The wetland buffer has slopes of less than 25 percent; and

(v) The buffer reduction determination and percentage shall be on a site-by-site basis based on the applicant’s plan and demonstration of improvement to water quality and habitat functions.

(e) If not already required under an existing development proposal, installation of oil/water separators for storm water quality control: up to 10 percent reduction in standard buffer width.

(f) Use of pervious material for driveway/road construction: up to 10 percent reduction in standard buffer width.

(g) Restoration of on-site buffer and wetland areas, or restoration of off-site buffer and wetland areas within the same sub-basin of the impacted wetland if no on-site restoration is possible:

(i) Up to 10 percent reduction in standard buffer width if restoration area is at a 2:1 ratio or greater; or

(ii) Up to 20 percent reduction in standard buffer width if restoration area is at a 4:1 ratio or greater.

(h) Removal of significant refuse or sources of toxic material: up to 10 percent reduction in standard buffer width.

(i) Percentages listed above may be added together to create a total buffer reduction; provided, that the total reduction does not exceed 50 percent of the standard buffer width.

(10) The use of hazardous substances, pesticides and fertilizers in the wetland and its buffer may be prohibited by the City.

(11) The introduction of livestock into a wetland or wetland buffer is prohibited. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2009-264 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O2005-172 § 4; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.300 Wetlands – Permitted alterations. 

Alterations to wetlands and wetland buffers are not allowed, except as provided for by complete exemptions, allowances for existing urban development and other uses and exceptions in this chapter or as allowed for by this section.

(1) Alterations may be permitted if the department determines, based upon its review of critical areas studies completed by qualified professionals, that the proposed development will:

(a) Protect, restore or enhance the wildlife habitat, natural drainage, or other valuable functions of the wetland resulting in a net improvement to the functions of the wetland system;

(b) Design, implement, maintain, and monitor a mitigation plan prepared by a qualified professional;

(c) Perform the mitigation under the direction of a qualified professional; and

(d) Will otherwise be consistent with the purposes of this chapter.

(2) If a wetland is in a flood hazard area, the applicant shall notify affected communities and native tribes of proposed alterations prior to any alteration and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.

(3) There shall be no introduction of any nonnative or invasive plant or wildlife into any wetland or wetland buffer except as required by a state or federal permit or approval or as otherwise allowed by SMC 21A.50.060, Allowances for existing urban development and other uses.

(4) Utilities may be allowed in wetland buffers if:

(a) The director determines that no reasonable alternative location is available; and

(b) The utility corridor meets any additional requirements for installation, replacement of vegetation and maintenance, as needed to mitigate impacts.

(5) Sewer utility corridors may be allowed in wetland buffers only if:

(a) The applicant demonstrates that the sewer line location is necessary for gravity flow;

(b) The corridor is not located in a wetland or buffer used by species listed as endangered or threatened by the state or federal government or containing critical or outstanding actual habitat for those species or heron rookeries or raptor nesting trees;

(c) The corridor alignment including, but not limited to, any allowed maintenance roads follows a path farthest from the wetland edge as feasible;

(d) Corridor construction and maintenance protects the wetland and buffer and is aligned to avoid cutting trees greater than 12 inches in diameter at breast height, when possible, and pesticides, herbicides and other hazardous substances are not used;

(e) An additional, contiguous and undisturbed buffer, equal in width to the proposed corridor, including any allowed maintenance roads, is provided to protect the wetland;

(f) The corridor is revegetated with appropriate native vegetation at preconstruction densities or greater immediately upon completion of construction or as soon thereafter as possible, and the sewer utility ensures that such vegetation survives;

(g) Any additional corridor access for maintenance is provided, to the extent possible, at specific points rather than by a parallel road; and

(h) The width of any necessary parallel road providing access for maintenance is as small as possible, but not greater than 15 feet; the road is maintained without the use of herbicides, pesticides or other hazardous substances; and the location of the road is contiguous to the utility corridor on the side away from the wetland.

(6) Joint use of an approved sewer utility corridor by other utilities may be allowed.

(7) Where technically feasible, surface water discharge shall be located outside of the wetland and wetland buffer. Where surface water management is authorized within a wetland or wetland buffer it shall be consistent with Appendix I-D: Guidelines for Wetlands when Managing Stormwater Manual for Western Washington, Volume I, August 2012, Publication No. 12-10-030, as such publication may be amended or revised by the Department of Ecology from time to time.

(8) Public and private trails may be allowed in the outer 25 percent of wetland buffers consistent with the standards and requirements in this chapter, development standards in Chapter 21A.30 SMC, and requirements elsewhere in the SMC. Proposals for constructing viewing platforms, associated access trails, and spur trails must be reviewed by a qualified professional and a critical areas study may be required.

(9) A dock, pier, moorage, float, or launch facility may be allowed, subject to the provisions of SMC Title 25, if:

(a) The existing and zoned density around the wetland is three dwelling units per acre or more;

(b) At least 75 percent of the lots around the wetland have been built upon and no significant buffer or wetland vegetation remains on these lots; and

(c) Open water is a significant component of the wetland.

(10) Crossings. The use of existing crossings, including but not limited to utility corridors, road and railroad rights-of-way within wetlands or buffers for public or private trails is preferred to new crossings, subject to the standards and requirements in the SMC. New wetland road and trail crossings may be allowed if:

(a) The director determines that:

(i) The crossing is identified as a part of a corridor shown in a City-adopted parks or trails plan, park master plan, transportation plan, or comprehensive plan, or otherwise is necessary to connect or construct the road or trail to publicly owned lands, utility corridors, rights-of-way or other public infrastructure, or is required to provide access to property where no other reasonable alternative access is possible; or

(ii) The applicant demonstrates that the new crossing creates less overall or less incremental impacts to critical areas and habitat than the use of an existing corridor while still achieving overall project goals and objectives;

(b) All crossings avoid or minimize impact to the wetland and provide mitigation for unavoidable impacts through restoration, enhancement or replacement of disturbed areas as described in this chapter and in the SMC;

(c) Crossings do not significantly change the overall wetland hydrology;

(d) Crossings do not diminish the flood storage capacity of the wetland; and

(e) All crossings are constructed during summer low water periods.

(11) Enhancement and Restoration. Wetland enhancement or restoration not associated with any other development proposal may be allowed if accomplished according to a plan for its design, implementation, maintenance and monitoring prepared by and carried out under the direction of a qualified professional. Restoration or enhancement must result in a net improvement to the functions of the wetland system.

(12) Wetland Restoration Project. A wetland restoration project for habitat enhancement may be allowed if:

(a) The restoration is approved by all agencies with jurisdiction;

(b) The restoration is not associated with mitigation of a specific development proposal;

(c) The restoration is limited to revegetation of wetlands and their buffers and other specific fish and wildlife habitat improvements that result in a net improvement to the functions of the wetland system;

(d) The restoration should be completed in accordance with best management practices (BMPs) and acceptable standards consistent with best available wetland science to minimize impacts to wetlands; and

(e) The restoration is performed under the direction of a qualified professional. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O2005-172 § 4; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.310 Wetlands – Mitigation requirements.

When mitigation for wetland and/or wetland buffer impacts is required, mitigation shall meet the requirements listed in SMC 21A.50.145 in addition to the following supplementary requirements:

(1) Equivalent or Greater Biological Functions. Mitigation for alterations to wetland(s) and/or wetland buffer(s) shall achieve equivalent or greater biologic functions and shall be consistent with the Department of Ecology Guidance on Wetland Mitigation in Washington State (2004, Department of Ecology Publication No. 06-06-11a and b), as such publication may be amended or revised by the Department of Ecology from time to time.

(2) No Net Loss. Wetland mitigation actions shall not result in a net loss of wetland area.

(3) Functions and Values. Mitigation actions shall address and provide equivalent or greater wetland and buffer functions and values compared to wetland and buffer conditions existing prior to the proposed alteration.

(4) Mitigation Type and Location. Mitigation actions shall be in-kind and conducted within the same sub-basin and on the same site as the alteration except when the following apply:

(a) There are no reasonable on-site opportunities for mitigation, or on-site opportunities do not have a high likelihood of success due to development pressures, adjacent land uses, or on-site buffers or connectivity are inadequate;

(b) Off-site mitigation has a greater likelihood of providing equal or improved wetland functions than the impacted wetland; and

(c) Off-site locations have been identified and evaluated in the following order of preference:

(i) Within the same drainage sub-basin;

(ii) Within the City limits;

(iii) Within the Sammamish service area for an approved fee-in-lieu or mitigation bank program sites within the City limits in accordance with SMC 21A.50.315;

(iv) Within the Sammamish service area for an approved fee-in-lieu or mitigation bank program sites within the WRIA 8 in accordance with SMC 21A.50.315.

(5) Mitigation Timing. Where feasible, mitigation projects shall be completed prior to activities that will disturb wetlands. In all other cases, mitigation shall be completed immediately following disturbance and prior to use or occupancy of the activity or development. Construction of mitigation projects shall be timed to reduce impacts to existing wildlife and flora.

(6) Mitigation Ratios.

(a) Wetland Mitigation Ratios. The following ratios shall apply to required wetland mitigation. The first number specifies the acreage of replacement wetlands and the second specifies the acreage of wetlands altered.

(i) Permanent Wetland Mitigation. The following ratios of area of mitigation to area of alteration apply to mitigation measures for permanent alterations.

 

	Category and type of wetland	Wetland reestablishment or creation	Wetland rehabilitation	1:1 Wetland reestablishment or wetland creation (R/C) and wetland enhancement (E)

	Category I bog	Not allowed	6:1 rehabilitation of a bog	Case-by-case

	Category I natural heritage site	Not allowed 	6:1 rehabilitation of a natural heritage site	Case-by-case

	Category I based on score for functions	4:1	8:1	1:1 R/C and 6:1 E

	Category I forested	6:1	12:1	1:1 R/C and 10:1 E

	Category II	3:1	8:1	1:1 R/C and 4:1 E

	Category III	2:1	4:1	1:1 R/C and 2:1 E

	Category IV	1.5:1	3:1	1:1 R/C and 2:1 E

(ii) Temporary Wetland Mitigation. The following ratios of area of mitigation to area of alteration apply to mitigation measures for temporary alterations where wetlands will not be impacted by permanent fill material:

	Wetland category	Permanent conversion of forested and shrub wetlands into emergent wetlands	Mitigation for temporal loss of forested and shrub wetlands when the impacted wetlands will be revegetated to forest or shrub communities

	 	Enhancement	Rehabilitation	Creation or restoration	Enhancement	Rehabilitation	Creation or restoration

	Category I	6:1	4.5:1	3:1	3:1	2:1	1.5:1

	Category II	3:1	2:1	1.5:1	1.5:1	1:1	.75:1

	Category III	2:1	1.5:1	1:1	1:1	.75:1	.5:1

	Category IV	1.5:1	1:1	.75:1	Not applicable	Not applicable	Not applicable

(b) Wetland Buffer Replacement Ratio. Altered wetland buffer area shall be replaced at a minimum ratio of one-to-one; provided, that the replacement ratio may be increased at the director’s discretion to replace lost functions and values.

(c) Increased Mitigation Ratio. The director may increase the ratios under the following circumstances:

(i) Uncertainty exists as to the probable success of the proposed restoration or creation; or

(ii) A significant period of time will elapse between impact and replication of wetland functions; or

(iii) Proposed mitigation will result in a lower category wetland or reduced functions relative to the wetland being impacted; or

(iv) The impact was an unauthorized impact.

(d) Decreased Mitigation Ratio. The director may decrease these ratios under the following circumstances:

(i) Documentation by a qualified professional demonstrates that the proposed mitigation actions have a very high likelihood of success. This documentation should specifically identify how the proposed mitigation actions are similar to other known mitigation projects with similar site-specific conditions and circumstances that have been shown to be successful;

(ii) Documentation by a qualified professional demonstrates that the proposed mitigation actions will provide functions and values that are significantly greater than the wetland being impacted; or

(iii) The proposed mitigation actions are conducted in advance of the impact and have been shown to be successful over the course of at least one full year.

(e) Minimum Mitigation Ratio. In all cases of permanent wetland impacts, a minimum acreage replacement ratio of one to one shall be required.

(7) Wetland Enhancement as Mitigation. Impacts to wetlands may be mitigated by enhancement of existing significantly degraded wetlands only after a one-to-one minimum acreage replacement ratio has been satisfied. Applicants proposing to enhance wetlands must produce a critical areas study that identifies how enhancement will increase the functions of the degraded wetland and how this increase will adequately mitigate for the loss of wetland function at the impact site.

(8) Restoration Required. Restoration shall be required when a wetland or its buffer is altered in violation of law or without any specific permission or approval by the City in accordance with the following provisions:

(a) A mitigation plan for restoration conforming to the requirements of this chapter and section shall be provided.

(b) On sites where nonnative vegetation was cleared, restoration shall include installation of native vegetation with a density equal to or greater than the pre-altered site conditions. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.315 Wetlands – Alternative mitigation.

(1) Wetland Banking.

(a) Credits from a wetland mitigation bank may be approved for use as compensation for unavoidable impacts to wetlands when:

(i) Criteria in SMC 21A.50.310(4) are met;

(ii) The bank is certified under Chapter 173-700 WAC;

(iii) The department determines that the wetland mitigation bank provides appropriate compensation for the authorized impacts;

(iv) The proposed use of credits is consistent with the terms and conditions of the bank’s certification; and

(v) The compensatory mitigation agreement occurs in advance of authorized impacts.

(b) Replacement ratios for projects using bank credits shall be consistent with replacement ratios specified in the bank’s certification.

(c) Credits from a certified wetland mitigation bank may be used to compensate for impacts located within the service area specified in the bank’s certification. In some cases, bank service areas may include portions of more than one adjacent drainage basin for specific wetland functions.

(d) Implementation of a mitigation bank is subject to City council review and approval.

(2) Fee-in-Lieu Mitigation.

(a) Fee-in-lieu mitigation may be approved for use as compensation for approved impacts to wetlands, when:

(i) The approved wetland impact is related to the approval of a single-family home, City of Sammamish capital improvement project, or development proposal within the Town Center;

(ii) Criteria in SMC 21A.50.310(4) are met;

(iii) The fee-in-lieu mitigation program is state certified;

(iv) The department determines that the wetland fee-in-lieu mitigation provides appropriate compensation for the authorized impacts;

(v) The proposed use of fee-in-lieu mitigation is consistent with the terms and conditions of the fee-in-lieu mitigation program; and

(vi) The compensatory mitigation agreement occurs in advance of authorized impacts.

(b) Fee-in-lieu mitigation may be authorized in the City based upon the following order of preference:

(i) A City approved program that utilizes receiving mitigation sites within the same sub-basin as the approved wetland impact.

(ii) The King County mitigation reserves program, or other approved program that gives priority to sites within the same sub-basin.

(iii) A City approved program, the King County mitigation reserves program, or other approved program that gives priority to sites that will expand or improve habitat for Lake Sammamish Kokanee.

(iv) The King County mitigation reserves program, or other approved program that gives priority to sites within the same sub-basin and/or a predefined service area that includes the City of Sammamish. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1)


21A.50.320 Wetlands – Development flexibilities.

The following alterations shall be authorized if the director determines that the cumulative impacts do not unduly counteract the purposes of this chapter and are mitigated pursuant to an approved mitigation plan:

(1) Isolated wetlands, as defined in SMC 21A.15.1410, and evaluated in a written and approved critical areas study meeting the requirements of SMC 21A.50.130, with a total area of up to 1,000 square feet may be exempted from the avoidance sequencing provisions of SMC 21A.50.135(1)(a). This provision is not applicable within the City of Sammamish shoreline jurisdiction.

(2) Category III and IV wetlands with a total area of 4,000 square feet or less may have the buffer reduced by 15 feet, provided:

(a) The wetland does not score four points or less for habitat in the adopted Western Washington rating system; and

(b) The buffer functions associated with the area of the reduced buffer width are mitigated through the enhancement of the wetland, the remaining on-site wetland buffer area, and/or other adjoining high value habitat areas as needed to replace lost buffer functions and values; and

(c) No subsequent buffer reduction or averaging is authorized.

(3) Pilot Program. In accordance with SMC 25.01.070, this pilot program is not applicable within the City of Sammamish shoreline jurisdiction.

(a) Establishment of Pilot Program. A pilot program is hereby established to allow isolated category III and IV wetlands to be exempted from the avoidance sequencing provisions of SMC 21A.50.135(1)(a) and the provisions of SMC 21A.50.290, subject to the provisions of this section.

(b) Purpose. The purpose of this pilot program is to allow for limited alterations of low habitat value isolated category III and IV wetlands with an area of 4,000 square feet or less, to evaluate the effects of such alterations on hydrologic, habitat, and water quality functions and values.

(c) Application. Applications for eligible projects meeting the provisions of subsections (3)(d) through (g) of this section must be submitted within two calendar years from the effective date of the revision to the Sammamish shoreline master program.

(d) Pilot Program Administration.

(i) Three projects associated with the construction of a single-family home are authorized by this pilot project, subject to the provisions of this section.

(ii) Eligible projects shall be accepted in the order received. To qualify for submittal, an applicant must have a complete application as described in the City’s application material and Chapter 20.05 SMC, and completed any necessary preliminary steps prior to application as set forth in Chapter 20.05 SMC.

(iii) In the event that an application for a project accepted into the pilot program is withdrawn by the applicant or cancelled by the director prior to the expiration of the pilot program, the next submitted application shall be accepted into the pilot program.

(iv) The director shall use the authority under SMC 20.05.100 to ensure expeditious processing of applications. In particular, the director shall set a reasonable deadline for the submittal of corrections, studies, or other information when requested; an extension may be provided based upon a reasonable request. Failure by the applicant to meet a deadline shall be cause for the department to cancel/deny the application.

(e) Eligible Projects. Subject to the limitation in the total number of projects in subsection (3)(d) of this section, wetlands that meet the following criteria may be exempted from the avoidance sequencing provisions of SMC 21A.50.135(1)(a) and the provisions of SMC 21A.50.290 and may be altered. To be eligible, a critical areas study prepared by a qualified professional shall be approved by the director and shall document the following:

(i) The wetland is a category III or IV wetland that is hydrologically isolated from other aquatic resources; and

(ii) The total area of the isolated wetland is 4,000 square feet or less; and

(iii) The wetland is not adjacent to a riparian area; and

(iv) The wetland has a score of 15 points or less for habitat in the adopted Western Washington rating system; and

(v) The wetland does not contain habitat identified as essential for local populations of priority species identified by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife.

(f) Mitigation. Mitigation to replace lost wetland functions and values, consistent with SMC 21A.50.310, shall be prepared for review and approval by the director; and

(g) Monitoring. Monitoring of the effect on biologic, hydrologic, and water quality, and assessment of the performance of required mitigation shall be provided by the applicant for five years following the completion of pilot projects authorized by this section. Annual monitoring reports shall be provided to the City for review and approval. Monitoring shall include the collection and analysis of data for the purpose of understanding and documenting changes in natural ecosystems, functions and features including, but not limited to, gathering baseline data.

(h) No subsequent exemption from the avoidance sequencing provisions of SMC 21A.50.135(1)(a) or 21A.50.290 is authorized for the property participating in this pilot program. (Ord. O2017-431 § 2 (Att. B); Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.322 Wetland management area – Special district overlay.

(1) The purpose of the wetland management area special overlay district is to provide a means to designate certain unique and outstanding wetlands when necessary to protect their functions and values from the impacts created from geographic and hydrologic isolation and impervious surface.

(2) The wetland management area special overlay district shall be designated on critical areas maps maintained by the department of community development.

(3) The following development standards shall be applied in addition to all applicable requirements of this chapter to development proposals located within a wetland management area district overlay:

(a) All development proposals on properties zoned R-1 in wetland management areas shall have a maximum impervious surface area of eight percent of the gross acreage of the site. Distribution of the allowable impervious area among the platted lots shall be recorded on the face of the plat. Impervious surface of existing streets need not be counted towards the allowable impervious area. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the Sammamish Town Center Study Area as identified in Ordinance O2005-185;

(b) All subdivisions and short subdivisions on properties identified in a management area for clustering and set aside requirements in the East Lake Sammamish Basin and Nonpoint Action Plan (1994) shall be required to cluster away from wetlands or the axis of corridors along stream tributaries and identified swales connecting wetlands. At least 50 percent of all portions of the property located within wetland management areas identified for vegetation retention shall be left in native vegetation, preferably forest, and placed in a permanent open space tract. The open space tract shall be designed to maximize the amount of separation between any critical areas and the proposed development. If no critical area tracts are required, the open space tract shall be located to provide additional protection to nearby wetlands;

(c) Clearing and grading activity from October 1st through April 30th shall meet the provisions of SMC 16.15.120(4) wherever not already applicable;

(d) All R-1 zoned properties within wetland management areas, as identified in the East Lake Sammamish Basin and Nonpoint Action Plan, shall retain native vegetation, or revegetate with trees to meet the following standards:

(i) Fifty percent of the site area shall be used to retain trees or revegetate with trees;

(ii) Retained vegetation shall be located primarily within the 50 percent open space area required by SMC 21A.25.030;

(iii) Retained vegetation shall consist primarily of trees with 0.0096 significant trees per square foot;

(iv) Areas revegetated shall provide 0.012 trees per square foot. Planted trees shall be planted primarily in the required open space area and shall be of a caliper or height approved by the director;

(v) The provisions of this section shall not apply to the Sammamish Town Center Study Area as identified in Ordinance O2005-185; and

(e) The director may, based upon review and approval of a critical areas special study, modify the provisions of this chapter to allow for:

(i) The installation of site access; provided, that the applicant shall limit impervious surfaces to the minimum required to grant access; or

(ii) Development using low impact development techniques to achieve standards adopted by the City that will demonstrably minimize development impacts consistent with subsections (3)(a) through (c) of this section. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1)


21A.50.325 Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas – Development standards.

A development proposal that includes a fish and wildlife habitat conservation area or buffer shall meet the following requirements:

(1) When appropriate due to the type of habitat or species present or the project area conditions, the director may require a critical areas study that includes a habitat management plan consistent with the latest guidance from the Department of Fish and Wildlife. If the habitat conservation area is also classified as a stream, lake or wetland, then the stream, lake or wetland protection standards shall apply and habitat management shall be addressed as part of the stream, lake or wetland review; provided, that the City may impose additional requirements when necessary to provide for protection of the habitat conservation areas consistent with this chapter.

(2) The director may require the following site- and proposal-related information with the critical areas study:

(a) Identification of any endangered, threatened, sensitive or candidate species that has a primary association with habitat on or adjacent to the project area, and an assessment of potential project impacts to the species;

(b) A discussion of any federal or state management recommendations, including Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife habitat management recommendations, that have been developed for species or habitats located on or adjacent to the project area;

(c) A discussion of any ongoing management practices that will protect habitat after the project site has been developed, including any proposed monitoring, maintenance, and adaptive management programs;

(d) When appropriate due to the type of habitat or species present or the project area conditions, the director may also require the habitat management plan to include an evaluation by the State Department of Fish and Wildlife, local Native American Indian Tribe, or other qualified professional regarding the applicant’s analysis and the effectiveness of any proposed mitigating measures or programs, to include any recommendations as appropriate; and

(e) When appropriate, information from the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife’s backyard wildlife sanctuary program shall be included.

(3) General Requirements. Habitat conservation areas that are on Lake Sammamish, Pine Lake, and Beaver Lake shall be governed by the requirements of the Sammamish shoreline master program. Other habitat conservation areas are subject to the following provisions:

(a) The department shall require the establishment of buffer areas for development activities in, or adjacent to, habitat conservation areas when needed to protect habitat conservation areas. Buffers shall consist of an undisturbed area of native vegetation, or areas identified for restoration, established to protect the integrity and functions of the habitat. Required buffer widths shall consider the management recommendations identified in subsection (2) of this section and reflect the sensitivity of the habitat and the type and intensity of human activity proposed to be conducted nearby. When a species is more susceptible to adverse impacts during specific periods of the year, seasonal restrictions may apply. Development activities may be further restricted and buffers may be increased during the specified season.

(b) Where applicable, a fish and wildlife habitat corridor shall be established as required in SMC 21A.50.327.

(c) A habitat conservation area may be altered only if the proposed alteration of the habitat or the mitigation proposed does not reduce the quantitative and qualitative functions and values of the habitat, except in accordance with this chapter.

(d) In addition to the provisions of SMC 21A.50.060, removal of any native vegetation or woody debris from the habitat conservation area may be allowed only as part of an approved habitat management plan, critical areas study, and/or alteration plan.

(e) Low impact uses and development activities which are consistent with the purpose and function of the habitat conservation area and do not detract from its integrity may be permitted within the conservation area depending on the sensitivity of the habitat area. Examples of uses and development activities which may be permitted in appropriate cases include trails that are pervious, viewing platforms, storm water management facilities such as grass-lined swales, utility easements and other similar uses and development activities; provided, that any impacts to the habitat resulting from such permitted facilities shall be fully mitigated.

(f) Whenever development activities are proposed in or adjacent to a habitat conservation area with which state or federally endangered or threatened species have a primary association, such area shall be protected through the application of measures in accordance with a critical areas report prepared by a qualified professional and approved by the City of Sammamish, with guidance provided by the appropriate state and/or federal agencies.

(g) Plant, wildlife, or fish species not indigenous to the coastal region of the Pacific Northwest shall not be introduced into habitat conservation areas unless authorized by this chapter and by any required state or federal permit or approval.

(h) Mitigation sites shall be located to achieve contiguous wildlife habitat corridors in accordance with a mitigation plan that is part of an approved critical areas report to minimize the isolating effects of development on habitat areas, so long as mitigation of aquatic habitat is located within the same aquatic ecosystem as the area disturbed.

(i) The director shall condition approvals of development activities allowed within or adjacent to a habitat conservation area or its buffers, as necessary, to minimize or mitigate any potential adverse impacts. Conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:

(i) Establishment of buffer zones;

(ii) Preservation of critically important vegetation;

(iii) Limitation of public access to the habitat area, including fencing to deter unauthorized access;

(iv) Seasonal restriction of development activities;

(v) Establishment of a duration and timetable for periodic review of mitigation activities; and

(vi) Requirement of a performance bond, when necessary, to ensure completion and success of proposed mitigation.

(j) Mitigation of alterations to habitat conservation areas shall achieve equivalent or greater biologic functions, and shall include mitigation for adverse impacts from the proposed development as appropriate. Mitigation shall address each function affected by the alteration to achieve functional equivalency or improvement on a per-function basis. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1)


21A.50.327 Fish and wildlife habitat corridors.

On development proposal sites that contain Type F or Np streams and/or wetlands with a high habitat score greater than or equal to eight, that are also located within 200 feet of an on-site or off-site Type F or Np stream and/or wetland with a high habitat score greater than or equal to eight, a fish and wildlife habitat corridor shall be set aside and protected as follows:

(1) Subdivisions and short subdivisions shall either place the corridor in a contiguous permanent open space tract with all developable lots sited on the remaining portion of the project site, or shall design the lots so that conservation easements on individual lots can form a contiguous easement covering the corridor.

(2) Individual lots shall place the corridor in a conservation easement.

(3) The fish and wildlife habitat corridor shall be sited on the property in order to meet the following conditions, where feasible:

(a) Forms one contiguous tract that connects on-site high value habitat areas to other on-site or off-site high value habitat areas;

(b) New development proposals shall provide a minimum fish and wildlife habitat corridor width of 300 feet or a corridor width that is consistent with an approved habitat management plan;

(c) In addition to the provisions of SMC 21A.50.060, development proposals on sites constrained by a fish and wildlife habitat corridor and where development already exists shall maintain a minimum fish and wildlife habitat corridor width of 300 feet unless, through an approved habitat management plan, it can be shown that a lesser habitat corridor width supports and maintains the corridor’s function and value;

(d) Be contiguous with and include and/or connect critical areas, buffers, and open space tracts or wooded areas on site or on adjacent properties, if present; and

(e) The director may modify corridor widths based on supporting documentation from an approved habitat management plan.

(4) Fish and wildlife habitat corridors do not parallel Type Np streams, except as required to provide a connection between two features as described above.

(5) A management plan for the wildlife corridor contained within a tract or tracts shall be prepared that specifies the permissible extent of recreation, forestry or other uses compatible with preserving and enhancing the wildlife habitat value of the tract or tracts. The management plan shall be reviewed and approved by the department. The approved management plan for a subdivision shall be contained within and recorded with the covenants, conditions and restrictions (CCRs). If the wildlife corridor is contained in a conservation easement, a management plan is not required, but may be submitted to the department for review and approval, and recorded with the conservation easement.

(6) Clearing within the wildlife corridor contained in a tract or tracts shall be limited to that allowed by the management plan or as otherwise allowed by this chapter. No clearing, including the removal of woody debris, shall be allowed within a wildlife corridor contained within a conservation easement on individual lots, unless the property owner has an approved management plan.

(7) Where feasible, a homeowners’ association or other entity capable of long-term maintenance and operation shall be established to monitor and assure compliance with the management plan. The association shall provide homeowners with information on the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife’s backyard wildlife sanctuary program.

(8) Wildlife corridors set aside in tracts or conservation easements shall meet the provisions in SMC 16.15.120.

(9) The permanent open space tract containing the wildlife corridor may be credited toward the other applicable requirements such as surface water management and the recreation space requirement of SMC 21A.30.140, provided the proposed uses within the tract are compatible with preserving and enhancing the wildlife habitat value. Restrictions on other uses within the wildlife corridor tract shall be clearly identified in the management plan.

(10) Low impact uses and activities which are consistent with the purpose and function of the habitat corridor and do not detract from its integrity may be permitted within the corridor depending on the sensitivity of the habitat area. Examples of uses and activities which may be permitted in appropriate cases include trails that are pervious, viewing platforms, storm water management facilities such as grass-lined swales, utility easements and other similar uses, or activities otherwise described and approved by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife; provided, that any impacts to the corridor resulting from such permitted facilities shall be fully mitigated.

(11) At the discretion of the director, these standards may be waived or reduced for public facilities such as schools, fire stations, parks, and public road projects. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1)


21A.50.330 Streams – Development standards.

A development proposal on a parcel or parcels containing a stream or associated buffer of a stream located on site or off site shall meet the following requirements:

(1) The following standard buffers shall be established from the ordinary high water mark or from the top of the bank if the ordinary high water mark cannot be identified:

	Stream Type	Standard Buffer Width (ft)

	Type S:	150

	Type F:	150

	Type Np:	75

	Type Ns:	50

(a) Where a legally established and constructed street transects a stream buffer, the department may approve a modification of the standard buffer width to the edge of the street if the isolated part of the buffer does not provide additional protection of the stream and provides insignificant biological, geological or hydrological buffer functions relating to the stream. If the resulting buffer distance is less than 50 percent of the standard buffer, no further reduction shall be allowed.

(b) Where a buffer has been previously established on a legally created parcel or tract that was legally established according to the regulations in place at the time of establishment, and is permanently recorded on title or placed within a separate tract, the buffer shall remain as previously established, provided it is equal to or greater than 50 percent of the required standard buffer distance for the applicable stream category.

(2) Any stream with an ordinary high water mark within 25 feet of the toe of a slope 30 percent or steeper, but less than 40 percent, shall have:

(a) The minimum buffer required for the stream class involved or a 25-foot buffer beyond the top of the slope, whichever is greater, if the horizontal length of the slope, including small benches and terraces, is within the buffer for that stream class; or

(b) A 25-foot buffer beyond the minimum buffer width required for the stream class involved if the horizontal length of the slope, including small benches and terraces, extends beyond the buffer for that stream class.

(3) Any stream adjoined by a riparian wetland or other contiguous critical area shall have the buffer required for the stream type involved or the buffer that applies to the wetland or other critical area, whichever is greater.

(4) Buffer Averaging. Buffer width averaging may be allowed by the City if:

(a) It will provide additional natural resource protection, as long as the total area contained in the buffer on the development proposal site does not decrease (see also SMC 21A.30.210(4) for buffer compensation requirements for trails);

(b) The stream contains variations in sensitivity due to existing physical characteristics or the character of the buffer varies in slope, soils, or vegetation, and the stream would benefit from a wider buffer in places and would not be adversely impacted by a narrower buffer in other places;

(c) The buffer width is not reduced to less than 50 percent of the standard buffer;

(d) The buffer is associated with a development proposal and it will not further encumber a neighboring property not owned by the applicant; and

(e) Buffer averaging may be used in conjunction with buffer reduction options in this section, provided the total combined reduction does not reduce the buffer to less than 50 percent of the standard buffer width at any location.

(5) Increased Buffers. Increased buffer widths may be required by a distance necessary to protect:

(a) Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas and habitat connections based on an approved habitat management plan as defined by the Department of Fish and Wildlife;

(b) Landslide or erosion hazard areas contiguous to streams;

(c) Groundwater recharge and discharge area;

(d) Or to offset buffer impacts, such as trail and utility corridors; and

(e) At-risk ecological stream functions including, but not limited to, the following:

(i) Habitat complexity, connectivity and biological functions;

(ii) Seasonal hydrological dynamics as provided in the adopted surface water design manual;

(iii) Sediment removal and erosion control;

(iv) Pollutant removal;

(v) Large wood debris (LWD) recruitment;

(vi) Water temperature;

(vii) Wildlife habitat; and

(viii) Microclimate.

(6) Buffer Reduction. Buffers may be reduced when buffer-reduction impacts are mitigated and result in equal or greater protection of the ecological stream functions. Prior to considering buffer reductions, the applicant shall demonstrate application of mitigation sequencing as required in SMC 21A.50.135. A plan for mitigating buffer-reduction impacts must be prepared using selected incentive-based mitigation options from the list below, and is subject to approval by the City. The following incentive options for reducing standard buffer widths shall be considered cumulative up to a maximum reduction of 50 percent of the standard buffer width. In all circumstances where a substantial portion of the remaining buffer is degraded, the buffer reduction plan shall include replanting with native vegetation in the degraded portions of the remaining buffer area and shall include a five-year monitoring and maintenance plan.

(a) Up to 20 percent reduction in the standard buffer width may be allowed if water quality is improved in excess of the requirements of the adopted surface water design manual and SMC Title 13, Surface Water Management, through the use of created and/or enhanced wetlands, or ponds supplemental to existing storm drainage and water quality requirements.

(b) Removal of existing impervious surfaces:

(i) Up to 10 percent reduction in standard buffer width if impervious surfaces within the to-be-remaining buffer area are reduced by at least 50 percent; or

(ii) Up to 20 percent reduction in standard buffer width if the to-be-remaining buffer area is presently more than 50 percent impervious and all of it is to be removed.

(c) Removal of invasive, nonnative vegetation: up to 10 percent reduction in standard buffer width for the removal and extended (minimum five-year) monitoring and continued-removal maintenance of relatively dense stands of invasive, nonnative vegetation from significant portions of the remaining buffer area.

(d) Restoration, preservation and maintenance of the existing stream and buffer vegetation if the following conditions are present and/or attainable as a result of action:

(i) An undisturbed vegetated buffer is preserved in the remaining buffer width; and

(ii) Existing buffer conditions are degraded such that more than 40 percent of the buffer is covered by nonnative/invasive plant species and the buffer is restored according to a City-approved restoration plan to improve wetland buffer functions; and

(iii) Native tree or shrub vegetation covers less than 25 percent of the total buffer area and the area will be revegetated according to a City-approved restoration plan with native trees and shrubs to replace impacted buffer functions; and

(iv) The stream buffer has slopes of less than 25 percent; and

(v) The buffer reduction determination and percentage shall be on a site-by-site basis based on the applicant’s plan and demonstration of improvement to water quality and habitat functions.

(e) In-stream habitat enhancement:

(i) Up to 20 percent reduction in standard buffer width for log structure placement, bioengineered bank stabilization, or culvert removal; or

(ii) Up to 30 percent reduction in standard buffer width for improving fish passage and/or creation of side channel or backwater areas.

(f) If not already required under an existing development proposal, installation of oil/water separators for storm water quality control: up to 10 percent reduction in standard buffer width.

(g) Use of pervious material for driveway/road construction: up to 10 percent reduction in standard buffer width.

(h) Restoration of on-site buffer and habitat areas, or restoration of off-site buffer and habitat areas within the same sub-basin of the impacted stream if no on-site restoration is possible:

(i) Up to 10 percent reduction in standard buffer width if restoration area is at a 2:1 ratio or greater; or

(ii) Up to 20 percent reduction in standard buffer width if restoration area is at a 4:1 ratio or greater.

(i) Removal of significant refuse or sources of toxic material: up to 10 percent reduction in standard buffer width.

(7) The use of hazardous substances, pesticides and fertilizers in the stream corridor and its buffer may be prohibited by the City.

(8) The introduction of livestock into a stream or stream buffer is prohibited.

(9) In addition to the provisions of SMC 21A.50.060, removal of any native vegetation or woody debris from the stream or stream buffer may be allowed only as part of an approved habitat management plan, critical areas study, and/or alteration plan. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O2005-172 § 4; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.340 Streams – Permitted alterations.

Alterations to streams and stream buffers are not allowed except as provided for by complete exemptions, allowances for existing urban development and other uses, and exceptions in this chapter or as allowed for by this section.

(1) Alterations may only be permitted if based upon a critical areas study conducted in accordance with SMC 21A.50.130 that determines the proposed development will:

(a) Protect, restore or enhance the habitat, natural drainage, or other valuable functions of the stream resulting in a net improvement to the stream and stream buffer;

(b) Design, implement, maintain and monitor a restoration or enhancement plan prepared by a qualified professional;

(c) Perform the restoration or enhancement under the direction of a qualified professional; and

(d) Will otherwise be consistent with the purposes of this chapter.

(2) The applicant shall notify affected communities and native tribes of proposed alterations prior to any alteration if a stream is in a flood hazard area and shall submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.

(3) There shall be no introduction of any plant or wildlife which is not indigenous to the coastal region of the Pacific Northwest into any stream or buffer unless required by a state or federal permit or approval or as otherwise allowed by SMC 21A.50.060, Allowances for existing urban development and other uses.

(4) Utilities may be allowed in stream buffers if:

(a) No reasonable alternative location is available;

(b) The utility corridor meets any additional requirements for installation, replacement of vegetation and maintenance, as needed to mitigate impacts;

(c) The requirements for sewer utility corridors in SMC 21A.50.300 shall also apply to streams; and

(d) Joint use of an approved sewer utility corridor by other utilities may be allowed.

(5) Where technically feasible, surface water discharge shall be located outside of the stream and stream buffer. If surface water discharge to a stream or stream buffer is unavoidable, the following management activities and provisions shall apply:

(a) Surface water discharge to a stream from a flow control or water quality treatment facility, sediment pond or other surface water management activity or facility may be allowed if the discharge is in compliance with the applicable City-adopted storm water requirements.

(b) A Type Ns stream buffer may be used as a regional storm water management facility if:

(i) A public agency and utility exception is granted pursuant to SMC 21A.50.070;

(ii) All requirements of the applicable City-adopted storm water requirements are met;

(iii) The use will not lower the rating or alter the factors used in rating the stream; and

(iv) There are no significant adverse impacts to the stream or habitat.

(6) Except as provided in subsection (7) of this section, public and private trails may be allowed in stream buffers consistent with the standards and requirements in this chapter, the development standards in Chapter 21A.30 SMC, and requirements elsewhere in the SMC. Proposals for constructing viewing platforms, associated access trails, and spur trails must be reviewed by a qualified professional and a critical areas study may be required.

(7) Crossings. The use of existing crossings, including but not limited to utility corridors, road and railroad rights-of-way across streams or buffers for public or private trails is preferred to new crossings, subject to the standards and requirements in the SMC. New stream crossings may be allowed and may encroach on the otherwise required stream buffer if:

(a) Bridges, bottomless culverts or other appropriate methods demonstrated to provide fisheries protection shall be used for stream crossings and the applicant shall demonstrate that such methods and their implementation will pose no harm to the stream habitat or inhibit migration of anadromous fish;

(b) All crossings are constructed during the summer low flow and are timed to avoid stream disturbance during periods when use is critical to resident or anadromous fish including salmonids;

(c) Crossings do not occur over spawning areas used by resident or anadromous fish including salmonids unless the City determines that no other reasonable crossing site exists;

(d) Bridge piers or abutments are not placed within the FEMA floodway or the ordinary high water mark;

(e) Crossings do not diminish the flood-carrying capacity of the stream;

(f) Underground utility crossings are laterally drilled and located at a depth of four feet below the maximum depth of scour for the base flood predicted by a civil engineer licensed by the state of Washington. Temporary bore pits to perform such crossings may be permitted within the stream buffer established in SMC 21A.50.330. Crossing of Type Ns streams when dry may be made with open cuts;

(g) Trail crossings shall use bridges and boardwalks consistent with the design requirements of the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife (WDFW, 2003, Design of Road Culverts for Fish Passage, as amended); and

(h) The number of crossings is minimized and consolidated to serve multiple purposes and properties whenever possible.

(8) Relocations. Stream relocations may be allowed only for:

(a) Type F, Np, and Ns streams as part of a public road, trail, or park project for which a public agency and utility exception is granted pursuant to SMC 21A.50.050; and

(b) Type F, Np and Ns streams for the purpose of enhancing resources in the stream if:

(i) Appropriate floodplain protection measures are used; and

(ii) The relocation occurs on site, except that relocation off site may be allowed if the applicant demonstrates that any on-site relocation is impracticable, the applicant provides all necessary easements and waivers from affected property owners and the off-site location is in the same drainage sub-basin as the original stream.

(9) For any relocation allowed by this section, the applicant shall demonstrate, based on information provided by qualified professionals, including a civil engineer and a biologist, that:

(a) The equivalent base flood storage volume and function will be maintained;

(b) There will be no adverse impact to local groundwater;

(c) There will be no increase in velocity;

(d) There will be no interbasin transfer of water;

(e) There will be no increase in sediment load;

(f) Requirements set out in the mitigation plan are met;

(g) The relocation conforms to other applicable laws; and

(h) All work will be carried out under the direct supervision of a qualified biologist.

(10) A stream channel may be stabilized if:

(a) Movement of the stream channel threatens existing residential or commercial structures, public facilities or improvements, unique natural resources or the only existing access to property;

(b) The stabilization is done in compliance with the requirements of SMC 21A.50.230; and

(c) Soft-bank stabilization techniques are utilized unless the applicant demonstrates that soft-bank techniques are not a reasonable alternative due to site-specific soil, geologic and/or hydrologic conditions.

(11) Replacement of existing culverts to enhance stream habitat, not associated with any other development proposal, may be allowed if accomplished according to a plan for its design, implementation, maintenance, and monitoring prepared by qualified professionals, including a civil engineer and a biologist, and carried out under the direction of a qualified biologist.

(12) Stream and habitat restoration or enhancement may be allowed if:

(a) The restoration is sponsored or approved by a public agency with a mandate to do such work;

(b) The restoration is unassociated with mitigation of a specific development proposal;

(c) The restoration is limited to placement of rock weirs, log controls, spawning gravel, and other specific habitat improvements for resident or anadromous fish including salmonids;

(d) The restoration only involves the use of hand labor and light equipment; or the use of helicopters and cranes that deliver supplies to the project site; provided, that they have no contact with critical areas or their buffers;

(e) The restoration is performed under the direction of qualified professionals; and

(f) Stream relocation, if proposed, may be approved pursuant to subsection (9) of this section as part of an approved restoration plan.

(13) Roadside ditches that carry streams with salmonids may be maintained through the use of best management practices developed in consultation with relevant City, state, and federal agencies. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O2005-172 § 4; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.350 Streams – Mitigation requirements. 

When mitigation for stream or stream buffer impacts is required, mitigation shall meet the requirements listed in SMC 21A.50.145 in addition to the following supplementary requirements:

(1) Equivalent or Greater Functions. Mitigation for alterations to stream(s) and/or stream buffer(s) shall achieve equivalent or greater functions including, but not limited to:

(a) Habitat complexity, connectivity, and other biological functions;

(b) Seasonal hydrological dynamics, water storage capacity and water quality; and

(c) Geomorphic and habitat processes and functions.

(2) Mitigation Type and Location. Mitigation actions shall be in-kind and conducted within the same sub-basin and on the same site as the alteration, except when the following apply:

(a) There are no reasonable on-site opportunities for mitigation or on-site opportunities do not have a high likelihood of success due to development pressures, adjacent land uses, or on-site buffers or connectivity are inadequate;

(b) Off-site mitigation has a greater likelihood of providing equal or improved functions than the impacted stream; and

(c) Off-site locations have been identified and evaluated in the following order of preference:

(i) Within the same drainage sub-basin;

(ii) Within the City limits;

(iii) Within the Sammamish service area for an approved fee-in-lieu or mitigation bank program sites within the City limits in accordance with the provisions of this section;

(iv) Within the Sammamish service area for an approved fee-in-lieu or mitigation bank program sites within the WRIA 8 in accordance with the provisions of this section.

(3) Fee-In-Lieu Stream Mitigation Program. Fee-in-lieu mitigation may be authorized for approved stream impacts; provided, that the impact is related to the approval of a single-family home, City of Sammamish capital improvement project, or development proposal within the Town Center. Fee-in-lieu mitigation shall be subject to the avoidance sequence requirements and mitigation measures of this title, and the approval of a program by the City, to be used in the following order of preference:

(a) A City approved program that utilizes receiving mitigation sites within the same sub-basin as the approved wetland impact.

(b) The King County mitigation reserves program, or other approved program that gives priority to sites within the same sub-basin.

(c) A City approved program, the King County mitigation reserves program, or other approved program that gives priority to sites that will expand or improve habitat for Lake Sammamish Kokanee.

(d) The King County mitigation reserves program, or other approved program that gives priority to sites within the same sub-basin and/or a predefined service area that includes the City of Sammamish.

(4) Mitigation Timing. Where feasible, mitigation projects shall be completed prior to activities that will disturb streams. In all other cases, mitigation shall be completed immediately following disturbance and prior to use or occupancy of the activity or development. Construction of mitigation projects shall be timed to reduce impacts to existing wildlife and flora.

(5) Restoration Required. Restoration shall be required when a stream or its buffer is altered in violation of law or without any specific permission or approval by the City. A mitigation plan for restoration shall conform to the requirements of this chapter and demonstrate that:

(a) The restoration will reliably and demonstrably improve the water quality and fish and wildlife habitat of the stream;

(b) The restoration will have no lasting significant adverse impact on any stream functions; and

(c) On sites where nonnative vegetation was cleared, restoration shall include installation of native vegetation with a density equal to or greater than the pre-altered site conditions.

(6) Surface water management or flood control alterations shall not be considered enhancement unless other functions are simultaneously improved. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O2005-172 § 4; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.351 Ponds – Development standards.

Repealed by Ord. O2013-350. (Ord. O2009-264 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1)


21A.50.352 Lake Sammamish buffer – Permitted alterations.

Repealed by Ord. O2009-264. (Ord. O2005-193 § 1)


21A.50.355 Lake management areas – Special district overlay.

(1) The purpose of lake management areas is to designate the Beaver Lake and Pine Lake watersheds as special management areas for total phosphorus loading control and to establish standard procedures for evaluating drainage plans and related materials for applications of development within the Beaver Lake and Pine Lake Watersheds (within the East Lake Sammamish drainage basin).

(2) The lake management areas special overlay district shall be designated on critical areas maps maintained by the department of community development.

(3) The Beaver Lake watershed as generally identified in the Beaver Lake management plan, which is available at the City of Sammamish community development department, is a sensitive lake and is hereby designated a critical drainage area. This designation is:

(a) Existing whole-lake total phosphorus concentration for the combined Beaver Lake system is 23 micrograms/liter. Beaver Lake 1 and Beaver Lake 2, individually, have whole-lake total phosphorus concentrations of 36 (±2) micrograms/liter and 20 (±1) micrograms/liter, respectively;

(b) Whole-lake total phosphorus concentration, chlorophyll a, and Secchi depth indicate that the Beaver Lake system is bordering on eutrophic conditions;

(c) Modeling of the Beaver Lake system’s future trophic status indicates that the lake will become hypereutrophic with a whole-lake total phosphorus concentration predicted to be 36 micrograms/liter without additional phosphorus removal via storm water treatment; and

(d) Maintaining existing trophic status is a management plan goal. To maintain existing trophic status, an 80 percent total phosphorus annual loading removal goal was established for new impervious surface development prior to storm water discharges to Beaver Lake.

(4) The Pine Lake watershed is generally identified in the City of Sammamish Comprehensive Plan (Figure IV-1 in the Comprehensive Plan or as updated). All appropriate Beaver Lake specific water quality regulations shall be extended to the Pine Lake drainage basin.

(a) These regulations shall only be in effect until such time that a customized Pine Lake water quality strategy is developed and development regulations are adopted based on approved findings of the study.

(b) An applicant for development within the Pine Lake drainage basin may apply for a variance from the standards specified in subsection (7) of this section if it can be proven that conditions are clearly different than at Beaver Lake.

(5) The standards specified in subsection (7) of this section shall apply to all development proposals located within the Beaver Lake and Pine Lake watersheds which require drainage review as specified in the adopted surface water design manual and SMC Title 13, Surface Water Management.

(6) Development proposals within the Beaver Lake or Pine Lake watersheds may be exempt from management plan requirements if they demonstrate to the satisfaction of the community development department that on-site surface and storm water runoff drainage does not in fact drain into the basin in question.

(7) Phosphorous Control Required.

(a) Applicability. Unless the conditions identified in subsection (6) of this section are documented to the satisfaction of the department, the following development proposals are subject to the conditions and standards contained in subsections (7)(b) through (7)(d) of this section:

(i) Projects that create greater than 5,000 square feet of new impervious surface subject to vehicular use in the Beaver Lake or Pine Lake watersheds; or

(ii) Projects that create greater than one acre of pollution generating pervious surface, as defined in the adopted surface water design manual and SMC Title 13, Surface Water Management, in the Beaver Lake or Pine Lake watersheds.

(b) The proposed storm water facilities shall be designed to remove 80 percent of all new total phosphorus loading on an annual basis due to new development (and associated storm water discharges) in the Beaver Lake or Pine Lake watersheds where feasible or utilize AKART if infeasible.

(c) The AKART standard or best management practices for phosphorus-sensitive lakes can be fulfilled by achieving the 50 percent phosphorous removal standard from the adopted surface water design manual and SMC Title 13, Surface Water Management, together with additional applicant proposed measures:

(i) For all development proposals subject to this section, the applicant shall demonstrate that a reduction of 80 percent total phosphorous is achievable through the use of engineering design computations.

(ii) As the adopted King County surface water design manual is updated and additional treatment options and designs for total phosphorus removal become available, new treatment systems may be approved by the City if the AKART standard for phosphorus removal can be demonstrated using the Department of Ecology’s Technology Assessment Protocol – Ecology (TAPE protocol).

(iii) Where soils are suitable, on-site infiltration of storm water runoff can be pursued through the variance process as an AKART alternative using methods described in the manual, as well as providing an organic soil layer consistent with the standards of the adopted surface water design manual and SMC Title 13, Surface Water Management.

(iv) Development proposals using on-site infiltration that do not comply with subsection (7)(c)(iii) of this section shall demonstrate that 80 percent, or better, phosphorus treatment can be expected with the designed on-site infiltration system, rather than by methods described in subsection (7)(c)(iii) of this section.

(d) Hydrologic analysis shall be determined using a continuous hydrologic model such as the Hydrologic Simulation Program – Fortran (HSPF) or the King County runoff time series program (KCRTS) methodology. These methodologies may be revised or superseded by other methodologies for achieving the same performance goal as stipulated by future revision to the surface water design manual. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1)


21A.50.360 Critical areas mitigation fee – Creation of fund.

Repealed by Ord. O2013-350. (Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.370 Critical areas mitigation fee – Source of funds.

Repealed by Ord. O2013-350. (Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.380 Critical areas mitigation fee – Use of funds. 

Repealed by Ord. O2013-350. (Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.390 Critical areas mitigation fee – Investment of funds.

Repealed by Ord. O2013-350. (Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.400 Sunset provisions.

Repealed by Ord. O2013-350. (Ord. O2013-347 § 1; Ord. O2012-338 § 1; Ord. O2011-315 § 1; Ord. O2009-274 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1)


21A.50.260 Landslide hazard areas – Development standards and permitted alterations.

A development proposal containing, or within 50 feet of, a landslide hazard area shall meet the following requirements:

(1) A minimum buffer of 50 feet shall be established from the top and toe of the landslide hazard area. The buffer shall be extended as required to mitigate a landslide or erosion hazard or as otherwise necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.

(a) The buffer may be reduced to a minimum of 15 feet if, based on a critical areas study, the City determines that the reduction will adequately protect the proposed development and other properties, the critical area and other critical areas off site.

(b) For single-family residential building permits only, the City may reduce the scope of the critical areas study if other development in the area has already provided sufficient information or if such information is otherwise readily available.

(2) In addition to the general requirements for critical areas studies that may be required consistent with SMC 21A.50.130, the critical areas study for a landslide hazard area shall include a geotechnical report prepared by a qualified professional consistent with SMC 21A.15.545, unless otherwise approved by the City, which also includes the following:

(a) A description of the extent and type of vegetative cover;

(b) A description of subsurface conditions based on data from site-specific explorations;

(c) Descriptions of surface and groundwater conditions, public and private sewage disposal systems, fills and excavations, and all structural improvements;

(d) An estimate of the bluff retreat rate that recognizes and reflects potential catastrophic events such as seismic activity or a 100-year storm event;

(e) Consideration of the run-out hazard of landslide debris and/or the impacts of landslide run-out on downslope properties;

(f) Recommendations for building siting limitations;

(g) An analysis of proposed surface and subsurface drainage, and the vulnerability of the site to erosion; and

(h) A comprehensive study of slope stability including an analysis of proposed cuts, fills, and other site grading and construction effects where the overall minimum factor of safety for slope stability is 1.5 for static conditions and 1.1 for seismic conditions as based on current building code seismic design conditions.

(3) Unless otherwise provided herein or as part of an approved alteration, removal of any vegetation from a landslide hazard area or buffer shall be prohibited, except for limited removal of vegetation necessary for surveying purposes and for the removal of hazard trees determined to be unsafe by the City. The City may require the applicant to submit a report prepared by a certified arborist to confirm hazard tree conditions. Notice to the City shall be provided prior to any vegetation removal permitted by this subsection.

(4) Vegetation on slopes within a landslide hazard area or buffer that has been damaged by human activity or infested by noxious weeds may be replaced with native vegetation pursuant to an enhancement plan approved by the City pursuant to SMC 21A.50.060. The use of hazardous substances, pesticides, and fertilizers in landslide hazard areas and their buffers may be prohibited by the City.

(5) Alterations to landslide hazard areas and buffers may be allowed only as follows:

(a) A landslide hazard area located on a slope 40 percent or steeper may be altered only if the alteration meets the following standards and limitations:

(i) Approved surface water conveyances, as specified in the adopted surface water design manual and SMC Title 13, Surface Water Management, may be allowed in a landslide hazard area if they are installed in a manner to minimize disturbance to the slope and vegetation;

(ii) Public and private trails may be allowed in a landslide hazard area subject to the standards and mitigations contained in this chapter, development standards in Chapter 21A.30 SMC, and requirements elsewhere in the SMC, when locating outside of the hazard area is not feasible;

(iii) Utility corridors may be allowed in a landslide hazard area if a critical areas study shows that such alteration will not subject the area to the risk of landslide or erosion;

(iv) Limited trimming and pruning of vegetation may be allowed in a landslide hazard area pursuant to an approved vegetation management plan for the creation and maintenance of views if the soils are not disturbed;

(v) Stabilization of sites where erosion or landsliding threatens public or private structures, utilities, roads, driveways or trails, or where erosion and landsliding threaten any lake, stream, wetland, or shoreline. Stabilization work shall be performed in a manner that causes the least possible disturbance to the slope and its vegetative cover; and

(vi) Reconstruction, remodeling, or replacement of an existing structure upon another portion of an existing impervious surface that was established pursuant to City ordinances and regulations may be allowed; provided:

(A) If within the buffer, the structure is located no closer to the landslide hazard area than the existing structure; and

(B) The existing impervious surface within the buffer or landslide hazard area is not expanded as a result of the reconstruction or replacement.

(b) A landslide hazard area located on a slope less than 40 percent may be altered only if the alteration meets the following requirements:

(i) The development proposal will not decrease slope stability on contiguous properties; and

(ii) Mitigation based on the best available engineering and geological practices is implemented that either eliminates or minimizes the risk of damage, death, or injury resulting from landslides.

(c) Neither buffers nor a critical area tract shall be required if the alteration meets the standards of subsection (5)(b) of this section.

(6) The following are exempt from the provisions of this section:

(a) Slopes that are 40 percent or steeper with a vertical elevation change of up to 20 feet if no adverse impact will result from the exemption based on the City’s review of and concurrence with a soils report prepared by a licensed geologist or geotechnical engineer; and

(b) The approved regrading of any slope that was created through previous legal grading activities. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2009-250 § 1; Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.270 Seismic hazard areas – Development standards and permitted alterations.

A development proposal containing a seismic hazard area shall meet the following requirements:

(1) All applicable building code requirements; and

(2) Alterations to seismic hazard areas may be allowed only as follows:

(a) The evaluation of site-specific subsurface conditions shows that the proposed development site is not located in a seismic hazard area; or

(b) Mitigation based on the best available engineering and geological practices is implemented that either eliminates or minimizes the risk of damage, death, or injury resulting from seismically induced settlement or soil liquefaction. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.280 Critical aquifer recharge areas – Development standards.

(1) Groundwater Quantity Protection Standards. For developments in all CARA classes, the applicant shall provide surface water infiltration as follows:

(a) Seventy-five percent of on-site storm water volume generated from the proposed development shall be infiltrated; provided, that a lesser standard may apply or on-site infiltration may be waived when:

(i) The applicant demonstrates that infiltration is not a reasonable alternative due to site-specific soil and/or geologic conditions;

(ii) It is determined that increased saturation of soils would result in an increased risk to existing facilities and/or adjacent properties;

(iii) Infiltration would result in significant unavoidable impacts to other critical areas or result in an excessive loss of native vegetation; or

(iv) The applicant proposes an addition of no more than 700 square feet of total new impervious surface compared cumulatively to 2005 levels.

(b) If infiltration is not feasible or required, then storm water facilities shall be constructed in accordance with City standards.

(c) The design and implementation of infiltration facilities shall follow the ecology infiltration guidelines specified in the Western Washington Stormwater Manual (2005), or other technical guidance as approved by the City.

(d) To prevent groundwater contamination, storm water infiltration may be prohibited for all or a portion of a site that includes use of hazardous substances.

(2) Groundwater Quality Protection Standards. The following provisions shall apply to development in all CARA classes:

(a) Activities may only be permitted in a critical aquifer recharge area if the proposed activity will not result in a significant increased risk of contamination of drinking water supplies;

(b) The City shall impose development conditions when necessary to prevent degradation of groundwater. Conditions to permits shall be based on known, available and reasonable methods of prevention, control and treatment; and

(c) The proposed activity must comply with the water source protection requirements and recommendations of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, State Department of Ecology, State Department of Health, and the Seattle-King County health district.

(3) Regulation of Facilities Handling and Storing Hazardous Materials Regulated by the State Department of Ecology.

(a) New and existing commercial and industrial land uses and activities located in Class 1 and Class 2 CARAs shall submit a hazardous materials inventory statement with a development proposal.

(b) Report Requirement. Commercial and industrial land uses and activities that involve the use, storage, transport or disposal of hazardous materials as regulated by the state of Washington, in quantities equal to or greater than 20 gallons or the equivalent of 200 pounds, located in Class 1 and Class 2 CARAs, shall submit a critical areas study in accordance with SMC 21A.50.130 including, as necessary, a hydrogeologic critical area assessment report, spill containment and response plan and/or groundwater monitoring plan, except for the following uses/activities:

(i) Retail sale of containers five gallons or less in size, where there are less than 500 total gallons; and

(ii) Hazardous materials of no risk to the aquifer.

(c) A hydrogeologic critical area assessment report, when required by subsection (3)(b) of this section, shall be prepared by a qualified professional to determine potential impacts of contaminants on the aquifer. The report shall include the following site- and proposal-related information, at a minimum:

(i) Information regarding geologic and hydrogeologic characteristics of the site including the surface location of all CARA classes located on site or immediately adjacent to the site and permeability of the unsaturated/vadose zone;

(ii) Groundwater depth, flow direction and gradient;

(iii) Data on wells and springs within 1,300 feet of the project area;

(iv) Location of other critical areas, including surface waters, within 1,300 feet of the project area;

(v) Historic hydrogeologic data for the area to be affected by the proposed activity;

(vi) Best management practices (BMPs) and integrated pest management (IPM) proposed to be used; and

(vii) Discussion of the effects of the proposed project on the groundwater quality and quantity, including:

(A) Predictive evaluation of groundwater withdrawal and recharge effects on nearby wells and surface water features;

(B) Predictive evaluation of contaminant transport based on potential releases to groundwater; and

(C) Predictive evaluation of changes in the infiltration/recharge rate.

(d) A spill containment and response plan, when required by subsection (3)(b) of this section, is required to identify equipment and/or structures that could fail and shall include provisions for inspection as required by the applicable state regulations, repair and replacement of structures and equipment that could fail.

(e) A groundwater monitoring plan, when required by subsection (3)(b) of this section, may be required to monitor quality and quantity of groundwater, surface water runoff, and/or site soils. The City may require the owner of a facility to install one or more groundwater monitoring wells to accommodate the required groundwater monitoring.

(i) Criteria used to determine the need for site monitoring shall include, but not be limited to, the proximity of the facility to production or monitoring wells, the type and quantity of hazardous materials on site, and whether or not the hazardous materials are stored in underground vessels.

(ii) The City may employ an outside consultant at the applicant’s expense to review the monitoring plan and analysis, to ensure that the monitoring plan is followed, and that corrective actions are completed.

(4) Prohibited Uses. Where land uses or materials prohibited in this section are allowed in the Table of Permitted Land Uses (Chapter 21A.20 SMC), this section shall control and the use shall be prohibited.

(a) Table 21A.50.280a identifies land uses and materials prohibited in Class 1, 2 and 3 CARAs for new uses; and

(b) Table 21A.50.280b identifies land uses and materials that should be discontinued, removed and decommissioned where existing in Class 1, 2 and 3 CARAs. The City shall require discontinuation, removal and decommissioning of these uses from Class 1, 2 and 3 CARAs at the time of development and redevelopment, in proportion to the degree and nature of the proposal.

Table 21A.50.280a  

	Prohibited Land Uses and Materials (New Uses/Activities)	Class 1 (1- and 5-year WHPA)	 Class 2 (10-year WHPA)	Class 3 (High Recharge Areas)

	Hazardous liquid transmission pipelines	prohibited	allowed subject to compliance with federal and state standards

	Mining, processing and reclamation of any type	prohibited	prohibited	reviewed under development permit

	Processing, storage, and disposal of radioactive substances (except certain medical uses)	prohibited	prohibited	prohibited

	Underground storage tanks (UST)	prohibited 	prohibited	prohibited

	UST with double walls, vault and monitor	prohibited	allowed subject to compliance with federal and state standards

	Above ground storage tanks for hazardous substances or hazardous waste with primary and secondary containment area and spill protection plan	allowed subject to compliance with federal and state standards

	Wells for class B and private water systems, when located in a water service area	prohibited	prohibited	allowed subject to compliance with federal and state standards

	Golf courses	prohibited	**	**

	Land use activities that require the use of nitrates, phosphorus, pesticides, and other chemicals that have a potential to degrade groundwater and surface water quality when used inappropriately or in excess	prohibited	**	**

	Closed loop geothermal/heat exchange wells used to recirculate a chemical heat transfer fluid other than potable water	prohibited	prohibited

	Closed loop geothermal/heat exchange wells used to recirculate potable water*	prohibited	**

	Open loop geothermal/heat exchange wells	prohibited	prohibited

	Closed loop geothermal/heat exchange systems (surface)	allowed subject to compliance with federal and state standards**	**

	Injection wells (storm water or reclaimed water)	prohibited	prohibited	**

	Cemeteries	prohibited	**	**

	Wrecking yards	prohibited	prohibited	prohibited

	Landfills with hazardous waste, municipal solid waste, or special waste	prohibited	prohibited	prohibited

	Dry cleaning using chlorinated solvents	prohibited	prohibited	prohibited

*    Closed loop geothermal/heat exchange wells shall register their location with the City.

**    Best management practices (BMPs) and integrated pest management (IPM), as applicable, are required for these uses.

Table 21A.50.280b  

	Restricted Land Uses and Materials – (Existing Uses/Activities)	Class 1 (1- and 5-year WHPA)	 Class 2 (10-year WHPA)	Class 3 (High Recharge Areas)

	UST (underground storage tank)	Remove, decommission or upgrade to comply with federal and state standards

	Abandoned wells	Decommission to comply with federal and state standards

	Existing uses that have a long-term potential to degrade water quality in the WHPA	Discontinue, remove or mitigate potential impacts

(5) Requirements for Specific Uses and Activities.

(a) Commercial Vehicle Repair and Servicing.

(i) In all CARA classes, vehicle repair and servicing must be conducted over impermeable pads, with containment curbs, and within a covered structure capable of withstanding normally expected weather conditions. Chemicals used in the process of vehicle repair and servicing must be stored in a manner that protects them from weather and provides containment should leaks occur.

(ii) In all CARA classes, no dry wells shall be allowed on sites used for vehicle repair and servicing. Dry wells existing on the site prior to facility establishment must be abandoned using techniques approved by the State Department of Ecology prior to commencement of the proposed activity.

(b) Use of Pesticides, Herbicides, and Fertilizers.

(i) Residential Use. In all CARA classes, application of household pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers shall not exceed times, rates, concentrations and locations specified on the packaging.

(ii) Other Uses. In Class 1 and 2 CARA areas, proposed developments with maintained landscape areas greater than 10,000 square feet in area shall prepare an operations and maintenance manual using best management practices (BMPs) and integrated pest management (IPM) for fertilizer and pesticide/herbicide applications. The BMPs shall include recommendations on the quantity, timing and type of fertilizers applied to lawns and gardens to protect groundwater quality.

(c) Spreading or Injection of Storm Water or Reclaimed Water. Water reuse projects for reclaimed water and storm water are regulated in accordance with the adopted water, sewer or storm water comprehensive plans that have been approved by the Departments of Ecology and Health. Injection wells are prohibited in Class 1 and 2 CARA areas. Injection wells are allowed, subject to City review and approval, in Class 3 CARA areas provided injection wells shall comply with the requirements of Chapters 173-200 and 173-218 WAC and the Sammamish Municipal Code.

(d) Construction Activity. In all CARA classes, if construction vehicles will be refueled on a construction site and/or the quantity of hazardous materials that will be used or stored on a site exceeds 20 gallons, exclusive of the quantity of hazardous materials contained in fuel or fluid reservoirs of construction vehicles, then persons obtaining construction permits shall provide information to the public works department regarding the types and quantities of hazardous materials that will be on site and then use BMPs to prevent and respond to spills. Construction site refueling must be conducted over impermeable pads, with containment curbs. The operator of the site shall immediately report to the City any spills and is responsible for complete recovery and cleanup.

(e) Fill Quality Standards and Imported Fill Source Statement. In all CARA classes, fill material shall not contain concentrations of contaminants that exceed cleanup standards for soil as specified in the Model Toxics Control Act (MTCA). An imported fill source statement is required for all projects where more than 100 cubic yards of fill will be imported to a site. The City may require analytical results to demonstrate that fill materials do not exceed cleanup standards. The imported fill source statement shall include:

(i) Source location of imported fill;

(ii) Previous land uses of the source location; and

(iii) Whether or not fill to be imported is native, undisturbed soil.

(f) In Class 1 and 2 CARAs, on lots smaller than one acre, new on-site septic systems are prohibited, unless:

(i) The system is approved by the Washington State Department of Health and the system either uses an upflow media filter system or a proprietary packed-bed filter system or is designed to achieve approximately 80 percent total nitrogen removal for typical domestic wastewater; or

(ii) The Seattle-King County department of public health determines that the systems required under subsection (5)(f)(i) of this section will not function on the site.

(g) Geothermal/heat exchange wells are allowed, subject to City review and approval, provided:

(i) The system is approved by the Washington Department of Ecology as compliant with the provisions of Chapter 173-160 WAC; and

(ii) A notice on title is recorded documenting the maintenance requirements of the geothermal/heat exchange wells. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O2005-172 § 4; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.290 Wetlands – Development standards.

A development proposal on a parcel or parcels containing a wetland or associated buffer of a wetland located on site or off site shall meet the following requirements:

(1) Wetlands shall be rated according to the Washington State Wetland Rating System for Western Washington (Department of Ecology, 2014, or as may be amended or revised by the Department from time to time). This document contains the definitions, methods and a rating form for determining the categorization of wetlands described below:

(a) Category 1. Category 1 wetlands include those that receive a score of greater than or equal to 23 through 27 points based on functions, or those that are rated Category 1 based on special characteristics as defined in the rating form.

(b) Category 2. Category 2 wetlands include those that receive a score of 20 through 22 points based on functions, or those that are rated Category 2 based on special characteristics as defined in the rating form.

(c) Category 3. Category 3 wetlands include those that receive a score of 16 through 19 points based on functions.

(d) Category 4. Category 4 wetlands that score equal to or less than 15 points based on functions.

(2) The following standard buffers shall be established from the wetland edge:

	Wetland Category	Standard Buffer Width (ft)

	Category I:	Natural heritage or bog wetlands	 215

	Habitat score 8 – 9	200

	Habitat score 5 – 7	150

	Not meeting above criteria	125

	Category II:	Habitat score 8 – 9	150

	Habitat score 5 – 7	100

	Not meeting above criteria	75

	Category III:	Habitat score 8 – 9	75

	Not meeting above criteria	50

	Category IV:	 	All land use types – 50

	Category III and IV: 	Subject to SMC 21A.50.320

(a) Where a legally established and constructed street transects a wetland buffer, the department may approve a modification of the standard buffer width to the edge of the street if the isolated part of the buffer does not provide additional protection of the wetland and provides insignificant biological, geological or hydrological buffer functions relating to the wetland. If the resulting buffer distance is less than 50 percent of the standard buffer for the applicable wetland category, no further reduction shall be allowed.

(b) In addition to the provisions of SMC 21A.50.060, where a buffer has been previously established on a legally created parcel or tract that was legally established according to the regulations in place at the time of establishment, and is permanently recorded on title or placed within a separate tract, the buffer shall remain as previously established, provided it is equal to or greater than 50 percent of the current required standard buffer distance for the applicable wetland category.

(c) Where wetland functions have been improved due to voluntary implementation of an approved stewardship, restoration and/or enhancement plan that is not associated with required mitigation or enforcement, the standard wetland buffer width shall be determined based on the previously established wetland category and habitat score as documented in the approved stewardship and enhancement plan.

(3) Removal of any native vegetation or woody debris from a wetland or wetland buffer may be allowed only as part of an approved alteration. Only native vegetation can be planted in wetland or buffer areas, unless the planting is otherwise allowed by SMC 21A.50.060, Allowances for existing urban development and other uses.

(4) Activities and uses shall be prohibited from wetlands and associated buffers, except as provided for in this chapter.

(5) Any wetland restored, relocated, replaced, or enhanced because of a wetland alteration shall have the buffer required for the highest wetland class involved.

(6) For a wetland buffer that includes a landslide hazard area, the buffer width shall be the greater of either the buffer width required by the wetland’s category in this section or 25 feet beyond the top of the landslide hazard area.

(7) Buffer Averaging. Buffer width averaging may be allowed by the department if:

(a) It will provide additional protection to wetlands or enhance their functions, as long as the total area contained in the buffer on the development proposal site does not decrease (see also SMC 21A.30.210(5) for buffer compensation requirements for trails);

(b) The wetland contains variations in sensitivity due to existing physical characteristics or the character of the buffer varies in slope, soils, or vegetation, and the wetland would benefit from a wider buffer in places and would not be adversely impacted by a narrower buffer in other places;

(c) The buffer width is not reduced to less than 50 percent of the standard buffer width at any location;

(d) The buffer width is decreased on one part of a wetland and increased on another part of the same wetland feature; and

(e) The buffer is associated with a development proposal and it will not further encumber a neighboring property not owned by the applicant.

(f) Buffer averaging may be used in conjunction with buffer reduction options in this section, provided the total combined reduction does not reduce the buffer to less than 50 percent of standard buffer width at any location.

(8) Increased Buffers. Increased buffer widths may be required by a distance necessary to protect wetland functions and provide connectivity to other wetland and habitat areas when the following occur:

(a) When a Category 1 or 2 wetland with a habitat score of greater than 29 points (per Washington State Wetland Rating System for Western Washington – Department of Ecology 2009 or as revised) is located within 200 feet of the wetland subject to the increased buffer;

(b) Fish and wildlife habitat conservation area and habitat connections are present;

(c) Landslide or erosion hazard areas are contiguous to wetlands;

(d) Groundwater recharge and discharge areas are at risk;

(e) Or to offset buffer impacts, such as trail and utility corridors; and

(f) Ecological wetland functions are at risk including, but not limited to, the following:

(i) Habitat complexity, connectivity and biological functions;

(ii) Seasonal hydrological dynamics as provided in the adopted surface water design manual;

(iii) Sediment removal and erosion control;

(iv) Pollutant removal;

(v) Large wood debris (LWD) recruitment;

(vi) Water temperature;

(vii) Wildlife habitat; and

(viii) Microclimate.

(9) Buffer Reduction. Buffers may be reduced when buffer reduction impacts are mitigated and result in equal or greater protection of the wetland functions. Prior to considering buffer reductions, the applicant shall demonstrate application of mitigation sequencing as required in SMC 21A.50.135. A plan for mitigating buffer-reduction impacts must be prepared using selected incentive-based mitigation options from the list below. The following incentive options for reducing standard buffer widths shall be considered cumulative up to a maximum reduction of 50 percent of the standard buffer width. In all circumstances where a substantial portion of the remaining buffer is degraded, the buffer reduction plan shall include replanting with native vegetation in the degraded portions of the remaining buffer area and shall include a five-year monitoring and maintenance plan.

(a) Up to 20 percent reduction in the standard buffer width may be allowed if water quality is improved in excess of the requirements of the adopted surface water design manual and SMC Title 13, Surface Water Management, through the use of created and/or enhanced wetlands, or ponds supplemental to existing storm drainage and water quality requirements.

(b) Removal of existing impervious surfaces:

(i) Up to 10 percent reduction in standard buffer width if impervious surfaces within the to-be-remaining buffer area are reduced by at least 50 percent; or

(ii) Up to 20 percent reduction in standard buffer width if the to-be-remaining buffer area is presently more than 50 percent impervious and all of it is to be removed.

(c) Removal of invasive, nonnative vegetation: up to 10 percent reduction in standard buffer width for the removal and extended (minimum five-year) monitoring and continued-removal maintenance of relatively dense stands of invasive, nonnative vegetation from significant portions of the remaining buffer area.

(d) Restoration, preservation and maintenance of the existing wetland and buffer vegetation if the following conditions are present and/or attainable as a result of action:

(i) An undisturbed vegetated buffer is preserved in the remaining buffer width; and

(ii) Existing buffer conditions are degraded such that more than 40 percent of the buffer is covered by nonnative/invasive plant species and the buffer is restored according to a City-approved restoration plan to improve wetland buffer functions; and

(iii) Native tree or shrub vegetation covers less than 25 percent of the total buffer area and the area will be revegetated according to a City-approved restoration plan with native trees and shrubs; and

(iv) The wetland buffer has slopes of less than 25 percent; and

(v) The buffer reduction determination and percentage shall be on a site-by-site basis based on the applicant’s plan and demonstration of improvement to water quality and habitat functions.

(e) If not already required under an existing development proposal, installation of oil/water separators for storm water quality control: up to 10 percent reduction in standard buffer width.

(f) Use of pervious material for driveway/road construction: up to 10 percent reduction in standard buffer width.

(g) Restoration of on-site buffer and wetland areas, or restoration of off-site buffer and wetland areas within the same sub-basin of the impacted wetland if no on-site restoration is possible:

(i) Up to 10 percent reduction in standard buffer width if restoration area is at a 2:1 ratio or greater; or

(ii) Up to 20 percent reduction in standard buffer width if restoration area is at a 4:1 ratio or greater.

(h) Removal of significant refuse or sources of toxic material: up to 10 percent reduction in standard buffer width.

(i) Percentages listed above may be added together to create a total buffer reduction; provided, that the total reduction does not exceed 50 percent of the standard buffer width.

(10) The use of hazardous substances, pesticides and fertilizers in the wetland and its buffer may be prohibited by the City.

(11) The introduction of livestock into a wetland or wetland buffer is prohibited. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2009-264 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O2005-172 § 4; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.300 Wetlands – Permitted alterations. 

Alterations to wetlands and wetland buffers are not allowed, except as provided for by complete exemptions, allowances for existing urban development and other uses and exceptions in this chapter or as allowed for by this section.

(1) Alterations may be permitted if the department determines, based upon its review of critical areas studies completed by qualified professionals, that the proposed development will:

(a) Protect, restore or enhance the wildlife habitat, natural drainage, or other valuable functions of the wetland resulting in a net improvement to the functions of the wetland system;

(b) Design, implement, maintain, and monitor a mitigation plan prepared by a qualified professional;

(c) Perform the mitigation under the direction of a qualified professional; and

(d) Will otherwise be consistent with the purposes of this chapter.

(2) If a wetland is in a flood hazard area, the applicant shall notify affected communities and native tribes of proposed alterations prior to any alteration and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.

(3) There shall be no introduction of any nonnative or invasive plant or wildlife into any wetland or wetland buffer except as required by a state or federal permit or approval or as otherwise allowed by SMC 21A.50.060, Allowances for existing urban development and other uses.

(4) Utilities may be allowed in wetland buffers if:

(a) The director determines that no reasonable alternative location is available; and

(b) The utility corridor meets any additional requirements for installation, replacement of vegetation and maintenance, as needed to mitigate impacts.

(5) Sewer utility corridors may be allowed in wetland buffers only if:

(a) The applicant demonstrates that the sewer line location is necessary for gravity flow;

(b) The corridor is not located in a wetland or buffer used by species listed as endangered or threatened by the state or federal government or containing critical or outstanding actual habitat for those species or heron rookeries or raptor nesting trees;

(c) The corridor alignment including, but not limited to, any allowed maintenance roads follows a path farthest from the wetland edge as feasible;

(d) Corridor construction and maintenance protects the wetland and buffer and is aligned to avoid cutting trees greater than 12 inches in diameter at breast height, when possible, and pesticides, herbicides and other hazardous substances are not used;

(e) An additional, contiguous and undisturbed buffer, equal in width to the proposed corridor, including any allowed maintenance roads, is provided to protect the wetland;

(f) The corridor is revegetated with appropriate native vegetation at preconstruction densities or greater immediately upon completion of construction or as soon thereafter as possible, and the sewer utility ensures that such vegetation survives;

(g) Any additional corridor access for maintenance is provided, to the extent possible, at specific points rather than by a parallel road; and

(h) The width of any necessary parallel road providing access for maintenance is as small as possible, but not greater than 15 feet; the road is maintained without the use of herbicides, pesticides or other hazardous substances; and the location of the road is contiguous to the utility corridor on the side away from the wetland.

(6) Joint use of an approved sewer utility corridor by other utilities may be allowed.

(7) Where technically feasible, surface water discharge shall be located outside of the wetland and wetland buffer. Where surface water management is authorized within a wetland or wetland buffer it shall be consistent with Appendix I-D: Guidelines for Wetlands when Managing Stormwater Manual for Western Washington, Volume I, August 2012, Publication No. 12-10-030, as such publication may be amended or revised by the Department of Ecology from time to time.

(8) Public and private trails may be allowed in the outer 25 percent of wetland buffers consistent with the standards and requirements in this chapter, development standards in Chapter 21A.30 SMC, and requirements elsewhere in the SMC. Proposals for constructing viewing platforms, associated access trails, and spur trails must be reviewed by a qualified professional and a critical areas study may be required.

(9) A dock, pier, moorage, float, or launch facility may be allowed, subject to the provisions of SMC Title 25, if:

(a) The existing and zoned density around the wetland is three dwelling units per acre or more;

(b) At least 75 percent of the lots around the wetland have been built upon and no significant buffer or wetland vegetation remains on these lots; and

(c) Open water is a significant component of the wetland.

(10) Crossings. The use of existing crossings, including but not limited to utility corridors, road and railroad rights-of-way within wetlands or buffers for public or private trails is preferred to new crossings, subject to the standards and requirements in the SMC. New wetland road and trail crossings may be allowed if:

(a) The director determines that:

(i) The crossing is identified as a part of a corridor shown in a City-adopted parks or trails plan, park master plan, transportation plan, or comprehensive plan, or otherwise is necessary to connect or construct the road or trail to publicly owned lands, utility corridors, rights-of-way or other public infrastructure, or is required to provide access to property where no other reasonable alternative access is possible; or

(ii) The applicant demonstrates that the new crossing creates less overall or less incremental impacts to critical areas and habitat than the use of an existing corridor while still achieving overall project goals and objectives;

(b) All crossings avoid or minimize impact to the wetland and provide mitigation for unavoidable impacts through restoration, enhancement or replacement of disturbed areas as described in this chapter and in the SMC;

(c) Crossings do not significantly change the overall wetland hydrology;

(d) Crossings do not diminish the flood storage capacity of the wetland; and

(e) All crossings are constructed during summer low water periods.

(11) Enhancement and Restoration. Wetland enhancement or restoration not associated with any other development proposal may be allowed if accomplished according to a plan for its design, implementation, maintenance and monitoring prepared by and carried out under the direction of a qualified professional. Restoration or enhancement must result in a net improvement to the functions of the wetland system.

(12) Wetland Restoration Project. A wetland restoration project for habitat enhancement may be allowed if:

(a) The restoration is approved by all agencies with jurisdiction;

(b) The restoration is not associated with mitigation of a specific development proposal;

(c) The restoration is limited to revegetation of wetlands and their buffers and other specific fish and wildlife habitat improvements that result in a net improvement to the functions of the wetland system;

(d) The restoration should be completed in accordance with best management practices (BMPs) and acceptable standards consistent with best available wetland science to minimize impacts to wetlands; and

(e) The restoration is performed under the direction of a qualified professional. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O2005-172 § 4; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.310 Wetlands – Mitigation requirements.

When mitigation for wetland and/or wetland buffer impacts is required, mitigation shall meet the requirements listed in SMC 21A.50.145 in addition to the following supplementary requirements:

(1) Equivalent or Greater Biological Functions. Mitigation for alterations to wetland(s) and/or wetland buffer(s) shall achieve equivalent or greater biologic functions and shall be consistent with the Department of Ecology Guidance on Wetland Mitigation in Washington State (2004, Department of Ecology Publication No. 06-06-11a and b), as such publication may be amended or revised by the Department of Ecology from time to time.

(2) No Net Loss. Wetland mitigation actions shall not result in a net loss of wetland area.

(3) Functions and Values. Mitigation actions shall address and provide equivalent or greater wetland and buffer functions and values compared to wetland and buffer conditions existing prior to the proposed alteration.

(4) Mitigation Type and Location. Mitigation actions shall be in-kind and conducted within the same sub-basin and on the same site as the alteration except when the following apply:

(a) There are no reasonable on-site opportunities for mitigation, or on-site opportunities do not have a high likelihood of success due to development pressures, adjacent land uses, or on-site buffers or connectivity are inadequate;

(b) Off-site mitigation has a greater likelihood of providing equal or improved wetland functions than the impacted wetland; and

(c) Off-site locations have been identified and evaluated in the following order of preference:

(i) Within the same drainage sub-basin;

(ii) Within the City limits;

(iii) Within the Sammamish service area for an approved fee-in-lieu or mitigation bank program sites within the City limits in accordance with SMC 21A.50.315;

(iv) Within the Sammamish service area for an approved fee-in-lieu or mitigation bank program sites within the WRIA 8 in accordance with SMC 21A.50.315.

(5) Mitigation Timing. Where feasible, mitigation projects shall be completed prior to activities that will disturb wetlands. In all other cases, mitigation shall be completed immediately following disturbance and prior to use or occupancy of the activity or development. Construction of mitigation projects shall be timed to reduce impacts to existing wildlife and flora.

(6) Mitigation Ratios.

(a) Wetland Mitigation Ratios. The following ratios shall apply to required wetland mitigation. The first number specifies the acreage of replacement wetlands and the second specifies the acreage of wetlands altered.

(i) Permanent Wetland Mitigation. The following ratios of area of mitigation to area of alteration apply to mitigation measures for permanent alterations.

 

	Category and type of wetland	Wetland reestablishment or creation	Wetland rehabilitation	1:1 Wetland reestablishment or wetland creation (R/C) and wetland enhancement (E)

	Category I bog	Not allowed	6:1 rehabilitation of a bog	Case-by-case

	Category I natural heritage site	Not allowed 	6:1 rehabilitation of a natural heritage site	Case-by-case

	Category I based on score for functions	4:1	8:1	1:1 R/C and 6:1 E

	Category I forested	6:1	12:1	1:1 R/C and 10:1 E

	Category II	3:1	8:1	1:1 R/C and 4:1 E

	Category III	2:1	4:1	1:1 R/C and 2:1 E

	Category IV	1.5:1	3:1	1:1 R/C and 2:1 E

(ii) Temporary Wetland Mitigation. The following ratios of area of mitigation to area of alteration apply to mitigation measures for temporary alterations where wetlands will not be impacted by permanent fill material:

	Wetland category	Permanent conversion of forested and shrub wetlands into emergent wetlands	Mitigation for temporal loss of forested and shrub wetlands when the impacted wetlands will be revegetated to forest or shrub communities

	 	Enhancement	Rehabilitation	Creation or restoration	Enhancement	Rehabilitation	Creation or restoration

	Category I	6:1	4.5:1	3:1	3:1	2:1	1.5:1

	Category II	3:1	2:1	1.5:1	1.5:1	1:1	.75:1

	Category III	2:1	1.5:1	1:1	1:1	.75:1	.5:1

	Category IV	1.5:1	1:1	.75:1	Not applicable	Not applicable	Not applicable

(b) Wetland Buffer Replacement Ratio. Altered wetland buffer area shall be replaced at a minimum ratio of one-to-one; provided, that the replacement ratio may be increased at the director’s discretion to replace lost functions and values.

(c) Increased Mitigation Ratio. The director may increase the ratios under the following circumstances:

(i) Uncertainty exists as to the probable success of the proposed restoration or creation; or

(ii) A significant period of time will elapse between impact and replication of wetland functions; or

(iii) Proposed mitigation will result in a lower category wetland or reduced functions relative to the wetland being impacted; or

(iv) The impact was an unauthorized impact.

(d) Decreased Mitigation Ratio. The director may decrease these ratios under the following circumstances:

(i) Documentation by a qualified professional demonstrates that the proposed mitigation actions have a very high likelihood of success. This documentation should specifically identify how the proposed mitigation actions are similar to other known mitigation projects with similar site-specific conditions and circumstances that have been shown to be successful;

(ii) Documentation by a qualified professional demonstrates that the proposed mitigation actions will provide functions and values that are significantly greater than the wetland being impacted; or

(iii) The proposed mitigation actions are conducted in advance of the impact and have been shown to be successful over the course of at least one full year.

(e) Minimum Mitigation Ratio. In all cases of permanent wetland impacts, a minimum acreage replacement ratio of one to one shall be required.

(7) Wetland Enhancement as Mitigation. Impacts to wetlands may be mitigated by enhancement of existing significantly degraded wetlands only after a one-to-one minimum acreage replacement ratio has been satisfied. Applicants proposing to enhance wetlands must produce a critical areas study that identifies how enhancement will increase the functions of the degraded wetland and how this increase will adequately mitigate for the loss of wetland function at the impact site.

(8) Restoration Required. Restoration shall be required when a wetland or its buffer is altered in violation of law or without any specific permission or approval by the City in accordance with the following provisions:

(a) A mitigation plan for restoration conforming to the requirements of this chapter and section shall be provided.

(b) On sites where nonnative vegetation was cleared, restoration shall include installation of native vegetation with a density equal to or greater than the pre-altered site conditions. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.315 Wetlands – Alternative mitigation.

(1) Wetland Banking.

(a) Credits from a wetland mitigation bank may be approved for use as compensation for unavoidable impacts to wetlands when:

(i) Criteria in SMC 21A.50.310(4) are met;

(ii) The bank is certified under Chapter 173-700 WAC;

(iii) The department determines that the wetland mitigation bank provides appropriate compensation for the authorized impacts;

(iv) The proposed use of credits is consistent with the terms and conditions of the bank’s certification; and

(v) The compensatory mitigation agreement occurs in advance of authorized impacts.

(b) Replacement ratios for projects using bank credits shall be consistent with replacement ratios specified in the bank’s certification.

(c) Credits from a certified wetland mitigation bank may be used to compensate for impacts located within the service area specified in the bank’s certification. In some cases, bank service areas may include portions of more than one adjacent drainage basin for specific wetland functions.

(d) Implementation of a mitigation bank is subject to City council review and approval.

(2) Fee-in-Lieu Mitigation.

(a) Fee-in-lieu mitigation may be approved for use as compensation for approved impacts to wetlands, when:

(i) The approved wetland impact is related to the approval of a single-family home, City of Sammamish capital improvement project, or development proposal within the Town Center;

(ii) Criteria in SMC 21A.50.310(4) are met;

(iii) The fee-in-lieu mitigation program is state certified;

(iv) The department determines that the wetland fee-in-lieu mitigation provides appropriate compensation for the authorized impacts;

(v) The proposed use of fee-in-lieu mitigation is consistent with the terms and conditions of the fee-in-lieu mitigation program; and

(vi) The compensatory mitigation agreement occurs in advance of authorized impacts.

(b) Fee-in-lieu mitigation may be authorized in the City based upon the following order of preference:

(i) A City approved program that utilizes receiving mitigation sites within the same sub-basin as the approved wetland impact.

(ii) The King County mitigation reserves program, or other approved program that gives priority to sites within the same sub-basin.

(iii) A City approved program, the King County mitigation reserves program, or other approved program that gives priority to sites that will expand or improve habitat for Lake Sammamish Kokanee.

(iv) The King County mitigation reserves program, or other approved program that gives priority to sites within the same sub-basin and/or a predefined service area that includes the City of Sammamish. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1)


21A.50.320 Wetlands – Development flexibilities.

The following alterations shall be authorized if the director determines that the cumulative impacts do not unduly counteract the purposes of this chapter and are mitigated pursuant to an approved mitigation plan:

(1) Isolated wetlands, as defined in SMC 21A.15.1410, and evaluated in a written and approved critical areas study meeting the requirements of SMC 21A.50.130, with a total area of up to 1,000 square feet may be exempted from the avoidance sequencing provisions of SMC 21A.50.135(1)(a). This provision is not applicable within the City of Sammamish shoreline jurisdiction.

(2) Category III and IV wetlands with a total area of 4,000 square feet or less may have the buffer reduced by 15 feet, provided:

(a) The wetland does not score four points or less for habitat in the adopted Western Washington rating system; and

(b) The buffer functions associated with the area of the reduced buffer width are mitigated through the enhancement of the wetland, the remaining on-site wetland buffer area, and/or other adjoining high value habitat areas as needed to replace lost buffer functions and values; and

(c) No subsequent buffer reduction or averaging is authorized.

(3) Pilot Program. In accordance with SMC 25.01.070, this pilot program is not applicable within the City of Sammamish shoreline jurisdiction.

(a) Establishment of Pilot Program. A pilot program is hereby established to allow isolated category III and IV wetlands to be exempted from the avoidance sequencing provisions of SMC 21A.50.135(1)(a) and the provisions of SMC 21A.50.290, subject to the provisions of this section.

(b) Purpose. The purpose of this pilot program is to allow for limited alterations of low habitat value isolated category III and IV wetlands with an area of 4,000 square feet or less, to evaluate the effects of such alterations on hydrologic, habitat, and water quality functions and values.

(c) Application. Applications for eligible projects meeting the provisions of subsections (3)(d) through (g) of this section must be submitted within two calendar years from the effective date of the revision to the Sammamish shoreline master program.

(d) Pilot Program Administration.

(i) Three projects associated with the construction of a single-family home are authorized by this pilot project, subject to the provisions of this section.

(ii) Eligible projects shall be accepted in the order received. To qualify for submittal, an applicant must have a complete application as described in the City’s application material and Chapter 20.05 SMC, and completed any necessary preliminary steps prior to application as set forth in Chapter 20.05 SMC.

(iii) In the event that an application for a project accepted into the pilot program is withdrawn by the applicant or cancelled by the director prior to the expiration of the pilot program, the next submitted application shall be accepted into the pilot program.

(iv) The director shall use the authority under SMC 20.05.100 to ensure expeditious processing of applications. In particular, the director shall set a reasonable deadline for the submittal of corrections, studies, or other information when requested; an extension may be provided based upon a reasonable request. Failure by the applicant to meet a deadline shall be cause for the department to cancel/deny the application.

(e) Eligible Projects. Subject to the limitation in the total number of projects in subsection (3)(d) of this section, wetlands that meet the following criteria may be exempted from the avoidance sequencing provisions of SMC 21A.50.135(1)(a) and the provisions of SMC 21A.50.290 and may be altered. To be eligible, a critical areas study prepared by a qualified professional shall be approved by the director and shall document the following:

(i) The wetland is a category III or IV wetland that is hydrologically isolated from other aquatic resources; and

(ii) The total area of the isolated wetland is 4,000 square feet or less; and

(iii) The wetland is not adjacent to a riparian area; and

(iv) The wetland has a score of 15 points or less for habitat in the adopted Western Washington rating system; and

(v) The wetland does not contain habitat identified as essential for local populations of priority species identified by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife.

(f) Mitigation. Mitigation to replace lost wetland functions and values, consistent with SMC 21A.50.310, shall be prepared for review and approval by the director; and

(g) Monitoring. Monitoring of the effect on biologic, hydrologic, and water quality, and assessment of the performance of required mitigation shall be provided by the applicant for five years following the completion of pilot projects authorized by this section. Annual monitoring reports shall be provided to the City for review and approval. Monitoring shall include the collection and analysis of data for the purpose of understanding and documenting changes in natural ecosystems, functions and features including, but not limited to, gathering baseline data.

(h) No subsequent exemption from the avoidance sequencing provisions of SMC 21A.50.135(1)(a) or 21A.50.290 is authorized for the property participating in this pilot program. (Ord. O2017-431 § 2 (Att. B); Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.322 Wetland management area – Special district overlay.

(1) The purpose of the wetland management area special overlay district is to provide a means to designate certain unique and outstanding wetlands when necessary to protect their functions and values from the impacts created from geographic and hydrologic isolation and impervious surface.

(2) The wetland management area special overlay district shall be designated on critical areas maps maintained by the department of community development.

(3) The following development standards shall be applied in addition to all applicable requirements of this chapter to development proposals located within a wetland management area district overlay:

(a) All development proposals on properties zoned R-1 in wetland management areas shall have a maximum impervious surface area of eight percent of the gross acreage of the site. Distribution of the allowable impervious area among the platted lots shall be recorded on the face of the plat. Impervious surface of existing streets need not be counted towards the allowable impervious area. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the Sammamish Town Center Study Area as identified in Ordinance O2005-185;

(b) All subdivisions and short subdivisions on properties identified in a management area for clustering and set aside requirements in the East Lake Sammamish Basin and Nonpoint Action Plan (1994) shall be required to cluster away from wetlands or the axis of corridors along stream tributaries and identified swales connecting wetlands. At least 50 percent of all portions of the property located within wetland management areas identified for vegetation retention shall be left in native vegetation, preferably forest, and placed in a permanent open space tract. The open space tract shall be designed to maximize the amount of separation between any critical areas and the proposed development. If no critical area tracts are required, the open space tract shall be located to provide additional protection to nearby wetlands;

(c) Clearing and grading activity from October 1st through April 30th shall meet the provisions of SMC 16.15.120(4) wherever not already applicable;

(d) All R-1 zoned properties within wetland management areas, as identified in the East Lake Sammamish Basin and Nonpoint Action Plan, shall retain native vegetation, or revegetate with trees to meet the following standards:

(i) Fifty percent of the site area shall be used to retain trees or revegetate with trees;

(ii) Retained vegetation shall be located primarily within the 50 percent open space area required by SMC 21A.25.030;

(iii) Retained vegetation shall consist primarily of trees with 0.0096 significant trees per square foot;

(iv) Areas revegetated shall provide 0.012 trees per square foot. Planted trees shall be planted primarily in the required open space area and shall be of a caliper or height approved by the director;

(v) The provisions of this section shall not apply to the Sammamish Town Center Study Area as identified in Ordinance O2005-185; and

(e) The director may, based upon review and approval of a critical areas special study, modify the provisions of this chapter to allow for:

(i) The installation of site access; provided, that the applicant shall limit impervious surfaces to the minimum required to grant access; or

(ii) Development using low impact development techniques to achieve standards adopted by the City that will demonstrably minimize development impacts consistent with subsections (3)(a) through (c) of this section. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1)


21A.50.325 Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas – Development standards.

A development proposal that includes a fish and wildlife habitat conservation area or buffer shall meet the following requirements:

(1) When appropriate due to the type of habitat or species present or the project area conditions, the director may require a critical areas study that includes a habitat management plan consistent with the latest guidance from the Department of Fish and Wildlife. If the habitat conservation area is also classified as a stream, lake or wetland, then the stream, lake or wetland protection standards shall apply and habitat management shall be addressed as part of the stream, lake or wetland review; provided, that the City may impose additional requirements when necessary to provide for protection of the habitat conservation areas consistent with this chapter.

(2) The director may require the following site- and proposal-related information with the critical areas study:

(a) Identification of any endangered, threatened, sensitive or candidate species that has a primary association with habitat on or adjacent to the project area, and an assessment of potential project impacts to the species;

(b) A discussion of any federal or state management recommendations, including Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife habitat management recommendations, that have been developed for species or habitats located on or adjacent to the project area;

(c) A discussion of any ongoing management practices that will protect habitat after the project site has been developed, including any proposed monitoring, maintenance, and adaptive management programs;

(d) When appropriate due to the type of habitat or species present or the project area conditions, the director may also require the habitat management plan to include an evaluation by the State Department of Fish and Wildlife, local Native American Indian Tribe, or other qualified professional regarding the applicant’s analysis and the effectiveness of any proposed mitigating measures or programs, to include any recommendations as appropriate; and

(e) When appropriate, information from the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife’s backyard wildlife sanctuary program shall be included.

(3) General Requirements. Habitat conservation areas that are on Lake Sammamish, Pine Lake, and Beaver Lake shall be governed by the requirements of the Sammamish shoreline master program. Other habitat conservation areas are subject to the following provisions:

(a) The department shall require the establishment of buffer areas for development activities in, or adjacent to, habitat conservation areas when needed to protect habitat conservation areas. Buffers shall consist of an undisturbed area of native vegetation, or areas identified for restoration, established to protect the integrity and functions of the habitat. Required buffer widths shall consider the management recommendations identified in subsection (2) of this section and reflect the sensitivity of the habitat and the type and intensity of human activity proposed to be conducted nearby. When a species is more susceptible to adverse impacts during specific periods of the year, seasonal restrictions may apply. Development activities may be further restricted and buffers may be increased during the specified season.

(b) Where applicable, a fish and wildlife habitat corridor shall be established as required in SMC 21A.50.327.

(c) A habitat conservation area may be altered only if the proposed alteration of the habitat or the mitigation proposed does not reduce the quantitative and qualitative functions and values of the habitat, except in accordance with this chapter.

(d) In addition to the provisions of SMC 21A.50.060, removal of any native vegetation or woody debris from the habitat conservation area may be allowed only as part of an approved habitat management plan, critical areas study, and/or alteration plan.

(e) Low impact uses and development activities which are consistent with the purpose and function of the habitat conservation area and do not detract from its integrity may be permitted within the conservation area depending on the sensitivity of the habitat area. Examples of uses and development activities which may be permitted in appropriate cases include trails that are pervious, viewing platforms, storm water management facilities such as grass-lined swales, utility easements and other similar uses and development activities; provided, that any impacts to the habitat resulting from such permitted facilities shall be fully mitigated.

(f) Whenever development activities are proposed in or adjacent to a habitat conservation area with which state or federally endangered or threatened species have a primary association, such area shall be protected through the application of measures in accordance with a critical areas report prepared by a qualified professional and approved by the City of Sammamish, with guidance provided by the appropriate state and/or federal agencies.

(g) Plant, wildlife, or fish species not indigenous to the coastal region of the Pacific Northwest shall not be introduced into habitat conservation areas unless authorized by this chapter and by any required state or federal permit or approval.

(h) Mitigation sites shall be located to achieve contiguous wildlife habitat corridors in accordance with a mitigation plan that is part of an approved critical areas report to minimize the isolating effects of development on habitat areas, so long as mitigation of aquatic habitat is located within the same aquatic ecosystem as the area disturbed.

(i) The director shall condition approvals of development activities allowed within or adjacent to a habitat conservation area or its buffers, as necessary, to minimize or mitigate any potential adverse impacts. Conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:

(i) Establishment of buffer zones;

(ii) Preservation of critically important vegetation;

(iii) Limitation of public access to the habitat area, including fencing to deter unauthorized access;

(iv) Seasonal restriction of development activities;

(v) Establishment of a duration and timetable for periodic review of mitigation activities; and

(vi) Requirement of a performance bond, when necessary, to ensure completion and success of proposed mitigation.

(j) Mitigation of alterations to habitat conservation areas shall achieve equivalent or greater biologic functions, and shall include mitigation for adverse impacts from the proposed development as appropriate. Mitigation shall address each function affected by the alteration to achieve functional equivalency or improvement on a per-function basis. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1)


21A.50.327 Fish and wildlife habitat corridors.

On development proposal sites that contain Type F or Np streams and/or wetlands with a high habitat score greater than or equal to eight, that are also located within 200 feet of an on-site or off-site Type F or Np stream and/or wetland with a high habitat score greater than or equal to eight, a fish and wildlife habitat corridor shall be set aside and protected as follows:

(1) Subdivisions and short subdivisions shall either place the corridor in a contiguous permanent open space tract with all developable lots sited on the remaining portion of the project site, or shall design the lots so that conservation easements on individual lots can form a contiguous easement covering the corridor.

(2) Individual lots shall place the corridor in a conservation easement.

(3) The fish and wildlife habitat corridor shall be sited on the property in order to meet the following conditions, where feasible:

(a) Forms one contiguous tract that connects on-site high value habitat areas to other on-site or off-site high value habitat areas;

(b) New development proposals shall provide a minimum fish and wildlife habitat corridor width of 300 feet or a corridor width that is consistent with an approved habitat management plan;

(c) In addition to the provisions of SMC 21A.50.060, development proposals on sites constrained by a fish and wildlife habitat corridor and where development already exists shall maintain a minimum fish and wildlife habitat corridor width of 300 feet unless, through an approved habitat management plan, it can be shown that a lesser habitat corridor width supports and maintains the corridor’s function and value;

(d) Be contiguous with and include and/or connect critical areas, buffers, and open space tracts or wooded areas on site or on adjacent properties, if present; and

(e) The director may modify corridor widths based on supporting documentation from an approved habitat management plan.

(4) Fish and wildlife habitat corridors do not parallel Type Np streams, except as required to provide a connection between two features as described above.

(5) A management plan for the wildlife corridor contained within a tract or tracts shall be prepared that specifies the permissible extent of recreation, forestry or other uses compatible with preserving and enhancing the wildlife habitat value of the tract or tracts. The management plan shall be reviewed and approved by the department. The approved management plan for a subdivision shall be contained within and recorded with the covenants, conditions and restrictions (CCRs). If the wildlife corridor is contained in a conservation easement, a management plan is not required, but may be submitted to the department for review and approval, and recorded with the conservation easement.

(6) Clearing within the wildlife corridor contained in a tract or tracts shall be limited to that allowed by the management plan or as otherwise allowed by this chapter. No clearing, including the removal of woody debris, shall be allowed within a wildlife corridor contained within a conservation easement on individual lots, unless the property owner has an approved management plan.

(7) Where feasible, a homeowners’ association or other entity capable of long-term maintenance and operation shall be established to monitor and assure compliance with the management plan. The association shall provide homeowners with information on the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife’s backyard wildlife sanctuary program.

(8) Wildlife corridors set aside in tracts or conservation easements shall meet the provisions in SMC 16.15.120.

(9) The permanent open space tract containing the wildlife corridor may be credited toward the other applicable requirements such as surface water management and the recreation space requirement of SMC 21A.30.140, provided the proposed uses within the tract are compatible with preserving and enhancing the wildlife habitat value. Restrictions on other uses within the wildlife corridor tract shall be clearly identified in the management plan.

(10) Low impact uses and activities which are consistent with the purpose and function of the habitat corridor and do not detract from its integrity may be permitted within the corridor depending on the sensitivity of the habitat area. Examples of uses and activities which may be permitted in appropriate cases include trails that are pervious, viewing platforms, storm water management facilities such as grass-lined swales, utility easements and other similar uses, or activities otherwise described and approved by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife; provided, that any impacts to the corridor resulting from such permitted facilities shall be fully mitigated.

(11) At the discretion of the director, these standards may be waived or reduced for public facilities such as schools, fire stations, parks, and public road projects. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1)


21A.50.330 Streams – Development standards.

A development proposal on a parcel or parcels containing a stream or associated buffer of a stream located on site or off site shall meet the following requirements:

(1) The following standard buffers shall be established from the ordinary high water mark or from the top of the bank if the ordinary high water mark cannot be identified:

	Stream Type	Standard Buffer Width (ft)

	Type S:	150

	Type F:	150

	Type Np:	75

	Type Ns:	50

(a) Where a legally established and constructed street transects a stream buffer, the department may approve a modification of the standard buffer width to the edge of the street if the isolated part of the buffer does not provide additional protection of the stream and provides insignificant biological, geological or hydrological buffer functions relating to the stream. If the resulting buffer distance is less than 50 percent of the standard buffer, no further reduction shall be allowed.

(b) Where a buffer has been previously established on a legally created parcel or tract that was legally established according to the regulations in place at the time of establishment, and is permanently recorded on title or placed within a separate tract, the buffer shall remain as previously established, provided it is equal to or greater than 50 percent of the required standard buffer distance for the applicable stream category.

(2) Any stream with an ordinary high water mark within 25 feet of the toe of a slope 30 percent or steeper, but less than 40 percent, shall have:

(a) The minimum buffer required for the stream class involved or a 25-foot buffer beyond the top of the slope, whichever is greater, if the horizontal length of the slope, including small benches and terraces, is within the buffer for that stream class; or

(b) A 25-foot buffer beyond the minimum buffer width required for the stream class involved if the horizontal length of the slope, including small benches and terraces, extends beyond the buffer for that stream class.

(3) Any stream adjoined by a riparian wetland or other contiguous critical area shall have the buffer required for the stream type involved or the buffer that applies to the wetland or other critical area, whichever is greater.

(4) Buffer Averaging. Buffer width averaging may be allowed by the City if:

(a) It will provide additional natural resource protection, as long as the total area contained in the buffer on the development proposal site does not decrease (see also SMC 21A.30.210(4) for buffer compensation requirements for trails);

(b) The stream contains variations in sensitivity due to existing physical characteristics or the character of the buffer varies in slope, soils, or vegetation, and the stream would benefit from a wider buffer in places and would not be adversely impacted by a narrower buffer in other places;

(c) The buffer width is not reduced to less than 50 percent of the standard buffer;

(d) The buffer is associated with a development proposal and it will not further encumber a neighboring property not owned by the applicant; and

(e) Buffer averaging may be used in conjunction with buffer reduction options in this section, provided the total combined reduction does not reduce the buffer to less than 50 percent of the standard buffer width at any location.

(5) Increased Buffers. Increased buffer widths may be required by a distance necessary to protect:

(a) Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas and habitat connections based on an approved habitat management plan as defined by the Department of Fish and Wildlife;

(b) Landslide or erosion hazard areas contiguous to streams;

(c) Groundwater recharge and discharge area;

(d) Or to offset buffer impacts, such as trail and utility corridors; and

(e) At-risk ecological stream functions including, but not limited to, the following:

(i) Habitat complexity, connectivity and biological functions;

(ii) Seasonal hydrological dynamics as provided in the adopted surface water design manual;

(iii) Sediment removal and erosion control;

(iv) Pollutant removal;

(v) Large wood debris (LWD) recruitment;

(vi) Water temperature;

(vii) Wildlife habitat; and

(viii) Microclimate.

(6) Buffer Reduction. Buffers may be reduced when buffer-reduction impacts are mitigated and result in equal or greater protection of the ecological stream functions. Prior to considering buffer reductions, the applicant shall demonstrate application of mitigation sequencing as required in SMC 21A.50.135. A plan for mitigating buffer-reduction impacts must be prepared using selected incentive-based mitigation options from the list below, and is subject to approval by the City. The following incentive options for reducing standard buffer widths shall be considered cumulative up to a maximum reduction of 50 percent of the standard buffer width. In all circumstances where a substantial portion of the remaining buffer is degraded, the buffer reduction plan shall include replanting with native vegetation in the degraded portions of the remaining buffer area and shall include a five-year monitoring and maintenance plan.

(a) Up to 20 percent reduction in the standard buffer width may be allowed if water quality is improved in excess of the requirements of the adopted surface water design manual and SMC Title 13, Surface Water Management, through the use of created and/or enhanced wetlands, or ponds supplemental to existing storm drainage and water quality requirements.

(b) Removal of existing impervious surfaces:

(i) Up to 10 percent reduction in standard buffer width if impervious surfaces within the to-be-remaining buffer area are reduced by at least 50 percent; or

(ii) Up to 20 percent reduction in standard buffer width if the to-be-remaining buffer area is presently more than 50 percent impervious and all of it is to be removed.

(c) Removal of invasive, nonnative vegetation: up to 10 percent reduction in standard buffer width for the removal and extended (minimum five-year) monitoring and continued-removal maintenance of relatively dense stands of invasive, nonnative vegetation from significant portions of the remaining buffer area.

(d) Restoration, preservation and maintenance of the existing stream and buffer vegetation if the following conditions are present and/or attainable as a result of action:

(i) An undisturbed vegetated buffer is preserved in the remaining buffer width; and

(ii) Existing buffer conditions are degraded such that more than 40 percent of the buffer is covered by nonnative/invasive plant species and the buffer is restored according to a City-approved restoration plan to improve wetland buffer functions; and

(iii) Native tree or shrub vegetation covers less than 25 percent of the total buffer area and the area will be revegetated according to a City-approved restoration plan with native trees and shrubs to replace impacted buffer functions; and

(iv) The stream buffer has slopes of less than 25 percent; and

(v) The buffer reduction determination and percentage shall be on a site-by-site basis based on the applicant’s plan and demonstration of improvement to water quality and habitat functions.

(e) In-stream habitat enhancement:

(i) Up to 20 percent reduction in standard buffer width for log structure placement, bioengineered bank stabilization, or culvert removal; or

(ii) Up to 30 percent reduction in standard buffer width for improving fish passage and/or creation of side channel or backwater areas.

(f) If not already required under an existing development proposal, installation of oil/water separators for storm water quality control: up to 10 percent reduction in standard buffer width.

(g) Use of pervious material for driveway/road construction: up to 10 percent reduction in standard buffer width.

(h) Restoration of on-site buffer and habitat areas, or restoration of off-site buffer and habitat areas within the same sub-basin of the impacted stream if no on-site restoration is possible:

(i) Up to 10 percent reduction in standard buffer width if restoration area is at a 2:1 ratio or greater; or

(ii) Up to 20 percent reduction in standard buffer width if restoration area is at a 4:1 ratio or greater.

(i) Removal of significant refuse or sources of toxic material: up to 10 percent reduction in standard buffer width.

(7) The use of hazardous substances, pesticides and fertilizers in the stream corridor and its buffer may be prohibited by the City.

(8) The introduction of livestock into a stream or stream buffer is prohibited.

(9) In addition to the provisions of SMC 21A.50.060, removal of any native vegetation or woody debris from the stream or stream buffer may be allowed only as part of an approved habitat management plan, critical areas study, and/or alteration plan. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O2005-172 § 4; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.340 Streams – Permitted alterations.

Alterations to streams and stream buffers are not allowed except as provided for by complete exemptions, allowances for existing urban development and other uses, and exceptions in this chapter or as allowed for by this section.

(1) Alterations may only be permitted if based upon a critical areas study conducted in accordance with SMC 21A.50.130 that determines the proposed development will:

(a) Protect, restore or enhance the habitat, natural drainage, or other valuable functions of the stream resulting in a net improvement to the stream and stream buffer;

(b) Design, implement, maintain and monitor a restoration or enhancement plan prepared by a qualified professional;

(c) Perform the restoration or enhancement under the direction of a qualified professional; and

(d) Will otherwise be consistent with the purposes of this chapter.

(2) The applicant shall notify affected communities and native tribes of proposed alterations prior to any alteration if a stream is in a flood hazard area and shall submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.

(3) There shall be no introduction of any plant or wildlife which is not indigenous to the coastal region of the Pacific Northwest into any stream or buffer unless required by a state or federal permit or approval or as otherwise allowed by SMC 21A.50.060, Allowances for existing urban development and other uses.

(4) Utilities may be allowed in stream buffers if:

(a) No reasonable alternative location is available;

(b) The utility corridor meets any additional requirements for installation, replacement of vegetation and maintenance, as needed to mitigate impacts;

(c) The requirements for sewer utility corridors in SMC 21A.50.300 shall also apply to streams; and

(d) Joint use of an approved sewer utility corridor by other utilities may be allowed.

(5) Where technically feasible, surface water discharge shall be located outside of the stream and stream buffer. If surface water discharge to a stream or stream buffer is unavoidable, the following management activities and provisions shall apply:

(a) Surface water discharge to a stream from a flow control or water quality treatment facility, sediment pond or other surface water management activity or facility may be allowed if the discharge is in compliance with the applicable City-adopted storm water requirements.

(b) A Type Ns stream buffer may be used as a regional storm water management facility if:

(i) A public agency and utility exception is granted pursuant to SMC 21A.50.070;

(ii) All requirements of the applicable City-adopted storm water requirements are met;

(iii) The use will not lower the rating or alter the factors used in rating the stream; and

(iv) There are no significant adverse impacts to the stream or habitat.

(6) Except as provided in subsection (7) of this section, public and private trails may be allowed in stream buffers consistent with the standards and requirements in this chapter, the development standards in Chapter 21A.30 SMC, and requirements elsewhere in the SMC. Proposals for constructing viewing platforms, associated access trails, and spur trails must be reviewed by a qualified professional and a critical areas study may be required.

(7) Crossings. The use of existing crossings, including but not limited to utility corridors, road and railroad rights-of-way across streams or buffers for public or private trails is preferred to new crossings, subject to the standards and requirements in the SMC. New stream crossings may be allowed and may encroach on the otherwise required stream buffer if:

(a) Bridges, bottomless culverts or other appropriate methods demonstrated to provide fisheries protection shall be used for stream crossings and the applicant shall demonstrate that such methods and their implementation will pose no harm to the stream habitat or inhibit migration of anadromous fish;

(b) All crossings are constructed during the summer low flow and are timed to avoid stream disturbance during periods when use is critical to resident or anadromous fish including salmonids;

(c) Crossings do not occur over spawning areas used by resident or anadromous fish including salmonids unless the City determines that no other reasonable crossing site exists;

(d) Bridge piers or abutments are not placed within the FEMA floodway or the ordinary high water mark;

(e) Crossings do not diminish the flood-carrying capacity of the stream;

(f) Underground utility crossings are laterally drilled and located at a depth of four feet below the maximum depth of scour for the base flood predicted by a civil engineer licensed by the state of Washington. Temporary bore pits to perform such crossings may be permitted within the stream buffer established in SMC 21A.50.330. Crossing of Type Ns streams when dry may be made with open cuts;

(g) Trail crossings shall use bridges and boardwalks consistent with the design requirements of the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife (WDFW, 2003, Design of Road Culverts for Fish Passage, as amended); and

(h) The number of crossings is minimized and consolidated to serve multiple purposes and properties whenever possible.

(8) Relocations. Stream relocations may be allowed only for:

(a) Type F, Np, and Ns streams as part of a public road, trail, or park project for which a public agency and utility exception is granted pursuant to SMC 21A.50.050; and

(b) Type F, Np and Ns streams for the purpose of enhancing resources in the stream if:

(i) Appropriate floodplain protection measures are used; and

(ii) The relocation occurs on site, except that relocation off site may be allowed if the applicant demonstrates that any on-site relocation is impracticable, the applicant provides all necessary easements and waivers from affected property owners and the off-site location is in the same drainage sub-basin as the original stream.

(9) For any relocation allowed by this section, the applicant shall demonstrate, based on information provided by qualified professionals, including a civil engineer and a biologist, that:

(a) The equivalent base flood storage volume and function will be maintained;

(b) There will be no adverse impact to local groundwater;

(c) There will be no increase in velocity;

(d) There will be no interbasin transfer of water;

(e) There will be no increase in sediment load;

(f) Requirements set out in the mitigation plan are met;

(g) The relocation conforms to other applicable laws; and

(h) All work will be carried out under the direct supervision of a qualified biologist.

(10) A stream channel may be stabilized if:

(a) Movement of the stream channel threatens existing residential or commercial structures, public facilities or improvements, unique natural resources or the only existing access to property;

(b) The stabilization is done in compliance with the requirements of SMC 21A.50.230; and

(c) Soft-bank stabilization techniques are utilized unless the applicant demonstrates that soft-bank techniques are not a reasonable alternative due to site-specific soil, geologic and/or hydrologic conditions.

(11) Replacement of existing culverts to enhance stream habitat, not associated with any other development proposal, may be allowed if accomplished according to a plan for its design, implementation, maintenance, and monitoring prepared by qualified professionals, including a civil engineer and a biologist, and carried out under the direction of a qualified biologist.

(12) Stream and habitat restoration or enhancement may be allowed if:

(a) The restoration is sponsored or approved by a public agency with a mandate to do such work;

(b) The restoration is unassociated with mitigation of a specific development proposal;

(c) The restoration is limited to placement of rock weirs, log controls, spawning gravel, and other specific habitat improvements for resident or anadromous fish including salmonids;

(d) The restoration only involves the use of hand labor and light equipment; or the use of helicopters and cranes that deliver supplies to the project site; provided, that they have no contact with critical areas or their buffers;

(e) The restoration is performed under the direction of qualified professionals; and

(f) Stream relocation, if proposed, may be approved pursuant to subsection (9) of this section as part of an approved restoration plan.

(13) Roadside ditches that carry streams with salmonids may be maintained through the use of best management practices developed in consultation with relevant City, state, and federal agencies. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O2005-172 § 4; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.350 Streams – Mitigation requirements. 

When mitigation for stream or stream buffer impacts is required, mitigation shall meet the requirements listed in SMC 21A.50.145 in addition to the following supplementary requirements:

(1) Equivalent or Greater Functions. Mitigation for alterations to stream(s) and/or stream buffer(s) shall achieve equivalent or greater functions including, but not limited to:

(a) Habitat complexity, connectivity, and other biological functions;

(b) Seasonal hydrological dynamics, water storage capacity and water quality; and

(c) Geomorphic and habitat processes and functions.

(2) Mitigation Type and Location. Mitigation actions shall be in-kind and conducted within the same sub-basin and on the same site as the alteration, except when the following apply:

(a) There are no reasonable on-site opportunities for mitigation or on-site opportunities do not have a high likelihood of success due to development pressures, adjacent land uses, or on-site buffers or connectivity are inadequate;

(b) Off-site mitigation has a greater likelihood of providing equal or improved functions than the impacted stream; and

(c) Off-site locations have been identified and evaluated in the following order of preference:

(i) Within the same drainage sub-basin;

(ii) Within the City limits;

(iii) Within the Sammamish service area for an approved fee-in-lieu or mitigation bank program sites within the City limits in accordance with the provisions of this section;

(iv) Within the Sammamish service area for an approved fee-in-lieu or mitigation bank program sites within the WRIA 8 in accordance with the provisions of this section.

(3) Fee-In-Lieu Stream Mitigation Program. Fee-in-lieu mitigation may be authorized for approved stream impacts; provided, that the impact is related to the approval of a single-family home, City of Sammamish capital improvement project, or development proposal within the Town Center. Fee-in-lieu mitigation shall be subject to the avoidance sequence requirements and mitigation measures of this title, and the approval of a program by the City, to be used in the following order of preference:

(a) A City approved program that utilizes receiving mitigation sites within the same sub-basin as the approved wetland impact.

(b) The King County mitigation reserves program, or other approved program that gives priority to sites within the same sub-basin.

(c) A City approved program, the King County mitigation reserves program, or other approved program that gives priority to sites that will expand or improve habitat for Lake Sammamish Kokanee.

(d) The King County mitigation reserves program, or other approved program that gives priority to sites within the same sub-basin and/or a predefined service area that includes the City of Sammamish.

(4) Mitigation Timing. Where feasible, mitigation projects shall be completed prior to activities that will disturb streams. In all other cases, mitigation shall be completed immediately following disturbance and prior to use or occupancy of the activity or development. Construction of mitigation projects shall be timed to reduce impacts to existing wildlife and flora.

(5) Restoration Required. Restoration shall be required when a stream or its buffer is altered in violation of law or without any specific permission or approval by the City. A mitigation plan for restoration shall conform to the requirements of this chapter and demonstrate that:

(a) The restoration will reliably and demonstrably improve the water quality and fish and wildlife habitat of the stream;

(b) The restoration will have no lasting significant adverse impact on any stream functions; and

(c) On sites where nonnative vegetation was cleared, restoration shall include installation of native vegetation with a density equal to or greater than the pre-altered site conditions.

(6) Surface water management or flood control alterations shall not be considered enhancement unless other functions are simultaneously improved. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O2005-172 § 4; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.351 Ponds – Development standards.

Repealed by Ord. O2013-350. (Ord. O2009-264 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1)


21A.50.352 Lake Sammamish buffer – Permitted alterations.

Repealed by Ord. O2009-264. (Ord. O2005-193 § 1)


21A.50.355 Lake management areas – Special district overlay.

(1) The purpose of lake management areas is to designate the Beaver Lake and Pine Lake watersheds as special management areas for total phosphorus loading control and to establish standard procedures for evaluating drainage plans and related materials for applications of development within the Beaver Lake and Pine Lake Watersheds (within the East Lake Sammamish drainage basin).

(2) The lake management areas special overlay district shall be designated on critical areas maps maintained by the department of community development.

(3) The Beaver Lake watershed as generally identified in the Beaver Lake management plan, which is available at the City of Sammamish community development department, is a sensitive lake and is hereby designated a critical drainage area. This designation is:

(a) Existing whole-lake total phosphorus concentration for the combined Beaver Lake system is 23 micrograms/liter. Beaver Lake 1 and Beaver Lake 2, individually, have whole-lake total phosphorus concentrations of 36 (±2) micrograms/liter and 20 (±1) micrograms/liter, respectively;

(b) Whole-lake total phosphorus concentration, chlorophyll a, and Secchi depth indicate that the Beaver Lake system is bordering on eutrophic conditions;

(c) Modeling of the Beaver Lake system’s future trophic status indicates that the lake will become hypereutrophic with a whole-lake total phosphorus concentration predicted to be 36 micrograms/liter without additional phosphorus removal via storm water treatment; and

(d) Maintaining existing trophic status is a management plan goal. To maintain existing trophic status, an 80 percent total phosphorus annual loading removal goal was established for new impervious surface development prior to storm water discharges to Beaver Lake.

(4) The Pine Lake watershed is generally identified in the City of Sammamish Comprehensive Plan (Figure IV-1 in the Comprehensive Plan or as updated). All appropriate Beaver Lake specific water quality regulations shall be extended to the Pine Lake drainage basin.

(a) These regulations shall only be in effect until such time that a customized Pine Lake water quality strategy is developed and development regulations are adopted based on approved findings of the study.

(b) An applicant for development within the Pine Lake drainage basin may apply for a variance from the standards specified in subsection (7) of this section if it can be proven that conditions are clearly different than at Beaver Lake.

(5) The standards specified in subsection (7) of this section shall apply to all development proposals located within the Beaver Lake and Pine Lake watersheds which require drainage review as specified in the adopted surface water design manual and SMC Title 13, Surface Water Management.

(6) Development proposals within the Beaver Lake or Pine Lake watersheds may be exempt from management plan requirements if they demonstrate to the satisfaction of the community development department that on-site surface and storm water runoff drainage does not in fact drain into the basin in question.

(7) Phosphorous Control Required.

(a) Applicability. Unless the conditions identified in subsection (6) of this section are documented to the satisfaction of the department, the following development proposals are subject to the conditions and standards contained in subsections (7)(b) through (7)(d) of this section:

(i) Projects that create greater than 5,000 square feet of new impervious surface subject to vehicular use in the Beaver Lake or Pine Lake watersheds; or

(ii) Projects that create greater than one acre of pollution generating pervious surface, as defined in the adopted surface water design manual and SMC Title 13, Surface Water Management, in the Beaver Lake or Pine Lake watersheds.

(b) The proposed storm water facilities shall be designed to remove 80 percent of all new total phosphorus loading on an annual basis due to new development (and associated storm water discharges) in the Beaver Lake or Pine Lake watersheds where feasible or utilize AKART if infeasible.

(c) The AKART standard or best management practices for phosphorus-sensitive lakes can be fulfilled by achieving the 50 percent phosphorous removal standard from the adopted surface water design manual and SMC Title 13, Surface Water Management, together with additional applicant proposed measures:

(i) For all development proposals subject to this section, the applicant shall demonstrate that a reduction of 80 percent total phosphorous is achievable through the use of engineering design computations.

(ii) As the adopted King County surface water design manual is updated and additional treatment options and designs for total phosphorus removal become available, new treatment systems may be approved by the City if the AKART standard for phosphorus removal can be demonstrated using the Department of Ecology’s Technology Assessment Protocol – Ecology (TAPE protocol).

(iii) Where soils are suitable, on-site infiltration of storm water runoff can be pursued through the variance process as an AKART alternative using methods described in the manual, as well as providing an organic soil layer consistent with the standards of the adopted surface water design manual and SMC Title 13, Surface Water Management.

(iv) Development proposals using on-site infiltration that do not comply with subsection (7)(c)(iii) of this section shall demonstrate that 80 percent, or better, phosphorus treatment can be expected with the designed on-site infiltration system, rather than by methods described in subsection (7)(c)(iii) of this section.

(d) Hydrologic analysis shall be determined using a continuous hydrologic model such as the Hydrologic Simulation Program – Fortran (HSPF) or the King County runoff time series program (KCRTS) methodology. These methodologies may be revised or superseded by other methodologies for achieving the same performance goal as stipulated by future revision to the surface water design manual. (Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1)


21A.50.360 Critical areas mitigation fee – Creation of fund.

Repealed by Ord. O2013-350. (Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.370 Critical areas mitigation fee – Source of funds.

Repealed by Ord. O2013-350. (Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.380 Critical areas mitigation fee – Use of funds. 

Repealed by Ord. O2013-350. (Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.390 Critical areas mitigation fee – Investment of funds.

Repealed by Ord. O2013-350. (Ord. O2005-193 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.50.400 Sunset provisions.

Repealed by Ord. O2013-350. (Ord. O2013-347 § 1; Ord. O2012-338 § 1; Ord. O2011-315 § 1; Ord. O2009-274 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2005-193 § 1)


Chapter 21A.55 WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES

Sections:

21A.55.010    Purpose.

21A.55.020    Applicability.

21A.55.030    Exemptions.

21A.55.040    Permit required.

21A.55.050    Application requirements.

21A.55.060    Siting hierarchy.

21A.55.070    Base station hierarchy.

21A.55.080    General requirements.

21A.55.090    Design standards.

21A.55.100    Technical evaluation.

21A.55.110    Interference.

21A.55.120    Cessation of use.

21A.55.130    Light poles.


21A.55.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to:

(1) Establish clear regulations for the siting and design of wireless communication facilities consistent with federal regulations;

(2) Promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the public by regulating the siting of WCFs;

(3) Minimize impacts of WCFs on surrounding areas by establishing standards for location, structural integrity, and compatibility;

(4) Encourage the location and collocation of wireless communication equipment on existing structures;

(5) Minimize visual, aesthetic, public safety, and environmental and wildlife effects;

(6) Accommodate the growing need and demand for wireless communication services;

(7) Respond to the policies embodied in the Telecommunications Act of 1996 in such a manner as not to unreasonably discriminate between providers of functionally equivalent personal wireless services or to prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting personal wireless services;

(8) Encourage orderly development in a preferred hierarchy using concealed technologies; and

(9) Assure WCF development is consistent with the City’s wireless master plan. (Ord. O2010-281 § 4)


21A.55.020 Applicability.

(1) If a conflict arises between this chapter and the provisions of another chapter regarding wireless communication facilities, this chapter shall govern.

(2) Facilities regulated by this chapter include the construction, modification, and placement of all WCFs, FCC-regulated amateur radio antennas, dish antennas, and any antennas used for multichannel multipoint distribution service (MMDS) or wireless cable, and wireless service facilities (i.e., cellular phone service, PCS – personal communication services, wireless paging services, wireless Internet services, etc.). Wireless services shall be subject to the following regulations to the extent that such requirements (a) do not unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent services; and (b) do not have the effect of prohibiting personal wireless services within the City of Sammamish. (Ord. O2010-281 § 4)


21A.55.030 Exemptions.

Exemptions shall comply with generally applicable building, structural, electrical, and safety codes and other laws codifying objective standards reasonably related to health and safety. A project taking place within an environmentally critical area shall not be eligible for an exemption. The following are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:

(1) Amateur radio antenna operated by a federally licensed amateur radio operator as part of the amateur or business radio service;

(2) Citizen band or two-way radio antenna including any mast;

(3) Satellite earth stations (satellite dish) that are one meter (39.37 inches) or less in diameter in all residential districts and two meters or less in all other zoning districts and which are not greater than 20 feet above grade in residential districts and 35 feet above grade in all other zoning districts;

(4) Public agency communications systems of the City of Sammamish, without limitation, when the facility or facilities are on lands owned by the City and all other building and land development regulations are complied with. Any such facility constructed and operated under this section shall comply with all federal regulations including, but not limited to, site location, aircraft warning, station power level, and frequency allocation;

(5) A temporary commercial wireless communications facility, for the purposes of providing coverage of a special event such as news coverage or sporting event, subject to approval by the City, except that such facility must comply with all federal and state requirements. Said wireless communications facility may be exempt from the provisions of this chapter up to one week after the duration of the special event;

(6) In the event a building permit is required for any emergency repair, notification in writing to the director of community development shall occur within 24 hours of identification of the needed repair; filing of the building permit application shall be done in compliance with the City’s adopted building code;

(7) Antenna modifications, provided:

(a) There is no increase in the number of antennas; and

(b) There is no increase in the height of the antenna support structure;

(8) Temporary WCF; and

(9) An eligible facilities request pursuant to Section 6409(a) of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012 and 47 CFR 1.40001. All projects that meet the definition of an “eligible facilities request” as defined in 47 CFR 1.40001 shall be permitted upon the issuance of a wireless exemption letter. An application for an eligible facilities request shall provide information as required by the director. For the purpose of reviewing an eligible facilities request, the definitions and procedures of 47 CFR 1.40001 shall control and supersede any contrary definitions or procedures of this chapter. (Ord. O2016-411 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-281 § 4)


21A.55.040 Permit required.

The following table summarizes the type of proposal and required land use approvals. All proposals are subject to the siting hierarchy requirements of this chapter.

	Concealed Attached WCF	Monopole-Style WCF	Concealed Collocation	Flush- or Nonflush-Mounted Antenna on Existing Antenna Support Structure	New Concealed Antenna Support Structure

	P1	P1	P1	P1	C

	C	C	C

P – Permitted Use: The use is allowed subject to the requirements of the code.

C – Conditional Use Permit: The use is allowed subject to the conditional use review procedures and requirements of the code.

Notes:

1. If the proposal does not exceed the maximum height limits set forth at SMC 21A.55.090(3).

(Ord. O2012-321 § 2 (Att. A § 1); Ord. O2010-281 § 4)


21A.55.050 Application requirements.

In addition to any information required for CUP and/or building permit review, an application for new WCFs or modifications to WCFs that require City approval shall provide the following information:

(1) A site plan showing existing and proposed WCFs, access, base station, ancillary structures, warning signs, fencing, landscaping and any other items necessary to illustrate compliance with the development standards of this chapter;

(2) Except as provided below, a stamped statement by a state of Washington registered professional engineer that the support structure shall comply with EIA/TIA-222-Revision G, published by the American National Standards Institute (as amended), allowable wind speed for the applicable zone in which the facility is located, and describing the general structural capacity of any proposed WCF(s), including:

(a) The number and type of antennas that can be accommodated;

(b) The basis for the calculation of capacity; and

(c) A written statement that the proposal complies with all federal guidelines regarding interference and ANSI standards as adopted by the FCC, including but not limited to nonionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER) standards.

The foregoing requirements are not applicable when the support structure is a utility pole or high voltage electrical transmission tower;

(3) A report by the applicant that includes a description of the proposed WCF, including height above grade, materials, color, lighting, and information demonstrating compliance with SMC 21A.55.060, Siting hierarchy;

(4) Where a permit for an attachment is required, the application shall also include the following information:

(a) The name and address of the operator(s) of proposed and existing antennas on the site;

(b) The height of any proposed antennas;

(c) Manufacture, type, and model of such antennas;

(d) Frequency, modulation, and class of service; and

(e) A description of the wireless communication service that the applicant intends to offer to provide, or is currently offering or providing within the City;

(5) A detailed visual simulation of the wireless communication facility shall be provided along with a written report from the applicant, including a map showing all locations where an unimpaired signal can be received for that facility;

(6) Approved WROWA (wireless right-of-way use agreement);

(7) Other information as the director of community development may reasonably require, including additional information specific to the City’s wireless communication facilities master plan; and

(8) Fees for review as established by the City’s most current fee resolution.

The director of community development may release an applicant from having to provide one or more of the pieces of information on this list upon a finding that in the specific case involved said information is not necessary to process or make a decision on the application being submitted. (Ord. O2012-321 § 2 (Att. A § 2); Ord. O2010-281 § 4)


21A.55.060 Siting hierarchy.

Siting of antennas or support structures shall adhere to the siting hierarchy of this section. The order of ranking for antenna or antenna support structures, from highest to lowest, shall be 1 to 5. Where a lower ranking alternative is proposed, the applicant must file relevant information including but not limited to an affidavit by a licensed radio frequency engineer demonstrating that despite diligent efforts to adhere to the established hierarchy within the geographic search area, higher ranking options are not technically feasible or justified given the location of the proposed wireless communications facility and network need.

Example:

A new WCF is proposed; the applicant demonstrates that the new facility cannot be sited under hierarchy 1. The applicant then demonstrates the new facility cannot be sited under hierarchy 2. The applicant then moves to hierarchy 3 and is able to propose a site.

Hierarchy:

(1) A WCF that is: 

(a) A concealed WCF that is attached to an existing antenna support structure:

(i) Located within City-classified principal arterial rights-of-way; 

(ii) Located on a high voltage electrical transmission tower;

(iii) Collocated with another WCF; or

(iv) Within public parks, public open spaces, or on other publicly owned land; or

(b) A monopole-style WCF with encased antennas that is located within public parks, public open spaces, or on other publicly owned land.

(2) A WCF that is:

(a) A concealed WCF that is attached to an existing antenna support structure:

(i) In a minor arterial right-of-way; 

(ii) Located on the roof of a multi-story building in the Town Center A or B zone; 

(iii) Located on the roof of any building in the commercial business or office zone; or

(iv) Located on the roof of any building in the R-12 or R-18 zone.

(3) A WCF that is:

(a) A concealed WCF that is attached to an existing antenna support structure:

(i) Located in a collector arterial right-of-way;

(ii) Located on the roof of any building in the neighborhood business zone; or

(iii) Located in a residentially zoned area on a parcel not used for residential purposes; or

(b) A monopole-style WCF that is located in a residentially zoned area on a parcel not used for residential purposes.

(4) A concealed WCF that is attached to a new antenna support structure within an arterial right-of-way.

(5) WCF not meeting any of the options in Tiers 1 through 4, when no reasonable alternative exists. (Ord. O2011-298 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-281 § 4)


21A.55.070 Base station hierarchy.

Siting of base stations shall adhere to the siting hierarchy of this section. The order of ranking, from highest to lowest, shall be 1, 2, and 3. Where a lower ranking alternative is proposed, the applicant must demonstrate that a higher ranking option is not technically feasible, or justified given the location or size of the proposed base station.

Hierarchy:

(1) A base station that is:

(a) Underground and where the top of the vault is flush with the surrounding grade within City rights-of-way.

(2) A base station that is:

(a) Attached to an antenna support structure located within City rights-of-way;

(b) Placed within an existing building, provided the use of the building is not single-family residential; or

(c) On the roof of an existing building, provided the use of the building is not single-family residential and is not visible from the street.

(3) A base station that is:

(a) On adjacent property and concealed in the same manner as concealed WCF (i.e., the base station is not readily identifiable as such and is designed to be aesthetically compatible with existing and proposed building(s) and uses on a site); or

(b) On adjacent property; provided, that the base station is fenced and landscaped; or

(c) Inside a building; or

(d) Otherwise located so as not to be open or visible to public view (e.g., in a forested area surrounded by vegetation so that the base station is not open to public view). (Ord. O2011-298 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-281 § 4)


21A.55.080 General requirements.

(1) Within public parks and public open spaces, the placement of antennas on existing structures, such as power poles, light standards for recreational fields and antenna support structures, is the preferred option subject to the approval of the property owner. If an existing structure cannot accommodate an antenna due to structural deficiency, or does not have the height required to provide adequate signal coverage, the structure may be replaced with a new structure, provided the new structure:

(a) Will serve the original purpose;

(b) Does not exceed the maximum height allowed by this chapter. Any height increase in excess of the maximum height allowed pursuant to SMC 21A.55.090(3) will require a conditional use permit; and

(c) Meets all the requirements of this chapter.

(2) Concealed attached antennas shall comply with the following requirements:

(a) Concealed antennas shall reflect the visual characteristics of the structure to which they are attached and shall be designed to architecturally match the facade, roof, wall, or structure on which they are affixed so that they blend with the existing structural design, color, and texture. This shall include the use of colors and materials, as appropriate. When located on structures such as buildings or water towers, the placement of the antennas on the structure shall reflect the following order of priority in order to minimize visual impact:

(i) A location as close as possible to the center of the structure; and

(ii) Along the outer edges or side-mounted; provided, that in this instance, additional means such as screens should be considered and may be required by the department on a case-by-case basis; and

(iii) When located on the outer edge or side-mounted, be placed on the portion of the structure less likely to be seen from adjacent lands containing, in descending order of priority: existing residences, public parks and open spaces, and public roadways;

(b) Feed lines shall be contained within a principal building or encased and the encasement painted to blend and match the design, color, and texture of the facade, roof, wall, or structure to which they are affixed.

(3) Concealed antenna support structures shall comply with the following requirements:

(a) Upon application for a conditional use permit or a building permit for a new concealed antenna support structure, whichever is required first, the applicant shall provide a map showing all existing antenna support structures or other suitable nonresidential structures located within one-quarter mile of the proposed structure with consideration given to engineering and structural requirements.

(b) No new antenna support structure shall be permitted if an existing structure suitable for attachment of an antenna or collocation is located within one-quarter mile, unless the applicant demonstrates that the existing structure is physically or technologically unfeasible, or is not made available for sale or lease by the owner, or is not made available at a market rate cost, or would result in greater visual impact. The burden of proof shall be on the applicant to show that a suitable structure for mounting of antenna or collocation cannot be reasonably or economically used in accordance with these criteria.

(c) In residential districts, new concealed antenna support structures shall only be permitted on lots whose principal use is not single-family residential including, but not limited to: schools, churches, synagogues, fire stations, parks, and other public property.

(d) To the extent that there is no conflict with the color and lighting requirements of the Federal Communications Commission and the Federal Aviation Administration for aircraft safety purposes, new antenna support structures shall be concealed as defined by this chapter and shall be configured and located in a manner to have the least visually obtrusive profile on the landscape and adjacent properties. New concealed antenna support structures shall be designed to complement or match adjacent structures and landscapes with specific design considerations such as architectural designs, height, scale, color, and texture and designed to blend with existing surroundings to the extent feasible. This shall be achieved through the use of compatible colors and materials, and alternative site placement to allow the use of topography, existing vegetation or other structures to screen the proposed concealed antenna support structure from adjacent lands containing, in descending order of priority: existing residences, public parks and open spaces, and public roadways.

(e) At time of application the applicant shall file a letter with the department, agreeing to allow collocation on the tower. The agreement shall commit the applicant to provide, either at a market rate cost or at another cost basis agreeable to the affected parties, the opportunity to collocate the antenna of other service providers on the applicant’s proposed tower to the extent that such collocation is technically and structurally feasible for the affected parties.

(f) All new concealed antenna support structures up to 60 feet in height shall be engineered and constructed to accommodate no less than two antenna arrays. All concealed antenna support structures between 61 feet and 100 feet shall be engineered and constructed to accommodate no less than three antenna arrays. All concealed antenna support structures between 101 and 140 feet shall be engineered and constructed to accommodate no less than four antenna arrays.

(g) Grading shall be minimized and limited only to the area necessary for the new WCF.

(4) Collocated or combined facilities shall comply with the following requirements:

(a) At the time of installation, the WCF base station and ancillary structures shall be brought into compliance with any applicable landscaping requirements; and

(b) When a collocated or combined WCF is to be located on a nonconforming building or structure, then it will be subject to Chapter 21A.70 SMC. (Ord. O2012-321 § 2 (Att. A § 3); Ord. O2010-281 § 4)


21A.55.090 Design standards.

(1) All WCFs shall:

(a) Be designed and constructed or improved at the time of an upgrade to present the least visually obtrusive profile; and

(b) Use colors such as brown, grey, blue, or green and materials that match the existing antenna support structure and structures in the local area and reduce visual impacts unless otherwise required by the City of Sammamish, the FAA, or the FCC. For example, a utility pole that is brown should have conduits and antennas that are brown. The colors and materials shall be approved by the City community development director to ensure compliance with this section; and

(c) Flush-mount antennas when feasible. Four nonflush-mounted antennas are allowed only upon written demonstration by the applicant that flush-mounting is not feasible.

(2) Base Stations.

(a) Base stations and ancillary structures shall be subject to the setbacks of the underlying zoning district.

(b) Except as allowed pursuant to subsection (5)(c) of this section, base stations that are not located underground shall not be visible from public views.

(c) New concealed base stations and ancillary structures shall be designed to complement or match adjacent structures and landscapes. Specific design considerations such as architectural designs, height, scale, color, and texture should be designed to blend with existing surroundings to the extent feasible.

(d) Where feasible, one building with multiple compartments shall be constructed to serve the total number of anticipated collocation tenants. If the applicant can demonstrate that one building is not feasible or practical due to site design or other constraints, then a master site plan shall be provided to demonstrate how all potential base stations and ancillary structures will be accommodated within the vicinity of the WCF.

(3) Height Standards.

(a) Measurement of WCF. For purposes of this subsection, the height of the antenna support structure shall be measured from the natural undisturbed ground surface below the center of the base of the tower to the top of the tower or, if higher, to the top of the highest antenna or piece of equipment attached thereto.

(b) Maximum Height for New WCF. The height of any new WCF shall not exceed the height provided in the table below.

	Locations	Maximum Height of New Antenna Support Structures

	CB, O	80'

	NB	40'

	R-1 – R-8, TC-C and TC-E	40'

	R-12 – R-18	60'

	TC-A, TC-B and TC-D	80'

	Principal arterial rights-of-way	120'

	Minor or collector arterial rights-of-way	80'

(c) Maximum Height for Replacement Antenna Support Structure. The height of an antenna support structure that replaces an existing antenna support structure shall not exceed the higher of the height of the existing antenna support structure being replaced or the maximum height provided in the table above for new antenna support structures.

(d) Maximum Height Above Top of Antenna Support Structure. The highest point of an attached antenna shall not be more than 20 feet above the highest point of the antenna support structure (not including any attached antenna) to which it is attached.

(e) A new antenna support structure may be permitted to exceed the maximum height allowed per location, provided:

(i) The increase is consistent with all conditions of the CUP authorizing the use and subsequent approvals thereafter;

(ii) The existing conditions and the proposed changes are not in violation of the SMC;

(iii) The height increase is made necessary by foliage attenuation from foliage in the proposed location of the antenna support structure that exceeds the maximum height allowed for antenna support structure for that location;

(iv) The height increase is the minimum necessary for the effective functioning of the provider’s network; and

(v) A nonconformance shall not be created or increased, except as otherwise provided by this chapter.

(4) Setback Requirements.

(a) Antenna support structures outside of the right-of-way shall have a setback from property lines of 10 feet from any property line and 50 feet or one foot setback for every one foot in height from any residentially zoned property, whichever provides the greatest setback.

(b) Base stations shall be subject to the setback requirements of the zone in which they are located.

(c) The department shall consider the following criteria and give substantial consideration to on-site location and setback flexibility. These are authorized when reviewing applications for new antenna support structures. The following shall be considered:

(i) Whether existing trees and vegetation can be preserved in such a manner that would most effectively screen the proposed tower from residences on adjacent properties;

(ii) Whether there are any natural landforms, such as hills or other topographic breaks, that can be utilized to screen the tower from adjacent residences; and

(iii) Whether the applicant has utilized a tower design that reduces the silhouette of the portion of the tower extending above the height of surrounding trees.

(5) Landscaping and Fencing Requirements.

(a) Except as allowed pursuant to subsection (5)(c) of this section, all ground-mounted base stations shall be enclosed with an opaque fence. In all residential zones, or a facility abutting a residential zone, or in any zone when the base station adjoins a public right-of-way, the fence shall be opaque and made of wood, brick, or masonry. All fencing shall be subject to SMC 21A.30.190.

(b) Except as allowed pursuant to subsection (5)(c) of this section, all base stations that are within base station hierarchy 2(a) and 3(b) shall have perimeter landscaping as follows:

(i) In the NB, CB, O or TC zone and the abutting rights-of-way, the base stations shall be landscaped with eight feet of Type II landscaping pursuant to Chapter 21A.35 SMC along any lot line abutting a residential zone;

(ii) In residential zones and the abutting rights-of-way, the base station shall be landscaped with 10 feet of Type I landscaping pursuant to Chapter 21A.35 SMC;

(iii) Any landscaping required shall be placed outside of the fence; and

(iv) Landscaping provisions may be modified in accordance with Chapter 21A.35 SMC.

(c) If an applicant is able to demonstrate to the City engineer that compliance with the applicable fencing and landscaping requirements will pose an unreasonable risk to the public health or safety, the fencing and landscaping requirements may be altered to the extent reasonably necessary to address the demonstrated risk to public health or safety, or waived if no reasonable alternatives exist.

(6) Lighting Standards. Except as specifically required by the FCC or FAA, WCFs shall not be illuminated, except lighting for security purposes that is compatible with the surrounding neighborhood.

Any lighting required by the FAA or FCC must be the minimum intensity and number of flashes per minute (i.e., the longest duration between flashes) allowable to minimize the potential attraction to migratory birds. Dual lighting standards (white blinking light in daylight and red blinking light at dusk and nighttime) are required and strobe light standards are prohibited unless required. The lights shall be oriented so as not to project directly onto surrounding residential property, and be consistent with FAA and FCC requirements.

(7) Signage. Commercial messages shall not be displayed on any WCF. The only signage that is permitted upon an antenna support structure, base station, or fence shall be informational and for the purpose of identifying the antenna support structure (such as ASR registration number), as well as the party responsible for the operation and maintenance of the facility, its current address and telephone number, security or safety signs, and property manager signs (if applicable).

If more than 220 voltage is necessary for the operation of the facility and is present in a ground grid or in the antenna support structure, signs located every 20 feet and attached to the fence or wall shall display in large, bold, high-contrast letters (minimum letter height of four inches) the following: HIGH VOLTAGE – DANGER.

(8) Sounds. Maximum permissible sound levels to intrude into the real property of another person from a WCF shall not exceed 45 dB(A). In the case of maintenance, construction, and emergencies, these sound levels may be exceeded for short durations as required by the specific circumstance. (Ord. O2012-321 § 2 (Att. A § 4); Ord. O2011-298 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-281 § 4)


21A.55.100 Technical evaluation.

The City may retain the services of an independent technical expert such as a registered professional electrical engineer accredited by the state of Washington who holds a federal communications general radio telephone operator’s license. The engineer will provide technical evaluation of permit applications for WCFs. The applicant shall pay all the costs of said review. (Ord. O2010-281 § 4)


21A.55.110 Interference.

Whenever the City has encountered radio frequency interference with its public safety communications equipment, and it believes that such interference has been or is being caused by one or more WCFs, the following steps shall be taken:

(1) Upon notification by the City to WCF service providers potentially interfering with public safety communications equipment, the providers shall cooperate and coordinate with the City and among themselves to investigate and mitigate the interference, if any, utilizing the procedures set forth in the joint wireless industry – public safety “Best Practices Guide,” released by the FCC in February 2001, including the “Good Engineering 

Practices,” as may be amended or revised by the FCC from time to time.

(2) If any WCF owner fails to cooperate with the City in complying with the owner’s obligations under this section or if the FCC makes a determination of radio frequency interference with the City public safety communications equipment, the owner who fails to cooperate and/or the owner of the WCF which caused the interference shall be responsible, upon FCC determination of radio frequency interference, for reimbursing the City for all costs associated with ascertaining and resolving the interference, including but not limited to any engineering studies obtained by the jurisdiction to determine the source of the interference. For the purposes of this subsection, failure to cooperate shall include failure to initiate any response or action as described in the “Best Practices Guide” within 24 hours of the City’s notification. (Ord. O2010-281 § 4)


21A.55.120 Cessation of use.

(1) Antennas shall be removed, at the owner’s expense, from WCFs no more than 180 days after the antenna is no longer operational, unless the abandonment is associated with a consolidation, in which case the removal shall occur within 90 days of cessation of use.

(2) The whole WCF shall be removed, at the owner’s expense, within 180 days of the date the last antenna is removed.

(3) An owner wishing to extend the time for removal or reactivation shall submit a written request along with the appropriate documentation demonstrating the reason for such extension request. The City may extend the time for removal up to 90 additional days upon a showing of good cause with one additional 90-day extension. If the antenna support structure or antenna is not removed in a timely fashion, the City may give notice that it will contract for removal within 30 days following written notice to the owner. Thereafter, the City may cause removal of the antenna support structure with costs being borne by the current WCF owner or landowner.

(4) Upon removal of the WCF, base station, and ancillary structures, said area shall be returned to its natural state and topography and vegetated consistent with the natural surroundings or consistent with the current use of the land at the time of removal. The cost of rehabilitation shall be borne by the current WCF owner or landowner. (Ord. O2010-281 § 4)


21A.55.130 Light poles.

Light poles and light standards located within the public rights-of-way are prohibited from use as an antenna support structure or for the attachment of an antenna or antenna array. For purposes of this prohibition, “light pole” shall mean and refer to a structure affixed to the ground, such as a pole, that has as its primary purpose the support of an overhead light fixture; and “public rights-of-way” shall mean the surface of, and the space above and below, any public street, highway, freeway, bridge, land path, alley, court, boulevard, sidewalk, way, lane, public way, drive, circle or other public right-of-way, including, any easement now or hereafter held by the City within the corporate boundaries of the City as now or hereafter constituted for the purpose of public travel, excluding railroad rights-of-way. (Ord. O2010-281 § 5)


Chapter 21A.60 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS – ADEQUACY OF PUBLIC FACILITIES AND SERVICES

Sections:

21A.60.010    Purpose.

21A.60.020    General requirements.

21A.60.030    Adequate sewage disposal.

21A.60.040    Adequate water supply.

21A.60.050    Surface water management.

21A.60.060    Adequate streets.

21A.60.070    Adequate vehicular access.

21A.60.080    Adequate fire protection.

21A.60.090    School concurrency – Applicability and relationship to fees.

21A.60.100    Findings, recommendations, and decisions regarding school capacities.

21A.60.110    Annual council review.

21A.60.120    School concurrency standard.

21A.60.130    Credit for improvements.


21A.60.010 Purpose. 

The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that public facilities and services necessary to support development are adequate or will be provided in a timely manner consistent with the public facilities and services planning goal of the Washington State Growth Management Act of 1990 by:

(1) Specifying the on-site and off-site facilities and services that must be in place or otherwise assured of timely provision prior to development;

(2) Allocating the cost of those facilities and services fairly; and

(3) Providing a general framework for relating development standards and other requirements of this code to:

(a) Adopted service level standards for public facilities and services;

(b) Procedural requirements for phasing development projects to ensure that services are provided as development occurs; and

(c) The review of development permit applications. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.60.020 General requirements.

(1) All new development proposals including any use, activity, or structure allowed by Chapter 21A.20 SMC that requires City approval shall be adequately served by the following facilities and services prior to the time of occupancy, recording, or other land use approval, as further specified in this chapter:

(a) Sewage disposal;

(b) Water supply;

(c) Surface water management;

(d) Streets and access;

(e) Fire protection service; and 

(f) Schools.

(2) All new development proposals for building permits, plats, short plats, and lot line adjustments, which will be served by a sewer or water district, shall include a certificate of water availability and/or certificate of sewer availability to demonstrate compliance with this chapter and other provisions of the SMC, the City of Sammamish interim comprehensive plan, and the Growth Management Act. 

(3) Regardless of the number of sequential permits required, the provisions of this chapter shall be applied only once to any single development proposal. If changes and modifications result in impacts not considered when the proposal was first approved, the City shall consider the revised proposal as a new development proposal. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.60.030 Adequate sewage disposal.

All new development shall be served by an adequate public or private sewage disposal system, including both collection and treatment facilities as follows:

(1) A public sewage disposal system is adequate for a development proposal provided that:

(a) For the issuance of a building permit, preliminary plat or short plat approval, or other land use approval, the site of the proposed development is or can be served by an existing disposal system consistent with the adopted sewer system plans of the Plateau water and sewer district and the Northeast Sammamish water and sewer district, and the disposal system has been approved by the department as being consistent with applicable state and local design and operating guidelines;

(b) For the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a building or change of use permit, the approved public sewage disposal system as set forth in subsection (1)(a) of this section is installed to serve each building or lot;

(c) For recording a final plat, final short plat, or binding site plan, the approved public sewage disposal system set forth in subsection (1)(a) of this section shall be installed to serve each lot respectively; or a bond or similar security shall be deposited with the City of Sammamish for the future installation of an adequate sewage disposal system. The bond may be assigned to a purveyor to assure the construction of such facilities within two years of recording; 

(d) For a zone reclassification, the timing of installation of required sewerage improvements shall be contained in the approving ordinance; and 

(2) A private individual sewage system is adequate, if an on-site sewage disposal system for each individual building or lot is installed to meet the requirements and standards of the King County department of public health as to lot size, soils, and system design prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a building or change of use permit. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.60.040 Adequate water supply.

All new development shall be served by an adequate public or private water supply system as follows:

(1) A public water system is adequate for a development proposal provided that:

(a) For the issuance of a building permit, preliminary plat approval or other land use approval, the applicant must demonstrate that the existing water supply system available to serve the site:

(i) Complies with the applicable planning, operating and design requirements of Chapter 246-290 WAC and other applicable provisions of the rules and regulations of the King County board of health, and any limitation or condition imposed by the adopted plan of the water purveyor; and

(ii) The proposed improvements to an existing water system have been reviewed by the City engineer and determined to comply with the design standards and conditions specified in subsection (1)(a)(i) of this section; or

(iii) A proposed new water supply system has been reviewed by the City engineer and determined to comply with the design standards and conditions specified in subsection (1)(a)(i) of this section;

(b) Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a building or change of use permit, the approved public water system and any system improvements set forth in subsection (1)(a) of this section shall be installed to serve each building or lot respectively;

(c) For recording a final plat, final short plat or binding site plan, either the approved public water supply system or system improvements set forth in subsection (1)(a) of this section shall be installed to serve each lot or a bond or similar security shall be deposited with the City of Sammamish and may be assigned to a purveyor to assure the construction of required water facilities in Group A systems as defined by board of health regulations, within two years of recording; and

(d) For a zone reclassification, the timing of installation of required water system improvements shall be included in the approving ordinance.

(2) An on-site, individual water system is adequate and the plat or short plat may receive preliminary and final approval, and a building or change of use permit may be issued if:

(a) The water purveyor has indicated that service cannot be provided in compliance with the purveyor’s approved water system plan; and

(b) The Seattle-King County department of public health has approved the proposed method of water supply in accordance with the applicable King County board of health rules and regulations and this section. The applicant shall provide appropriate information to demonstrate to the department and the Seattle-King County department of public health that a private individual water system will be adequate. The Seattle-King County department of public health may require installation of private individual water systems prior to final approval of a plat or short plat where information is insufficient to show an adequate water supply can be made available. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.60.050 Surface water management.

All new development shall be served by an adequate surface water management system as follows:

(1) The proposed system is adequate if the development proposal site is served by a surface water management system approved by the department as being consistent with the design, operating and procedural requirements of the King County surface water design manual and KCC Title 9 as adopted by SMC Title 13;

(2) For a subdivision or zone reclassification, the phased installation of required surface water management improvements shall be stated in the approving ordinance. Such phasing may require that a bond or similar security be deposited with the City of Sammamish; and

(3) A variance request from the requirements of the King County surface water design manual and KCC Title 9 as adopted by SMC Title 13 shall be reviewed as set forth in KCC 9.04.050 and does not require a variance from this title unless relief is requested from a building height, setback, landscaping or other development standard set forth in Chapters 21A.25 through 21A.65 SMC. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.60.060 Adequate streets. 

(1) All new development shall be served by adequate streets. Streets are adequate if the development’s traffic impacts on surrounding public streets are acceptable under the level of service standards and the compliance procedures established in SMC Title 14A.

(2)  The renewal of permits or the issuance of a new permit for existing uses constitutes a new development proposal only if it will generate additional traffic above that currently generated by the use.

(3) A variance request from the street cross-section or construction standards established by the City of Sammamish public works standards adopted by SMC Title 14A, and does not require a variance from this title unless relief is requested from a building height, setback, landscaping or other development standard set forth in Chapters 21A.25 through 21A.65 SMC. (Ord. O2018-466 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.60.070 Adequate vehicular access.

All new development shall be served by adequate vehicular access as follows:

(1) The property upon which the development proposed is to be located has direct access to:

(a) A public or private street that meets City street standards as set forth in the public works standards or is formally declared acceptable by the City engineer; or

(b) The property has access to such a street over a private driveway approved by the City;

(2)  The proposed circulation system of a proposed subdivision, short subdivision or binding site plan shall intersect with existing and anticipated streets abutting the site at safe and convenient locations, as determined by the department and the City engineer; and

(3) Every lot upon which one or more buildings is proposed to be erected or traffic generating use is proposed to be established shall establish safe access as follows:

(a) Safe passage from the street right-of-way to building entrances for transit patrons and other pedestrians, in accordance with the design standards set forth in Chapter 21A.40 SMC;

(b) Direct access from the street right-of-way, fire lane or a parking space to any part of the property as needed to provide public services in accordance with adopted standards (e.g., fire protection, emergency medical service, mail delivery or trash collection); and

(c) Direct access from the street right-of-way, driveway, alley or other means of ingress/egress approved by the City to all required off-street parking spaces on the premises. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.60.080 Adequate fire protection. 

All new development shall be served by adequate fire protection as set forth below:

(1) The site of the development proposed is served by a water supply system that provides at least minimum fire flow and a road system or fire lane system that provides life safety/rescue access, and other fire protection requirements for buildings as required by SMC Title 16, Buildings and Construction;

(2) For a zone reclassification, the timing of installation of required fire protection improvements shall be stated in the approving ordinance, secured with a bond or similar security, and deposited with the City of Sammamish; and

(3) A variance request from the requirements established by Chapter 16.05 SMC, Building Codes and Fire Code, shall be reviewed as set forth in Article 2 of the currently adopted edition of the Uniform Fire Code and does not require a variance from this title unless relief is requested from a building height, setback, landscaping or other development standard set forth in Chapters 21A.25 through 21A.65 SMC. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.60.090 School concurrency – Applicability and relationship to fees.

(1) The school concurrency standard set out in SMC 21A.60.120 shall apply to applications for preliminary plat approval, mobile home parks, requests for multifamily zoning, and building permits for multifamily housing projects that have not been previously evaluated for compliance with the concurrency standard.

(2) The City’s finding of concurrency shall be made at the time of preliminary plat or UPD approval, at the time that a request to actualize potential multifamily zoning is approved, at the time a mobile home park site plan is approved, or prior to building permit issuance for multifamily housing projects that have not been previously established for compliance with the concurrency standard. Once such a finding has been made, the development shall be considered as vested for purposes of the concurrency determination.

(3) Excluded from the application of the concurrency standard are:

(a) Building permits for individual single-family dwellings;

(b) Any form of housing exclusively for senior citizens, including nursing homes and retirement centers;

(c) Shelters for temporary placement, relocation facilities and transitional housing facilities;

(d) Replacement, reconstruction or remodeling of existing dwelling units;

(e) Short subdivisions that create four or fewer lots;

(f) Any residential building permit for any development proposal for which a concurrency determination has already been made pursuant to the terms of this title. 

(4) All of the development activities that are excluded from the application of the concurrency standard are subject to school impact fees imposed pursuant to Chapter 21A.105 SMC, School Impact Fees.

(5) The assessment and payment of impact fees are governed by and shall be subject to the provisions in Chapter 21A.105 SMC addressing school impact fees.

(6) A certification of concurrency for a school district shall not preclude the City from collecting impact fees for the district. Impact fees may be assessed and collected as long as the fees are used to fund capital and system improvements needed to serve the new development, and as long as the use of such fees is consistent with the requirements of Chapter 82.02 RCW and this chapter. Pursuant to Chapter 82.02 RCW, impact fees may also be used to recoup capital and system improvement costs previously incurred by a school district to the extent that new growth and development will be served by the previously constructed improvements or incurred costs. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.60.100 Findings, recommendations, and decisions regarding school capacities.

(1) In making a threshold determination pursuant to SEPA, the director and/or the hearing examiner, in the course of reviewing proposals for residential development including applications for plats, mobile home parks, or multifamily zoning, and multifamily building permits, shall consider the school district’s capital facilities plan as adopted by the City council.

(2) Documentation that the district is required to submit to the City of Sammamish shall be incorporated into the record in every case without requiring the district to offer such plans and data into the record. The school district is also authorized to present testimony and documents demonstrating a lack of concurrency in the district and the inability of the district to accommodate the students to be generated by a specific development.

(3) Based upon a finding that the impacts generated by the plat, mobile home park or the multifamily development were generally not anticipated at the time of the last City council review and approval of a school district capital plan and were not included in the district’s long-range forecast, the director may require or recommend phasing or provision of the needed facilities and/or sites as appropriate to address the deficiency or deny or condition approval, consistent with the provisions of this chapter, the State Subdivision Act, and the State Environmental Policy Act.

(4) Determinations of the hearing examiner or director regarding concurrency can be appealed only pursuant to the provisions for appeal of the development permit process for which the determination has been made. Where no other administrative appeal process is available, an appeal may be taken to the hearing examiner using the appeal procedures for variances. Any errors in the formula identified as a result of an appeal should be referred to the City council for possible modifications.

(5) Where the council has not adopted an impact fee ordinance for a particular school district, the language of this section shall not affect the authority or duties of the hearing examiner or the director pursuant to the State Environmental Policy Act or the State Subdivision Act. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.60.110 Annual council review. 

On at least an annual basis, the Sammamish City council shall review the reports prepared by the King County school technical review committee and confirm that the King County council has certified the plans of the Issaquah and Lake Washington School Districts. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.60.120 School concurrency standard. 

(1) Schools shall be considered to have been provided concurrently with the development that will impact the schools if:

(a) The permanent and interim improvements necessary to serve the development are planned to be in place at the time the impacts of development are expected to occur; or

(b) The necessary financial commitments are in place to assure the completion of the needed improvements to meet the district’s standard of service within three years of the time that the impacts of development are expected to occur. Necessary improvements are those facilities identified by the district in its capital facilities plan as reviewed and adopted by the City of Sammamish.

(2) Any combination of the following shall constitute the “necessary financial commitments” for the purposes of subsection (1) of this section:

(a) The district has received voter approval of and/or has bonding authority;

(b) The district has received approval for federal, state, or other funds;

(c) The district has received a secured commitment from a developer that the developer will construct the needed permanent school facility, and the school district has found such facility to be acceptable and consistent with its capital facilities plan; and/or

(d) The district has other assured funding, including but not limited to, school impact fees that have been paid.

(3) Compliance with this concurrency requirement of this section shall be sufficient to satisfy the provisions of RCW 58.17.060 and 58.17.110. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.60.130 Credit for improvements. 

Whenever a development is granted approval subject to a condition that the development proponent actually provide a school facility acceptable to the district, the development proponent shall be entitled to a credit for the actual cost of providing the facility, against the fee that would be chargeable under the formula provided by Chapter 21A.105 SMC. The cost of construction shall be estimated at the time of approval, but must be documented and the documentation confirmed after the construction is completed to assure that an accurate credit amount is provided. If construction costs are less than the calculated fee amount, the difference remaining shall be chargeable as a school impact fee. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


Chapter 21A.65 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS – ANIMALS, HOME OCCUPATION, HOME INDUSTRY

Sections:

21A.65.010    Purpose.

21A.65.020    Animal regulations – Small animals.

21A.65.030    Animal regulations – Livestock – Management standards.

21A.65.040    Animal regulations – Livestock – Building requirements.

21A.65.050    Home businesses.

21A.65.060    Repealed.


21A.65.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to enhance and preserve the compatibility between neighboring properties by regulating the scope and intensity of accessory uses or activities. In addition, the intent of the home business regulations is to:

(1) Maintain and preserve the character of neighborhoods;

(2) Promote appropriate business and economic development opportunities within neighborhoods;

(3) Ensure the compatibility of home businesses and surrounding uses; and

(4) Mitigate potential impacts to surrounding uses. (Ord. O2012-327 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.65.020 Animal regulations – Small animals. 

The raising, keeping, breeding, or fee boarding of small animals is subject to Chapter 11.04 KCC as adopted by Chapter 11.05 SMC, Animal Control, and the following requirements:

(1) Small animals that are kept indoors as household pets in aquariums, terrariums, cages or similar containers shall not be limited in number, except as may be provided in KCC Title 11 as adopted by Chapter 11.05 SMC. 

(2) Other small animals kept indoors as household pets shall be limited to five, of which not more than three may be unaltered cats or dogs. Other small animals kept outside, including adult cats and dogs, shall be limited to three per household on lots of less than 20,000 square feet, five per household on lots of 20,000 to 35,000 square feet, with an additional two per acre of site area over 35,000 square feet up to a maximum of 20, unless more are allowed as an accessory use pursuant to subsection (5) of this section; provided, that all unaltered animals kept outdoors must be kept on a leash or in a confined area, except as authorized for a hobby kennel or cattery or commercial kennel or cattery pursuant to Chapter 11.04 KCC as adopted by Chapter 11.05 SMC.

(3) Excluding kennels and catteries, the total number of unaltered adult cats and/or dogs per household shall not exceed three.

(4) Animals considered to be household pets shall be treated as other small animals pursuant to subsection (5) of this section when they are kept for commercial breeding, boarding or training.

(5) Small animals and household pets kept as an accessory use outside the dwelling shall be raised, kept or bred only as an accessory use on the premises of the owner, or in a kennel or cattery approved through the conditional use permit process, subject to the following limitations:

(a) Birds shall be kept in an aviary or loft that meets the following standards:

(i) The aviary or loft shall provide one-half square foot for each parakeet, canary or similarly sized bird, one square foot for each pigeon, small parrot or similarly sized bird, and two square feet for each large parrot, macaw or similarly sized bird.

(ii) Aviaries or lofts shall not exceed 2,000 square feet.

(iii) The aviary is set back at least 10 feet from any property line, and 20 feet from any dwelling unit.

(b) Small animals other than birds shall be kept according to the following standards:

(i) The minimum site area shall be one-half acre if more than three small animals are being kept.

(ii) All animals shall be confined within a building, pen, aviary or similar structure.

(iii) Any covered structure used to house or contain such animals shall maintain a distance of not less than 10 feet to any property line, except structures used to house mink and fox shall be a distance of not less than 150 feet.

(iv) Poultry, chicken, squab, and rabbits are limited to a maximum of one animal per one square foot of structure used to house such animals, up to a maximum of 2,000 square feet. 

(v) Hamsters and chinchillas are limited to a maximum of one animal per square foot of structure used to house such animals, up to a maximum of 2,000 square feet.

(vi) Mink and fox are permitted only on sites having a minimum area of five acres.

(vii) Beekeeping is limited as follows:

(A) Beehives are limited to 50 on sites less than five acres;

(B) The number of beehives shall not be limited on sites of five acres or greater;

(C) Colonies shall be maintained in movable-frame hives at all times;

(D) Adequate space shall be provided in each hive to prevent overcrowding and swarming;

(E) Colonies shall be requeened following any swarming or aggressive behavior;

(F) All colonies shall be registered with the King County extension agent prior to April 1st of each year on a state registration form acceptable to the county; and

(G) Abandoned colonies, diseased bees, or bees living in trees, buildings, or any other space except in movable-frame hives shall constitute a public nuisance, and shall be abated as set forth in Chapter 21A.115 SMC, Enforcement. (Ord. O2011-299 § 2 (Att. B); Ord. O2009-249 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.65.030 Animal regulations – Livestock – Management standards.

Buffer areas shall not be subject to public access, use or dedication by reason of the establishment of such buffers. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.65.040 Animal regulations – Livestock – Building requirements.

(1) In residential zones, fee boarding of livestock other than in a legally established stable shall only be as an accessory use to a residence on the subject property (see also SMC 21A.25.140 for setbacks related to manure storage); and

(2) A barn or stable may contain a caretaker’s accessory living quarters. (Ord. O2009-249 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.65.050 Home businesses.

(1) Business License. All home businesses shall obtain required business licenses.

(2) Compatibility Required. All home businesses shall be operated in such a way as to ensure compatibility between the home business and the surrounding neighborhood. In addition to other required standards, home business compatibility shall address the following aspects of the home business:

(a) Visibility from adjacent properties and the street;

(b) Audibility and vibrations from adjacent properties and the street;

(c) Residential scale and intensity;

(d) Odors;

(e) Health and safety (including the use of significant amounts of hazardous materials or the creation of significant amounts of hazardous waste); and

(f) Traffic.

(3) Prohibited. The following home businesses are prohibited:

(a) Automobile, truck, and heavy equipment repair;

(b) Autobody work or painting;

(c) Adult use facilities;

(d) Veterinary clinic or hospitals;

(e) Collective gardens;

(f) Cooperatives;

(g) Outdoor parking and storage of heavy equipment;

(h) Outdoor storage of automobiles, boats, and recreational vehicles;

(i) Outdoor storage of building materials for use on other properties; and

(j) Other uses determined by the director to be similar in nature to the prohibited uses listed in this subsection.

(4) Home businesses that meet the following standards will be considered Type 1 home businesses for the purposes of this chapter:

(a) Business related activity shall be conducted within the confines of the building(s) associated with the home business;

(b) Smoke, odors, dust, vibration or light produced by the business shall not exceed that normally associated with a residential dwelling unit;

(c) Buildings associated with the home business shall be designed to be compatible with surrounding uses;

(d) Properties with home business(es) shall be limited to no more than three vehicles (per property) that are visible from the street or adjacent properties on a regular basis;

(e) Properties with home businesses engaged in sales or on-site services shall be limited to no more than three nonresident employees per property;

(f) Sales or services shall be by appointment or provided off site;

(g) No more than one outbuilding, in addition to the dwelling unit, may be used for the home business, excluding outbuildings used solely for material storage. All outbuildings used for the home business shall not be visible from the street;

(h) On-site client or customer related appointments shall occur between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.;

(i) Vehicles, equipment, and materials owned by the home business and associated with business operation shall be stored within the buildings associated with the home business; and

(j) Truck deliveries shall be consistent with normal residential deliveries. Regular and frequent tractor-trailer or semi-trailer deliveries are prohibited.

(5) Type 2 home businesses require a conditional use permit pursuant to SMC 21A.20.030 and SMC 21A.110.040. Prior to decision on a conditional use permit the director shall consider the compatibility criteria in subsection (2) of this section and the compatibility review in subsection (6) of this section. Type 2 home businesses shall also be subject to the following minimum standards:

(a) The home business shall be located:

(i) Such that the home business is compatible with surrounding uses;

(ii) On a lot with a minimum property dimension of 100 feet (measured by scaling a circle of the applicable diameter within the boundaries of the lot); and

(iii) No closer than 20 feet to property lines.

(b) Activities conducted outdoors shall be fully screened from adjacent properties and streets;

(c) Vehicles, equipment, and materials owned by the home business and associated with business operation shall be fully screened from adjacent properties and streets;

(d) Noise, traffic, vibrations, light, and odors shall be evaluated to ensure compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood;

(e) No more than six vehicles associated with the home business shall be visible from the street or adjacent properties on a regular basis.

(f) Home businesses engaged in activities that require a federal or state license or permit, in addition to a business license, shall be limited to sales of items produced on site.

(6) Compatibility Review. In code compliance cases and in review of a Type 2 home business, the director has the authority to review and condition the proposed use to ensure that the home business complies with the compatibility standards established by subsection (2) of this section. The director may further set conditions to ensure compatibility by:

(a) Determining that a specific home business cannot be operated as a Type 1 home business and is subject to the review requirements of a Type 2 home business;

(b) Limiting the type and size of equipment used by the home business to those that are compatible with the surrounding neighborhood;

(c) Limiting the number of client or customer trips to the site related to the home business;

(d) Limiting on-site retail sales to ensure compatibility;

(e) Providing for setbacks or screening as needed to protect adjacent residential properties;

(f) Specifying hours of operation;

(g) Determining acceptable levels of outdoor lighting;

(h) Limiting or prohibiting odors from the home business;

(i) Requiring sound level tests for activities determined to produce sound levels that may be excessive for a residential neighborhood;

(j) Limiting other neighborhood impacts generated by the home business; and

(k) Establishing other conditions necessary to ensure compatibility consistent with subsection (2) of this section. (Ord. O2016-406 § 5 (Att. E); Ord. O2012-327 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2009-249 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.65.060 Home industry.

Repealed by Ord. O2012-327. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


Chapter 21A.70 NONCONFORMANCE, TEMPORARY USES, AND RE-USE OF FACILITIES

Sections:

21A.70.010    Purpose.

21A.70.020    Nonconformance – Applicability.

21A.70.030    Nonconformance – Creation, continuation, and forfeiture of nonconformance status.

21A.70.040    Nonconformance – Abatement of illegal use, structure or development.

21A.70.050    Nonconformance – Re-establishment of discontinued nonconforming use, or damaged or destroyed nonconforming structure or site improvement.

21A.70.060    Nonconformance – Modifications to nonconforming use, structure, or site improvement.

21A.70.070    Nonconformance – Expansions of nonconforming uses, structures, or site improvements.

21A.70.080    Nonconformance – Required findings.

21A.70.090    Nonconformance – Residences.

21A.70.100    Temporary use permits – Uses requiring permits.

21A.70.110    Temporary use permits – Exemptions to permit requirement.

21A.70.120    Temporary use permits – Duration and frequency.

21A.70.130    Temporary use permits – Parking.

21A.70.140    Temporary use permits – Traffic control.

21A.70.150    Temporary construction buildings.

21A.70.160    Temporary construction residence.

21A.70.170    Temporary mobile home for medical hardship.

21A.70.180    Temporary real estate offices.

21A.70.190    Temporary school facilities.

21A.70.195    Temporary homeless encampment use permit.

21A.70.200    Re-use of facilities – General standards.

21A.70.210    Re-use of facilities – Re-establishment of closed public school facilities.


21A.70.010 Purpose.

The purposes of this chapter are to:

(1) Establish the legal status of a nonconformance by creating provisions through which a nonconformance may be maintained, altered, reconstructed, expanded or terminated;

(2) Provide for the temporary establishment of uses that are not otherwise permitted in a zone and to regulate such uses by their scope and period of use;

(3) Provide a permitting process and standards for homeless encampments for homeless persons, consistent with state laws; and

(4) Encourage the adaptive re-use of existing public facilities that will continue to serve the community, and to ensure public review of redevelopment plans by allowing:

(a) Temporary re-use of closed public school facilities retained in school district ownership, and the reconversion of a temporary re-use back to a school use;

(b) Permanent re-use of surplus nonresidential facilities (e.g., schools, fire stations, government facilities) not retained in school district ownership; or

(c) Permanent re-use of historic structures listed on the National Register or designated as county landmarks. (Ord. O2014-372 § 3; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.70.020 Nonconformance – Applicability. 

(1) All nonconformances except nonconforming uses and improvements related to the provisions of Chapter 21A.50 SMC shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter.

(2) The provisions of this chapter do not supersede or relieve a property owner from compliance with:

(a) The requirements of the Uniform Building and Fire Codes; or

(b) The provisions of this code beyond the specific nonconformance addressed by this chapter. (Ord. O2013-350 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.70.030 Nonconformance – Creation, continuation, and forfeiture of nonconformance status. 

Once created pursuant to SMC 21A.15.800, a nonconformance may be continued in a manner consistent with the provisions of this chapter. However, nonconformance status is forfeited if the nonconformance is discontinued beyond the provisions of SMC 21A.70.050. Once nonconformance status is forfeited, the nonconformance shall not be re-established. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.70.040 Nonconformance – Abatement of illegal use, structure or development. 

Any use, structure or other site improvement not established in compliance with use and development standards in effect at the time of establishment shall be deemed illegal and shall be discontinued or terminated and subject to removal pursuant to the provisions of SMC Title 23. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.70.050 Nonconformance – Re-establishment of discontinued nonconforming use, or damaged or destroyed nonconforming structure or site improvement.

A nonconforming use that has been discontinued or a nonconforming structure or site improvement that has been damaged or destroyed may be re-established or reconstructed if:

(1) The nonconforming use, structure, or site improvement that previously existed is not expanded;

(2) A new nonconformance is not created; and

(3) The use has not been discontinued for more than 12 months prior to its re-establishment, or the nonconforming structure or site improvement is reconstructed pursuant to a complete permit application submitted to the department within 12 months of the occurrence of damage or destruction. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.70.060 Nonconformance – Modifications to nonconforming use, structure, or site improvement. 

Modifications to a nonconforming use, structure, or site improvement may be reviewed and approved by the department pursuant to the code compliance review process of SMC 21A.100.010 provided that:

(1) The modification does not expand any existing nonconformance; and 

(2) The modification does not create a new type of nonconformance. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.70.070 Nonconformance – Expansions of nonconforming uses, structures, or site improvements. 

A nonconforming use, structure, or site improvement may be expanded as follows:

(1) The department may review and approve, pursuant to the code compliance process of SMC 21A.100.010, an expansion of a nonconformance provided that:

(a) The expansion shall conform to all other provisions of this title, except that the extent of the project-wide nonconformance in each of the following may be increased up to 10 percent: 

(i) Building square footage; 

(ii) Impervious surface;

(iii) Parking; or

(iv) Building height.

(b) No subsequent expansion of the same nonconformance shall be approved under this subsection if the cumulative amount of such expansion exceeds the percentage prescribed in subsection (1)(a) of this section.

(2) A special use permit shall be required for expansions of a nonconformance within a development authorized by an existing special use or unclassified use permit if the expansions are not consistent with the provisions of subsection (1) of this section.

(3) A conditional use permit shall be required for expansions of a nonconformance:

(a) Within a development authorized by an existing planned unit development approval; or

(b) Not consistent with the provisions of subsections (1) and (2) of this section. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.70.080 Nonconformance – Required findings. 

Modifications or expansions approved by the department shall be based on written findings that the proposed modification or expansion of a nonconformance located within a development governed by an existing conditional use permit, special use permit, unclassified use permit, or planned unit development shall provide the same level of protection for and compatibility with adjacent land uses as the original land use permit approval. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.70.090 Nonconformance – Residences.

Any residence nonconforming relative to use may be expanded, after review and approval through the code compliance process set forth in SMC 21A.100.010, subject to all other applicable codes besides those set forth in this chapter for nonconformances. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.70.100 Temporary use permits – Uses requiring permits.

Except as provided by SMC 21A.70.110, a temporary use permit shall be required for:

(1) Uses not otherwise permitted in the zone that can be made compatible for periods of limited duration and/or frequency; or

(2) Limited expansion of any use that is otherwise allowed in the zone but that exceeds the intended scope of the original land use approval. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.70.110 Temporary use permits – Exemptions to permit requirement.

(1) The following uses shall be exempt from requirements for a temporary use permit when located in the CB, NB, or O zones for the time period specified below:

(a) Uses not to exceed a total of 30 days each calendar year:

(i) Christmas tree lots;

(ii) Fireworks stands; and

(iii) Produce stands.

(b) Uses not to exceed a total of 14 days each calendar year:

(i) Amusement rides, carnivals, or circuses;

(ii) Community festivals; and

(iii) Parking lot sales.

(2) Any use not exceeding a cumulative total of two days each calendar year shall be exempt from requirements for a temporary use permit.

(3) Any community event held in a park and not exceeding a period of seven days shall be exempt from requirements for a temporary use permit. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.70.120 Temporary use permits – Duration and frequency. 

Temporary use permits shall be limited in duration and frequency as follows:

(1) The temporary use permit shall be effective for no more than 180 days from the date of the first event;

(2) The temporary use shall not exceed a total of 60 days; provided, that this requirement applies only to the days that the event(s) actually take place;

(3) The temporary use permit shall specify a date upon which the use shall be terminated and removed; and

(4) A temporary use permit shall not be granted for the same temporary use on a property more than once per calendar year; provided, that a temporary use permit may be granted for multiple events during the approval period. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.70.130 Temporary use permits – Parking. 

Parking and access for proposed temporary uses shall be approved by the City. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.70.140 Temporary use permits – Traffic control. 

The applicant for a proposed temporary use shall provide any parking/traffic control attendants as specified by the Sammamish police chief. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.70.150 Temporary construction buildings.

Temporary structures for storage of tools and equipment, or for supervisory offices, may be permitted for construction projects; provided, that such structures are:

(1) Allowed only during periods of active construction; and

(2) Removed within 30 days of project completion or cessation of work. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.70.160 Temporary construction residence.

(1) A mobile home may be permitted on a lot as a temporary dwelling for the property owner, provided a building permit for a permanent dwelling on the site has been obtained.

(2) The temporary mobile home permit shall be effective for a period of 12 months. The permit may be extended for one additional period of 12 months if the permanent dwelling is constructed with a finished exterior by the end of the initial approval period.

(3) The mobile home shall be removed within 90 days of:

(a) The expiration of the temporary mobile home permit; or

(b) The issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the permanent residence, whichever occurs first. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.70.170 Temporary mobile home for medical hardship.

(1) A mobile home may be permitted as a temporary dwelling on the same lot as a permanent dwelling, provided:

(a) The mobile home together with the permanent residence shall meet the setback, height, building footprint, and lot coverage provisions of the applicable zone; and

(b) The applicant submits with the permit application a notarized affidavit that contains the following:

(i) Certification that the temporary dwelling is necessary to provide daily care, as defined in SMC 21A.15.262;

(ii) Certification that the primary provider of such daily care will reside on-site;

(iii) Certification that the applicant understands the temporary nature of the permit, subject to the limitations outlined in subsections (2) and (3) of this section;

(iv) Certification that the physician’s signature is both current and valid; and

(v) Certification signed by a physician that a resident of the subject property requires daily care, as defined in SMC 21A.15.262.

(2) Temporary mobile home permits for medical hardships shall be effective for 12 months. Extensions of the temporary mobile home permit may be approved in 12-month increments subject to demonstration of continuing medical hardship in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth in subsection (1) of this section.

(3) The mobile home shall be removed within 90 days of:

(a) The expiration of the temporary mobile home permit; or

(b) The cessation of provision of daily care. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.70.180 Temporary real estate offices.

One temporary real estate office may be located on any new residential development; provided, that activities are limited to the initial sale or rental of property or units within the development. The office use shall be discontinued within one year of recording of a short subdivision or issuance of a final certificate of occupancy for an apartment development, and within two years of the recording of a formal subdivision. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.70.190 Temporary school facilities. 

Temporary school structures may be permitted during construction of new school facilities or during remodeling of existing facilities; provided, that such structures are:

(1) Allowed only during periods of active construction or remodeling;

(2) Do not expand the student capacity beyond the capacity under construction or remodeling; and

(3) Removed within 30 days of project completion or cessation of work. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.70.195 Temporary homeless encampment use permit.

Homeless encampments are allowed only pursuant to a homeless encampment use permit, which shall be a Type I permit issued by the director in accordance with the following conditions:

(1) For the purposes of this section a homeless encampment may only be hosted by a religious organization, and must be located on real property owned or controlled by the religious organization.

(2) Duration and Frequency.

(a) No homeless encampment shall operate within the City of Sammamish for more than four consecutive calendar months, except that the director may allow up to five additional days to accommodate moving onto or off a site.

(b) The director shall not grant a homeless encampment use permit that is proposed to commence on a site that contained a homeless encampment within the last 18 calendar months. For the purposes of this subsection, the 18 months shall be calculated from the last day of the prior homeless encampment’s occupancy.

(c) No more than one homeless encampment may be located in the City at any time.

(d) No more than one homeless encampment within the City limits shall be allowed in any period of 365 consecutive days.

(3) All homeless encampments shall obtain, prior to occupancy, all applicable City of Sammamish and other agency permits, licenses and approvals.

(4) Permit Process Requirements.

(a) Neighborhood Meeting. The applicant shall conduct a neighborhood meeting to inform nearby residents and the public about the proposed homeless encampment prior to submittal of an application.

(i) The applicant shall provide notice of the neighborhood meeting by mail, first class and postage prepaid, to all owners of real property within 500 feet of the lot(s) containing the proposed homeless encampment, provided such area shall be expanded as necessary to send mailed notices to at least 20 different property owners. The notice of the neighborhood meeting shall be mailed at least 15 days prior to the neighborhood meeting.

(ii) Prior to the neighborhood meeting, a representative of the sponsor and managing agency shall meet and confer with the following entities regarding the neighborhood meeting and any proposed security measures for the homeless encampment: the Sammamish police department; the administration of any public or private elementary, middle, junior high, or high school; and the operators of any properly licensed child care service, within 500 feet of the boundaries of the proposed site, and unaffiliated with the sponsor.

(iii) At the neighborhood meeting, a representative of the sponsor and managing agency shall present in writing and verbally the proposed homeless encampment location, timing, site plan, code of conduct, encampment concerns, and a security management plan. The presentation shall also include copies of all previously submitted comments received on the proposed homeless encampment, including comments from the Sammamish police department, schools, and child care services. Copies of the agenda and the other specified comments and materials shall be provided by the applicant at the meeting. The meeting shall be conducted on the proposed homeless encampment site whenever feasible.

(b) Application. An applicant shall submit a complete application for a homeless encampment use permit at least 30 days before the occupancy of a homeless encampment.

(c) Notice of Application. The City shall provide a notice of application per the mailed notice requirements of SMC 20.05.060(7).

(d) Warrant and Sex Offender Checks. Managing agencies shall obtain warrant and sex offender checks from the King County sheriff’s office (“warrant check”) for all homeless encampment residents. For homeless encampment residents initially moving onto the site with the homeless encampment, the warrant check must be completed at least seven days prior to the homeless encampment moving onto the site. For residents moving into the homeless encampment during the permit period, the warrant check must be completed on or before the date that the new resident moves on site. If a warrant check reveals a homeless encampment resident or prospective resident is or is required to be a registered sex offender or has an active warrant, the managing agency or sponsor shall immediately contact and so advise the City or Sammamish police department. The sponsor shall be responsible for verifying that the warrant checks occur.

(5) Parking, Transportation, and Security.

(a) Parking.

(i) Each lot occupied by a homeless encampment must provide or have available a parking and vehicular maneuvering area.

(ii) A homeless encampment and the parking of any vehicles associated with a homeless encampment shall not displace the sponsor site’s parking lot in such a way that the sponsor site no longer meets the minimum or required parking of the principal use as required by code or previous approvals unless an alternative parking plan has first been approved by the director.

(b) Transportation Plan.

(i) The sponsor or managing agency shall submit a plan with the permit application demonstrating the ability for residents to obtain access to methods of communication and services such as grocery, supplies, and medical care.

(ii) The plan shall provide for a means of transportation to an appropriate public transportation stop and include any proposed alternative means of transportation such as private or volunteer shuttle service and/or reasonable bicycle/pedestrian paths.

(c) Security Management Plan.

(i) The sponsor or managing agency shall submit a plan with the permit application demonstrating security measures, site specific or otherwise, necessary to ensure the safety of the residents of the temporary encampment and the public.

(ii) At a minimum, the plan shall specify the following:

(A) The person or entity responsible for providing security;

(B) The type of security to be used, e.g., private security firm, volunteers, or other means; and

(C) Recommendations and/or requirements provided by the police department.

(6) Maximum Occupancy. A homeless encampment shall be limited to a maximum occupancy not to exceed 100 persons, depending on the conditions of the proposed site (e.g., physical size, topography, site constraints, etc.). A homeless encampment use permit may be conditioned to establish occupancy of less than 100 persons, depending on the conditions of the proposed site. After a homeless encampment reaches its maximum capacity, any individual who arrives after sundown (and who meets all screening criteria) will be allowed to stay for one night, after which the individual shall not be permitted entry until a vacancy is available. Such occurrences shall be logged and reported to the director on a weekly basis.

(7) Minor Residents. No children under the age of 18 shall be allowed to stay overnight in a homeless encampment unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. If any other child under the age of 18 attempts to stay overnight at a homeless encampment, the managing agency shall immediately contact the Washington State Department of Social and Health Services Child Protective Services, or its successor.

(8) Structures. Any permanent structures, as determined by the director, shall meet the requirements of all SMC provisions and receive any necessary permits. All temporary structures for homeless encampments shall comply with the following requirements:

(a) Homeless encampment structures and facilities shall be located a minimum of 20 feet away from any property line, unless otherwise approved by the director;

(b) A six-foot-high sight-obscuring fence, vegetative screen or other visual buffering shall be provided between a homeless encampment and any abutting residential property. The director shall consider existing vegetation, fencing, topographic variations and other site conditions in determining compliance with this requirement and may modify the fence requirement when the objective is substantially achieved by other means;

(c) Exterior lighting must be directed downward, away from adjoining properties, and contained within the homeless encampment; and

(d) If the homeless encampment includes tents or membrane structures in excess of 400 square feet, or canopies in excess of 400 square feet, as defined by the International Fire Code, then a permit and approval for the tent, canopy or membrane structure shall first be obtained from the fire marshal.

(9) Smoking Area. A designated smoking area shall be provided on site in the location which would result in the least impact on neighboring properties based on distance.

(10) Debris. Each site occupied by a homeless encampment shall be left free of debris, litter, or other evidence of the homeless encampment upon the homeless encampment moving from the site.

(11) Health Department Compliance. Homeless encampments shall comply with all applicable standards of the Seattle-King County health department, or its successor.

(12) Code Compliance and Hours of Service. Homeless encampments shall comply with all codes and regulations of the state of Washington, City, and other agencies with jurisdiction concerning, but not limited to, drinking water connections, human waste, solid waste disposal, electrical systems, cooking, food handling, and fire-resistant materials. Servicing of portable toilets and trash dumpsters is prohibited between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Mondays through Fridays, and between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, except in the case of bona fide emergency or under the terms of a permit condition approved by the director in the case of demonstrated necessity.

(13) Inspections. Homeless encampments shall permit regular inspections by regulatory personnel, including but not limited to, City staff, police department, fire department, King County health department, and any other regulatory agencies with jurisdiction to check for permit and other code compliance by the homeless encampment.

(14) Required Services. Homeless encampments shall have services such as food, water, and waste disposal supervised by the sponsor or managing agency.

(15) Resident Log. The managing agency shall maintain a resident log of all people residing at the homeless encampment. Such log shall be kept on site at the homeless encampment. When signing the log, prospective encampment residents shall provide a state of Washington driver’s license, state of Washington identification card, a driver’s license or identification card issued by another state, or other similar document that confirms a person’s identity. The sponsor shall be responsible for verifying that the log is being properly kept and that the required identification is being provided.

(16) Code of Conduct. Sponsors and managing agencies shall ensure enforcement of a code of conduct at homeless encampment sites. The code of conduct shall substantially include the following:

(a) Possession or use of illegal drugs and marijuana is not permitted;

(b) No alcohol is permitted;

(c) No weapons are permitted;

(d) All knives over three and one-half inches must be turned in to the managing agency for safekeeping;

(e) No violence is permitted;

(f) No open flames are permitted;

(g) No trespassing onto private property in the surrounding neighborhood is permitted;

(h) No littering on the homeless encampment site or in the surrounding neighborhood is permitted; and

(i) No convicted sex offender shall reside in the homeless encampment.

Nothing within this section shall prohibit a sponsor or managing agency from imposing and enforcing additional code of conduct conditions not otherwise inconsistent with this section.

(17) Permit Violation Process. Upon a determination that there has been a violation of any condition of permit approval, the director may give written notice to the sponsor describing the alleged violation pursuant to SMC Title 23 and other applicable code authority, or may instead immediately pursue available judicial or other remedies. Any violation of a subsequently issued stop work order under Chapter 23.70 SMC is declared a nuisance and may be remedied by injunctive relief, revocation of the homeless encampment use permit and vacation of the site by the homeless encampment, or any other available remedy in law or equity.

(18) Health and Safety Permit Conditions. The director may modify or establish any requirements necessary to mitigate impacts from homeless encampments on the public health and safety in accordance with the purpose of this chapter.

(19) Application. An applicant for a homeless encampment use permit shall submit all of the following, unless modified by the director:

(a) Application form for a homeless encampment use permit;

(b) A site plan, which extends 50 feet beyond the proposed site’s property boundaries, drawn to scale showing all of the following:

(i) All existing structures;

(ii) Existing parking stalls;

(iii) Parking stalls proposed to be unavailable for parking vehicles during the homeless encampment;

(iv) All proposed temporary structures;

(v) Proposed electrical and plumbing connections;

(vi) Location of trash receptacles, including trash dumpsters;

(vii) Location of toilets and other sanitary facilities;

(viii) Location and details of any proposed connection to wastewater, potable water, stormwater, electrical supply, or other public or private utility systems;

(ix) Proposed and existing ingress and egress;

(x) Any permanent alterations on the lot to the site or structures;

(xi) A designated smoking area; and

(xii) Access routes for emergency vehicles;

(c) Proposed fencing or screening detail or a typical section of same;

(d) Written authorization from the sponsor on whose property the homeless encampment is to be located;

(e) A copy of any agreements with other parties regarding use of parking, either on site or off site;

(f) A copy of any agreement between the sponsor, the managing agency, and any schools and/or child care services;

(g) A copy of the code of conduct;

(h) The applicant shall provide the following neighborhood meeting documentation:

(i) The date, time, and location of the meeting;

(ii) Contact information for all persons representing the managing agency and sponsor at the meeting;

(iii) A summary of comments provided for the meeting attendees by the applicant, managing agency or sponsor prior to or during the meeting;

(iv) A summary of comments received from meeting attendees or other persons prior to or during the meeting; and

(v) Copies of documents submitted or presented at the meeting;

(i) The Transportation and Security Management Plans;

(j) Any other information deemed necessary by the director to protect public health and safety for the processing of a homeless encampment use permit; and

(k) Application filing fees in an amount established by City resolution.

(20) Modification for Emergencies. The provisions herein shall not apply when for the preservation of public health and safety the situation necessitates a need for emergency management planning and the application of SMC 21A.05.040(5). (Ord. O2014-372 § 4)


21A.70.200 Re-use of facilities – General standards. 

The interim or permanent re-use of surplus nonresidential facilities in residential zoned areas shall require that no more than 50 percent of the original floor area be demolished for either permanent or interim re-use of facilities. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.70.210 Re-use of facilities – Re-establishment of closed public school facilities. 

The re-establishment or reconversion of an interim nonschool use of school facilities back to school uses shall require a site plan and the issuance of a conditional use permit. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


Chapter 21A.75 RESIDENTIAL DENSITY INCENTIVES

Sections:

21A.75.010    Purpose.

21A.75.020    Permitted locations of residential density incentives.

21A.75.030    Maximum densities permitted through residential density incentive review.

21A.75.040    Public benefits and density incentives.

21A.75.050    Rules for calculating total permitted dwelling units.

21A.75.060    Review process.

21A.75.070    Minor adjustments in final site plans.

21A.75.080    Applicability of development standards.


21A.75.010 Purpose. 

The purpose of this chapter is to provide density incentives to developers of residential lands in urban areas and rural activity centers, in exchange for public benefits to help achieve comprehensive plan goals of affordable housing, open space protection, and energy conservation, by:

(1) Defining in quantified terms the public benefits that can be used to earn density incentives;

(2) Providing rules and formulae for computing density incentives earned by each benefit;

(3) Providing a method to realize the development potential of sites containing unique features of size, topography, environmental features or shape; and

(4) Providing a review process to allow evaluation of proposed density increases and the public benefits offered to earn them, and to give the public opportunities to review and comment. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.75.020 Permitted locations of residential density incentives. 

Residential density incentives (RDI) shall be used only on sites served by public sewers and only in the following zones:

(1) In R-4 through R-18 zones; and

(2) In NB, CB and O zones when part of a mixed use development. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.75.030 Maximum densities permitted through residential density incentive review. 

The maximum density permitted through RDI review shall be 150 percent of the base density of the underlying zone of the development site or 200 percent of the base density for RDI proposals with 100 percent affordable units. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.75.040 Public benefits and density incentives.

(1) The public benefits eligible to earn increased densities, and the maximum incentive to be earned by each benefit, are set forth in subsection (6) of this section. The density incentive is expressed as additional bonus dwelling units (or fractions of dwelling units) earned per amount of public benefit provided.

(2) Bonus dwelling units may be earned through any combination of the listed public benefits.

(3) The guidelines for affordable housing bonuses including the establishment of rental levels, housing prices and asset limitations will be updated and adopted annually by the council in the comprehensive housing affordability strategy plan.

(4) Bonus dwelling units may also be earned and transferred to the project site through the transfer of density credit (TDC) process set forth in Chapter 21A.80 SMC, by providing any of the open space, or park site public benefits set forth in subsections (6)(2) or (6)(3) of this section on sites other than that of the RDI development.

(5) Residential development in R-4 through R-18 zones with property specific development standards requiring any public benefit enumerated in this chapter shall be eligible to earn bonus dwelling units as set forth in subsection (6) of this section when the public benefits provided exceed the basic development standards of this title. When a development is located in a special overlay district, bonus units may be earned if the development provides public benefits exceeding corresponding standards of the special district.

(6) The following are the public benefits eligible to earn density incentives through RDI review:

	BENEFIT	DENSITY INCENTIVE

	1. AFFORDABLE HOUSING

	a. Benefit units consisting of rental housing permanently priced to serve nonsenior citizen low-income households (i.e., no greater than 30 percent of gross income for households at or below 50 percent of King County median income, adjusted for household size). A covenant on the site that specifies the income level being served, rent levels and requirements for reporting to the City of Sammamish shall be recorded at final approval.	1.5 bonus units per benefit unit, up to a maximum of 30 low-income units per five acres of site area; projects on sites of less than five acres shall be limited to 30 low-income units.

	b. Benefit units consisting of rental housing designed and permanently priced to serve low-income senior citizens (i.e., no greater than 30 percent of gross income for one or two-person households, one member of which is 62 years of age or older, with incomes at or below 50 percent of King County median income, adjusted for household size). A covenant on the site that specifies the income level being served, rent levels and requirements for reporting to the City of Sammamish shall be recorded at final approval.	1.5 bonus units per benefit unit, up to a maximum of 60 low-income units per five acres of site area; projects on sites of less than five acres shall be limited to 60 low-income units.

	c. Benefit units consisting of senior citizen assisted housing units 600 square feet or less.	1.0 bonus unit per benefit unit.

	d. Benefit units consisting of moderate income housing reserved for income- and asset-qualified home buyers (total household income at or below 80 percent of King County median, adjusted for household size). Benefit units shall be limited to owner-occupied housing with prices restricted based on typical underwriting ratios and other lending standards, and with no restriction placed on resale. Final approval conditions shall specify requirements for reporting to the City of Sammamish on both buyer eligibility and housing prices.	0.75 bonus unit per benefit unit.

	e. Benefit units consisting of moderate income housing reserved for income- and asset-qualified home buyers (total household income at or below 80 percent of King County median, adjusted for household size). Benefit units shall be limited to owner-occupied housing with prices restricted based on typical underwriting ratios and other lending standards, and with a 15-year restriction binding prices and eligibility on resale to qualified moderate income purchasers. Final approval conditions shall specify requirements for reporting to the City of Sammamish on both buyer eligibility and housing prices.	1.0 bonus unit per benefit unit.

	f. Benefit units consisting of moderate income housing reserved for income- and asset-qualified home buyers (total household income at or below 80 percent of King County median, adjusted for household size). Benefit units shall be limited to owner-occupied housing, with prices restricted to same income group, based on current underwriting ratios and other lending standards for 30 years from date of first sale. A covenant on the site that specifies the income level and other aspects of buyer eligibility, price levels and requirements for reporting to the City of Sammamish shall be recorded at final approval.	1.5 bonus units per benefit unit.

	g. Projects in which 100 percent of the units are reserved for moderate income- and asset-qualified buyers (total household income at or below 80 percent of the King County median, adjusted for household size). All units shall be limited to owner-occupied housing with prices restricted based on current underwriting ratios and other lending standards, and with prices restricted to same income group, for 15 years from date of first sale. Final approval conditions shall specify requirements for reporting to the City of Sammamish on both buyer eligibility and housing prices. 	200 percent of the base density of the underlying zone. Limited to parcels five acres or less in size and located in the R-4 through R-8 zones. Housing types in the R-4 or R-6 zones shall be limited to structures containing four or less units, except for townhouses. Such RDI proposals shall not be eligible to utilize other RDI bonus density incentives listed in this section.

	h. Benefit units consisting of mobile home park space or pad reserved for the relocation of an insignia or non-insignia mobile home, that has been or will be displaced due to closure of a mobile home park located in incorporated or unincorporated King County.	1.0 bonus unit per benefit unit.

	2. OPEN SPACE, TRAILS AND PARKS

	a. Dedication of park site or trail right-of-way meeting the City of Sammamish location and size standards for neighborhood, community or regional park, or trail, and accepted by the parks division.	0.5 bonus unit per acre of park area or quarter-mile of trail exceeding the minimum requirement of Chapter 21A.30 SMC for on-site recreation space or trail corridors, computed on the number of dwelling units permitted by the site’s base density.

	b. Improvement of dedicated park site to the City of Sammamish standards for developed parks.	0.75 bonus unit per acre of park improvement. If the applicant is dedicating the site of the improvements, the bonus units earned by improvements shall be added to the bonus units earned by the dedication. 

	c. Improvement of dedicated trail segment to the City of Sammamish standards.	1.8 bonus units per quarter-mile of trail constructed to City standard for pedestrian trails; or 

	2.5 bonus units per quarter-mile of trail constructed to City standard for multipurpose trails (pedestrian/ bicycle/equestrian).

	Shorter segments shall be awarded bonus units on a pro rata basis. If the applicant is dedicating the site of the improvements, the bonus units earned by improvements shall be added to the bonus units earned by the dedication.

	d. Dedication of open space, meeting the City of Sammamish acquisition standards to the City or a qualified public or private organization such as a nature conservancy.	0.5 bonus unit per acre of open space.

	3. ENERGY CONSERVATION

	a. Benefit units that incorporate conservation features in the construction of all on-site dwelling units heated by electricity that save at least 20 percent of space heat energy use from the maximum permitted by the Northwest Energy Code, as amended. No more than 50 percent of the required savings may result from the installation of heat pumps. None of the required savings shall be achieved by reduction of glazing area below 15 percent of floor area. Energy use shall be expressed as allowable energy load per square foot or as total transmittance (UA).	0.15 bonus unit per benefit unit that achieves the required savings.

	b. Benefit units that incorporate conservation features in the construction of all on-site dwelling units heated by natural gas, or other non-electric heat source, that save at least 25 percent of space heat energy use from the maximum permitted by the Northwest Energy Code, as amended. None of the required savings shall be achieved by reduction of glazing area below 15 percent of floor area. Energy use shall be expressed as allowable energy load per square foot or as total transmittance (UA).	0.10 bonus unit per benefit unit that achieves the required savings.

	c. Developments located within one-quarter mile of transit routes served on at least a half-hourly basis during the peak hours and hourly during the daytime nonpeak hours.	10 percent increase above the base density of the zone.

	NOTE: When proposed energy conservation bonus units of SMC 21A.75.040 are reviewed in conjunction with a subdivision or a short subdivision, the applicant shall provide data and calculations for a typical house of the type to be built in the development that demonstrates to the department’s satisfaction how the required savings will be achieved. A condition of approval shall be recorded with the plat and shown on the title of each lot specifying the required energy savings that must be achieved in the construction of the dwelling unit. The plat notation shall also specify that the savings shall be based on the energy code in effect at the time of preliminary plat application.

(Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.75.050 Rules for calculating total permitted dwelling units. 

(1) The formula for calculating the total number of dwelling units permitted through RDI review is as follows:

	DUs allowed by RDI site base density	+	Bonus DUs	+	DUs allowed by sending site density (if any) 	=	Total RDI DUs

(2) The total dwelling units permitted through RDI review shall be calculated using the following steps:

(a) Calculate the number of dwellings permitted by the base density of the site in accordance with Chapter 21A.25 SMC;

(b) Calculate the total number of bonus dwelling units earned by providing the public benefits listed in SMC 21A.75.040;

(c) Add the number of bonus dwelling units earned to the number of dwelling units permitted by the base density;

(d) Add the number of dwelling units permitted by the base density of the site sending TDCs, if any;

(e) Round fractional dwelling units to the nearest whole number; 0.49 or less dwelling units are rounded down; and

(f) On sites with more than one zone or zone density, the maximum density shall be calculated for the site area of each zone. Bonus units may be re-allocated within the zones in the same manner set forth for base units in SMC 21A.25.200. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.75.060 Review process. 

(1) All RDI proposals shall be reviewed concurrently with a primary proposal to consider the proposed site plan and methods used to earn extra density as follows:

(a) For the purpose of this section, a primary proposal is defined as a proposed subdivision, conditional use permit or commercial building permit;

(b) When the primary proposal requires a public hearing under this code or SMC Title 19, the public hearing on the primary proposal shall serve as the hearing on the RDI proposal, and the reviewing authority shall make a consolidated decision on the proposed development and use of RDI;

(c) When the primary proposal does not require a public hearing under this code or SMC Title 19, the RDI proposal shall be subject to the decision criteria for conditional use permits outlined in Chapter 21A.100 SMC and to the procedures set forth for director/hearing examiner review in this title; and

(d) The notice for the RDI proposal also shall include the development’s proposed density and a general description of the public benefits offered to earn extra density.

(2) RDI applications that propose to earn bonus units by dedicating real property or public facilities shall include a letter from the applicable county receiving agency certifying that the proposed dedication qualifies for the density incentive and will be accepted by the agency or other qualifying organization. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.75.070 Minor adjustments in final site plans. 

When issuing building permits in an approved RDI development, the department may allow minor adjustments in the approved site plan involving the location or dimensions of buildings or landscaping, provided such adjustments shall not:

(1) Increase the number of dwelling units;

(2) Decrease the amount of perimeter landscaping (if any);

(3) Decrease residential parking facilities (unless the number of dwelling units is decreased);

(4) Locate structures closer to any site boundary line; or

(5) Change the locations of any points of ingress and egress to the site. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.75.080 Applicability of development standards. 

(1) RDI developments shall comply with dimensional standards of the zone with a base density most closely comparable to the total approved density of the RDI development; provided, that an RDI proposal in the R-4 through R-8 zone shall conform to the height requirements of the underlying zone in which it is located.

(2) RDI developments in the R-4 through R-8 zones shall be landscaped as follows:

(a) When 75 percent or more of the units in the RDI development consists of townhouses or apartments, the development shall provide perimeter landscaping and tree retention in accordance with Chapter 21A.35 SMC for townhouse or apartment projects.

(b) When less than 75 percent of the units in the RDI consists of townhouses or apartments, the development shall provide landscaping and tree retention in accordance with Chapter 21A.35 SMC for townhouses or apartments on the portion(s) of the development containing such units; provided, that if buildings containing such units are more than 100 feet from the development’s perimeter, the required landscaping may be reduced by 50 percent.

(c) All other portions of the RDI shall provide landscaping or retain trees in accordance with Chapter 21A.35 SMC.

(3) RDI developments in all other zones shall be landscaped or retain trees in accordance with Chapter 21A.35 SMC.

(4) RDI developments shall provide parking as follows:

(a) Projects with 100 percent affordable housing shall provide one off-street parking space per unit. The director may require additional parking, up to the maximum standards for attached dwelling units, which may be provided in common parking areas.

(b) All other RDI proposals shall provide parking for:

(i) Market rate/bonus units at levels consistent with Chapter 21A.40 SMC; and

(ii) Benefit units at 50 percent of the levels required for market rate/bonus units.

(5) RDI developments shall provide on-site recreation space as follows:

(a) Projects with 100 percent affordable housing shall provide recreation space at 50 percent of the levels required in Chapter 21A.30 SMC.

(b) All other RDI proposals shall provide recreation space for:

(i) Market rate/bonus units at levels consistent with Chapter 21A.30 SMC; and

(ii) Benefit units at 50 percent of the levels required for market rate/bonus units. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


Chapter 21A.80 TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS

Sections:

21A.80.010    Purpose and intent.

21A.80.020    Applicability.

21A.80.030    Sending site categories and criteria.

21A.80.040    Receiving sites.

21A.80.050    Calculation of available development rights from sending sites.

21A.80.060    Sending site certification.

21A.80.070    Documentation of restrictions.

21A.80.080    Sending site development limitations.

21A.80.090    Receiving site incentives.

21A.80.100    TDR transfer process.


21A.80.010 Purpose and intent.

(1) The purpose of the transfer of development rights (TDR) program is to implement a market-based tool to permanently preserve partially developed or undeveloped land with important public benefits, such as farmland, forestland, open space, and wildlife habitat, through the private acquisition of the development rights on those lands (“sending sites”) and the subsequent transfer of those rights to lands more suitable for development (“receiving sites”). 

(2) The TDR provisions supplement land use regulations, resource protection efforts and open space acquisition programs and are intended to encourage increased residential development density or increased commercial square footage where it can best be accommodated by: 

(a) Providing an incentive process for property owners of partially developed property, undeveloped land, farmland, forestland, open space and wildlife habitat to preserve lands with a public benefit; and 

(b) Providing an administrative review process to ensure that transfers of development rights are evaluated and administered in a fair and timely manner in accordance with other City goals and policies. (Ord. O2011-297 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.80.020 Applicability.

All new development on a site identified as a receiving site pursuant to SMC 21A.80.040 shall have the option to acquire a certified transfer of development rights to increase the development potential of the receiving site. All private property owners owning a site that qualifies as a sending site pursuant to SMC 21A.80.030 and 21A.80.050 shall have the option to request sending site certification and to sell the development potential of a sending site to an interested buyer. The development potential of a sending site, as determined by site certification pursuant to SMC 21A.80.060, may be transferred and credited to a receiving site only when the transfer is approved in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. O2011-297 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.80.030 Sending site categories and criteria.

(1) A sending site may be certified by the City pursuant to SMC 21A.80.060, provided the sending site meets the criteria for one of the following sending site categories, and the provisions of subsection (2) of this section:

(a) In-City Sending Sites. Undeveloped or partially developed properties located within the following areas may qualify as in-City sending sites. The department shall maintain maps of the approximate location of these areas, which shall be subject to field verification as part of the certification process: 

(i) Properties located within the Thompson subbasin; or

(ii) Properties located within the Inglewood subbasin; or

(iii) Properties located within erosion hazards special district overlay; or

(iv) Properties located within the wetland management areas special district overlay.

(b) Interjurisdictional Sending Sites.

(i) Unincorporated King County land identified by the City council in an interlocal agreement with King County; or

(ii) Land identified by the City council in an interlocal agreement with another jurisdiction.

(c) For the purposes of this chapter, “undeveloped properties” are properties that have the potential to accommodate dwelling units and do not currently contain dwelling units.

(2) To be eligible for the TDR program, all sending sites shall be certified by the City pursuant to SMC 21A.80.060, have intact development potential, and provide a defined public benefit. 

(a) A sending site is deemed to have a defined public benefit if the site is:

(i) Open space adjacent to, or connected with, City park or open space lands; or

(ii) Wildlife habitat for threatened and/or endangered species listed by the federal government or the state of Washington; or 

(iii) Located such that preservation will provide additional protection for sensitive subbasins or environmentally critical areas; or 

(iv) Farmland; or 

(v) Forestland.

(b) A sending site is deemed to have intact development potential if the area proposed for conservation is:

(i) Of sufficient area to create at least one development right pursuant to SMC 21A.80.050; and

(ii) Contiguous, except for division by public rights-of-way; and

(iii) The sending site’s development rights or development capacity is not exhausted through any of the following:

(A) Existing development on the site; or

(B) Agriculture, recreation, or open space easements; or

(C) Conservation of environmentally sensitive areas and their buffers through means including, but not limited to, an open space easement or native growth easement; or

(D) Alteration by a conservation easement or through any agreement.

(3) Development rights acquired from eligible sending sites may be transferred to eligible receiving sites through the TDR transfer process. After completion of the conveyance of a sending site’s development rights, the property shall be maintained in a condition that is consistent with the criteria in this chapter under which the sending site was qualified by means of a TDR conservation easement. (Ord. O2011-297 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.80.040 Receiving sites.

(1) Eligible receiving sites shall be:

(a) Town Center subarea properties as follows:

(i) Commercial properties in Zone A of the Town Center subarea;

(ii) Residential properties in Zones A, B, C, and D of the Town Center subarea.

(b) [Placeholder for future receiving sites].

(2) Except as provided in this chapter, development of a receiving site shall remain subject to all use, lot coverage, height, setback and other applicable requirements of the Sammamish Municipal Code.

(3) A Town Center subarea receiving site may accept density credits, up to the maximum density authorized pursuant to Chapter 21B.25 SMC, from any sending site or combination of sending sites.

(4) A [placeholder for future receiving sites] receiving site may accept density credits, up to the maximum density authorized pursuant to Chapter 21A.25 SMC, from any sending site or combination of sending sites. (Ord. O2011-297 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.80.050 Calculation of available development rights from sending sites.

The number of development rights that a sending site is eligible to sell under this program shall be calculated based upon the sending site category established pursuant to SMC 21A.80.030, provided:

(1) Interjurisdictional Sending Sites. 

(a) The number of development rights eligible for sale on a sending site located on land identified by the City council in an interlocal agreement with another jurisdiction shall be determined pursuant to the interlocal agreement.

(b) If the sending site is located on unincorporated King County land identified by the City council in an interlocal agreement with King County, the number of development rights eligible for sale may be determined pursuant to the interlocal agreement.

(2) In-City Sending Sites. The number of development rights eligible for sale on a sending site located in the in-City preservation sending site category shall be determined pursuant to SMC 21A.25.070 and 21A.25.080, subject to the limitation of subsection (3) of this section; and provided, that the minimum number of development rights for an undeveloped property shall be one per legal lot.

(3) No development rights may be assigned to land already encumbered by a conservation easement unless expressly reserved by the easement. (Ord. O2011-297 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.80.060 Sending site certification.

(1) Sending Sites Located within Sammamish.

(a) The City shall be responsible for determining whether properties are eligible to be considered a sending site. The City shall base its decision on the materials provided by the landowner in a TDR sending site application and a satisfaction of the sending site requirements outlined in SMC 21A.80.030 and calculations in SMC 21A.80.050.

(b) Responsibility for preparing a completed sending site application rests exclusively with the applicant. Application forms shall be available from the department of community development.

(c) Sending site landowners may obtain TDR certificates which can be transferred pursuant to SMC 21A.80.100 and used by receiving area landowners. The process for obtaining the TDR certificates is as follows:

(i) Following City review and approval of an application for TDR certificates by the sending site owner, the City shall issue a TDR certificate letter of intent. The letter shall contain the following: 

(A) A determination of the number of development rights calculated for the sending site pursuant to SMC 21A.80.050 and 21A.80.100; and 

(B) An agreement by the City to issue a corresponding number of TDR certificates in conversion for a conservation easement granted by the City or the City’s designated agent; and

(C) A summary of the expected terms of use for the sending site established through SMC 21A.80.070. 

(ii) The sending site owner may use the TDR certificate letter of intent to market sending site development rights to potential purchasers, but the certificate letter of intent shall have no value and cannot be transferred or used to obtain increased development rights within receiving areas. 

(iii) The letter of intent shall expire 10 years from the date of issuance by the City of Sammamish.

(iv) As provided by the TDR certificate letter of intent, the City shall issue serially numbered TDR certificates to the sending site owner upon acceptance of a TDR conservation easement. The City shall have 90 days from the date the conservation easement is offered by the sending site owner in which to conduct, at its discretion, a review of the sending site records and/or a site inspection.

(v) A TDR conservation easement will not encumber a sending site until such time as a TDR certificate or certificates have been issued to sending site landowners pursuant to SMC 21A.80.100 except by owner preference. The director is authorized to create administrative rules to provide for phased development of a project incorporating TDRs.

(2) Sending Sites Located Outside of Sammamish.

(a) All development rights transferred through an interlocal agreement with another jurisdiction from sending sites located outside of the City limits of Sammamish shall be transferred into Sammamish pursuant to the terms of the interlocal TDR agreement with the relevant jurisdiction.

(b) All development rights that are not subject to the terms of an interlocal agreement with another jurisdiction and are transferred from sending sites located outside the City limits of Sammamish shall be transferred into Sammamish pursuant to subsection (1) of this section.

(3) The maximum number of sending site TDR certificates issued, and resulting in the recording of a conservation easement, shall not exceed 630. (Ord. O2011-297 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.80.070 Documentation of restrictions.

(1) TDR certificates issued to sending sites by the City of Sammamish shall have a conservation easement restricting the deed and granted to the City of Sammamish, or an appropriate agent, recorded with King County and notice placed on the title of the sending parcel. 

(2) TDR certificates issued to sending sites pursuant to an interlocal agreement with another jurisdiction shall have a conservation easement restricting the deed recorded with King County and notice placed on the title of the sending parcel. 

(3) The director shall establish the form of conservation easements issued by the City of Sammamish; however, the conservation easement shall contain, at a minimum the following items:

(a) The number of development rights extinguished on the sending site through the TDR certificate issuance;

(b) The specific public benefit identified on the subject site pursuant to SMC 21A.80.030; and

(c) The terms of use for the subject site, consistent with required protections of the identified public benefit;

(d) The intent of the conservation easement shall be to encumber the property perpetually. (Ord. O2011-297 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.80.080 Sending site development limitations.

(1) Sending sites that the City has issued TDR certificate letter of intent for shall be limited to uses consistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter and with the criteria originally used as the basis for issuing the letter of intent to the sending site pursuant to SMC 21A.80.030 and 21A.80.060. Failure to use the sending site in a manner consistent with the original certification may result in the City not issuing TDR certificates.

(2) When only a portion of a site’s development rights have been conveyed and extinguished, the owner retains all rights on the remaining buildable portion of the property and may exercise them pursuant to Sammamish Municipal Code. 

(3) The conservation easement by its terms may reserve dwelling units that may be developed in the future. Transferred development rights explicitly identified in the conservation easement pursuant to SMC 21A.80.070 shall be separated from the property through the conservation easement. 

(4) The landowner shall not undertake any division, subdivision or partitioning of the property, whether by physical or legal process, which includes, but is not limited to, any subdivision, short subdivision, platting, binding site plan, testamentary division, or other process by which the property is divided into lots or in which title to different portions of the property are not held in unified ownership, unless such land division allocates the reserved development rights between the divided parcels of property in a manner consistent with the terms of the conservation easement.

(5) Use of a sending site subject to a conservation easement shall be limited to uses consistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter and with the criteria originally used to establish the sending site.

(6) Once an undeveloped or partially developed sending site has been encumbered by a conservation easement, additional development potential within the sending site area constrained by the conservation easement cannot be created by means of a rezone of the property. (Ord. O2011-297 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.80.090 Receiving site incentives.

(1) Development rights may be purchased to achieve TDR-based incentive densities allowed by Sammamish development regulations on receiving sites identified in SMC 21A.80.040.

(2) Receiving Site Incentives.

(a) Town Center. The following table outlines TDR-based incentives for eligible receiving sites with the purchase of a development right. (For example, a sending site in the R-1 zone that generates one TDR will allow for the creation of four dwelling units at a receiving in the TC-C zone of the Town Center. Alternatively, the same site in the R-1 zone that generates one TDR will allow 7,716 square feet of additional commercial development in the Town Center):

Table 21A.80.090  Receiving Site Incentive Table

	Sending Zoning

	R-1	R-4	R-6	KC Lands

	Receiving Zoning	Commercial	7,716 sq. ft.	3,560 sq. ft.	2,600 sq. ft.	3,560 sq. ft.



	Zone C	4 du	2 du	1 du	2 du

	Zone B	7 du	3 du	2 du	3 du

	Zone A	5 du

Note: Dwelling units may be transferred from the TC-D zone into the TC-A zones, subject to the provisions of SMC 21B.25.040(2)(d).

(b) [Placeholder for future receiving sites].

(3) Modification of Receiving Site Incentives.

(a) The director is authorized to recommend that the City council adopt a revised incentive table to address changing economic conditions or to further refine the receiving site incentives. The director is also authorized to recommend that the City council adopt receiving site incentives for sending sites not currently identified in subsection (2) of this section. The incentive table shall not be revised more than once in a calendar year. The director shall base the recommendation of a revised incentive table on the following economic analysis:

(i) The expected marginal value of the receiving site incentives; and

(ii) The prevailing cost of per square foot commercial or residential development and the impact of the acquisition of TDRs on a project’s marginal returns; and

(iii) The appropriate regional costs of development per commercial square foot or residential dwelling unit; and 

(iv) Consistency with the conservation principles and purpose and intent of this chapter.

(b) Once adopted by the Council, the modified receiving site incentive table shall be used for calculation of receiving site incentives. Within 14 days of adopting a revised incentive table, the director shall mail notification to property owners with an active TDR certificate letter of intent following adoption of a revised incentive table.

(c) If adoption of a revised incentive table is requested by a developer or private property owner, the burden of preparing the economic analysis shall be on the developer or private property owner.

(d) The director shall keep a log of modified receiving site incentives and shall periodically report the modifications to the City council. (Ord. O2011-310 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2011-297 § 1 (Att. A))


21A.80.100 TDR transfer process.

(1) Receiving site landowners are required to transfer sending site TDR certificates to achieve TDR-based incentive densities. Permit applications may be submitted without the purchase of TDR certificates, but no permits for development associated with a TDR project shall be issued until the TDR certificate requirement is satisfied.

(2) The required TDR certificates may be acquired by:

(a) Transferring development rights from certified sending sites; or 

(b) Transferring development rights from certified sending sites owned by a receiving site owner; or

(c) Purchasing previously purchased, unexecuted development rights from another buyer.

(3) All receiving site projects using TDRs must be in accordance with all other applicable laws and regulations. (Ord. O2011-297 § 1 (Att. A))


Chapter 21A.85 LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT

Sections:

21A.85.010    Intent and goals.

21A.85.020    Applicability.

21A.85.030    Low impact development approaches.

21A.85.040    LID incentives.

21A.85.050    Review.


21A.85.010 Intent and goals.

Low impact development (LID) is an approach to land use planning and project design that seeks to:

(1) Increase the ability of a developed site to effectively emulate predevelopment hydrologic conditions, including without limitation, storm water retention, water quality treatment, and infiltration functions;

(2) Minimize overland storm water runoff from a developed site;

(3) Maximize the retention of trees, native vegetation, understory plants, and native soils;

(4) Minimize soil disturbance;

(5) Minimize the conversion of site surfaces from vegetated to nonvegetated surfaces; and

(6) Maximize the quantity and use of appropriate native plants on site.

The purpose of this chapter is to encourage development proposals to incorporate LID planning and design approaches into project development by providing incentives tied to LID’s use.

This chapter seeks to guide land use planning decisions only and does not replace any federal, state or local storm water flow control and water quality treatment regulations. Applicants are responsible for ensuring that their project proposal complies with all applicable regulations. (Ord. O2016-429 § 7 (Att. G); Ord. O2008-236 § 1)


21A.85.020 Applicability.

All new development subject to drainage review shall be required to comply with the adopted Surface Water Design Manual (SWDM). The SWDM requires low impact development (LID) flow control best management practices (BMPs) to mitigate the impacts of storm and surface water runoff generated by new impervious surfaces, new pervious surfaces, existing impervious surfaces, and replaced impervious surfaces.

In addition to the use of these required BMPs, new development may also have the option to incorporate LID site planning approaches described in SMC 21A.85.030 into project design in order to accumulate sufficient technique points to allow the applicant to take advantage of the incentives identified in SMC 21A.85.040.

The City of Sammamish shall apply this chapter to all City projects and encourage other governmental entities to utilize LID in accordance with this chapter in their projects. (Ord. O2016-429 § 7 (Att. G); Ord. O2008-236 § 1)


21A.85.030 Low impact development approaches.

The following list identifies preferred LID approaches that may be proposed within any zoning designation and the technique points associated with the successful use of each approach. Whether the implementation of any LID approach is sufficient to earn technique points shall be subject to the review and approval of the director.

(1) Retention of Existing Forested Condition – Up to 25 Technique Points.

(a) The applicant may earn up to 25 technique points for retaining up to 50 percent of the subject site’s remaining existing forested area after meeting retention standards in accordance with Development Standards – Trees, Chapter 21A.37 SMC.

(b) Existing forested areas shall be subject to Development Standards – Trees, Chapter 21A.37 SMC, and the maintenance and irrigation requirements of SMC 21A.35.110 through 21A.35.140.

(c) Technique points shall be awarded for retention as follows:

(i) Retention of 10 percent of existing forested condition: five technique points.

(ii) Retention of 20 percent of existing forested condition: 10 technique points.

(iii) Retention of 30 percent of existing forested condition: 15 technique points.

(iv) Retention of 40 percent of existing forested condition: 20 technique points.

(v) Retention of 50 percent of existing forested condition: 25 technique points.

(2) Restoration of Vegetated Area – Up to 20 Technique Points.

(a) The applicant may earn up to 20 technique points for restoring up to 50 percent of the subject site in one or more permanent open space tracts after meeting retention standards in accordance with Development Standards – Trees, Chapter 21A.37 SMC;

(b) Technique points shall be awarded for restoration as follows:

(i) Restoration of 10 percent of vegetated area: four technique points.

(ii) Restoration of 20 percent of vegetated area: eight technique points.

(iii) Restoration of 30 percent of vegetated area: 12 technique points.

(iv) Restoration of 40 percent of vegetated area: 16 technique points.

(v) Restoration of 50 percent of vegetated area: 20 technique points;

(c) Restoration of vegetated areas shall be subject to Development Standards – Trees, Chapter 21A.37 SMC, and the maintenance and irrigation requirements of SMC 21A.35.110 through 21A.35.140. Landscaping plans for open space tracts shall be designed consistent with SMC 21A.35.080 and 21A.35.100;

(d) Restoration areas shall be landscaped as part of the site’s development and meet the following requirements:

(i) The site design shall maximize the amount of existing mature vegetation retained on site;

(ii) The revegetation plan shall be designed by a licensed professional or ISA certified arborist;

(iii) The plantings shall provide a multilayer canopy of large trees (50 percent), small trees, shrubs, and ground cover at maturity;

(iv) A minimum of 75 percent of the open space tract shall be planted with trees, shrubs and groundcover. Groundcover does not include pasture or turf;

(v) All invasive plants on the site shall be removed;

(vi) No more than 15 percent of the proposed open space tract shall be pasture or turf;

(vii) Plants shall be selected by a licensed professional based upon site suitability;

(viii) For proposed open space tracts exceeding one-half acre in area, a ratio of two evergreens to one deciduous tree is required;

(ix) Three trees shall be planted per 1,000 square feet of proposed open space tract area;

(x) Trees shall be native to the coastal Pacific Northwest. On planting, deciduous trees shall have a minimum caliper of three-quarters inch and coniferous and broadleaf evergreen trees shall be at least five feet in height;

(xi) Eighty percent of shrubs and 80 percent of groundcover shall be species native to the coastal Pacific Northwest;

(xii) Shrubs shall be spaced a maximum of four feet on center and ground cover shall be spaced a maximum of two feet on center; and

(xiii) Significant trees retained in an open space tract may also be counted towards total tree retention requirements for the parcel.

(3) Restoration of Critical Area Buffers – Up to 20 Technique Points.

(a) The applicant may earn up to 20 technique points for restoring up to 50 percent of the critical area buffers within a development site.

(b) Technique points shall be awarded for restoration as follows:

(i) Restoration of 10 percent of vegetated area: four technique points.

(ii) Restoration of 20 percent of vegetated area: eight technique points.

(iii) Restoration of 30 percent of vegetated area: 12 technique points.

(iv) Restoration of 40 percent of vegetated area: 16 technique points.

(v) Restoration of 50 percent of vegetated area: 20 technique points.

(c) Restoration of critical area buffers shall be subject to mitigation standards in accordance with Chapter 21A.50 SMC and the maintenance and irrigation requirements of SMC 21A.35.110 through 21A.35.140.

(4) Increased Width of Critical Area Buffer – 10 Technique Points.

(a) The applicant may increase the width of a critical area buffer required under Chapter 21A.50 SMC by 35 percent.

(b) Any such increased width may also be included as part of a contiguous critical area tract counting as open space tract under subsection (2) of this section (see Diagram B).


[IMAGE]


Diagram B

(5) Limited Site Disturbance – 12 Technique Points.

(a) Soil disturbance of the site shall be limited to 50 percent of the site area otherwise unconstrained by environmentally critical areas and associated buffers and tree protection standards during plat and subsequent building construction;

(b) Limited clearing may occur within the area where soil is undisturbed, subject to the following limitations:

(i) The top four inches of soil may be disturbed but not removed from the site or lot, as needed, to allow for removal of unsuitable vegetation; provided, that the disturbed soil is moved to an isolated location where it will not be driven upon and such soil is then returned and respread on the parcel;

(ii) Six inches of arborist chippings are placed on top of in-place soil areas that may be subject to construction activities or operations;

(iii) Soil that is not protected as set forth in subsection (5)(b)(i) or (5)(b)(ii) of this section shall be tilled to a depth of 12 inches upon completion of all site disturbance;

(iv) Stump removal shall consist of grinding the stump in the existing location; and

(v) In no case shall the natural grade of the undisturbed area be modified by more than four inches.

(6) Reforestation – Eight Technique Points.

(a) No storm water facility modeling credits to reduce sizing of required flow control or water quality facilities in accordance with the adopted Surface Water Design Manual shall be provided for reforestation unless reforestation areas are contained within a designated tract as approved by the director;

(b) Residential Development. All of the lots within a residential development shall be reforested prior to final occupancy is issued on the development;

(c) Commercial/Institutional Development. The site shall be reforested;

(d) Reforestation shall consist of:

(i) For lots of 4,000 square feet or less, a minimum of two trees planted per lot;

(ii) For lots greater than 4,000 square feet in area, a minimum of two trees plus one additional tree planted per 1,000 square feet over 4,000 square feet;

(iii) Trees shall be native to the coastal Pacific Northwest. On planting, deciduous trees shall have a minimum caliper of three-quarters inch and coniferous and broadleaf evergreen trees shall be at least five feet in height.

(7) Reduced Impervious Surface – Up to 12 Technique Points.

(a) Lots created through a development proposal shall qualify for points under this subsection if each lot’s total impervious surface area is less than the applicable maximum allowable impervious surface area pursuant to SMC 21A.25.030 or 21A.25.040, as applicable and after meeting maximum impervious surface standards in accordance with the adopted Surface Water Design Manual;

(b) Technique points shall be awarded for reduced impervious surface as follows:

(i) Each lot total impervious surface is five percent less than the applicable maximum allowable impervious surface area: three technique points.

(ii) Each lot total impervious surface is 10 percent less than the applicable maximum allowable impervious surface area: six technique points.

(iii) Each lot total impervious surface is 15 percent less than the applicable maximum allowable impervious surface area: nine technique points.

(iv) Each lot total impervious surface is 20 percent less than the applicable maximum allowable impervious surface area: 12 technique points;

(c) Impervious surface areas which are public roads or public sidewalks shall be excluded from the calculation of the site’s total impervious surface area hereunder; and

(d) The allowed increases in the maximum permitted impervious surface area for smaller lots pursuant to SMC 21A.25.030 and 21A.25.040 shall not apply to this subsection.

(8) Minimal Foundation Excavation – 12 Technique Points.

(a) All of the structures within a residential development shall be designed with minimal foundation excavation which shall include:

(i) Limited or no disturbance of the natural soil profile within the footprint of all proposed structures. “Limited disturbance” shall have the meaning set forth in subsection (5) of this section;

(ii) Using a foundation that consists of a combination of driven piles and a connection at or above the existing grade of the subject site.

(b) Compliance with this technique shall require review and approval by the building official.

(9) Joint Use Driveway – Six Technique Points.

(a) Sixty-five percent of lots within a proposed residential development shall be accessed from a joint use driveway. A “joint use driveway” is defined by the current Public Works Standards.

(10) Hollywood Driveway – Eight Technique Points.

(a) Sixty-five percent of lots within a proposed residential development shall be accessed from a Hollywood driveway. A Hollywood driveway consists of two paved wheel tracks between two and one-half and three and one-half feet wide separated by a planted strip at least three feet wide. (Ord. O2016-429 § 7 (Att. G); Ord. O2008-236 § 1. Formerly 21A.85.040)


21A.85.040 LID incentives.

Technique points earned by installing one or more of the LID approaches described in SMC 21A.85.030 may be used to obtain the following LID incentives. Technique points are cumulative and may be combined to gain the use of one or more incentives below. Technique points may only be used for obtaining incentives for the development proposal that generates the points and may not be used for other development proposals. Except as otherwise noted in this section, technique points may only be used once.

(1) Twenty Percent Increased Density. Subject to compliance with the provisions of Chapter 21A.50 SMC, Environmentally Critical Areas, this density incentive may be used to increase the site density permitted under SMC 21A.25.030 and 21A.25.040, as applicable, by up to 20 percent.

(a) Thirty Technique Points Required. The applicant may include up to 75 percent of the area within streets within the site density calculations required under SMC 21A.25.080;

(b) Twenty-Seven Technique Points Required. The applicant may include up to 50 percent of the area within streets within the site density calculations required under SMC 21A.25.080;

(c) Twenty-Four Technique Points Required. The applicant may include up to 25 percent of the area within streets within the site density calculations required under SMC 21A.25.080.

(2) Thirty Percent Increased Density Incentive. Subject to compliance with the provisions of Chapter 21A.50 SMC, Environmentally Critical Areas, this density incentive may be used to increase the site density permitted under SMC 21A.25.030 and 21A.25.040, as applicable, by up to 30 percent.

(a) Forty Technique Points Required. The applicant may include up to 75 percent of the area within critical areas and critical area buffers within the site density calculations required under SMC 21A.25.080;

(b) Thirty-Five Technique Points Required. The applicant may include up to 50 percent of the area within critical areas and critical area buffers within the site density calculations required under SMC 21A.25.080;

(c) Thirty Technique Points Required. The applicant may include up to 25 percent of the area within critical areas and critical area buffers within the site density calculations required under SMC 21A.25.080.

(3) Recognition – 24 Technique Points Required. The applicant may request that the City generate a featured LID development article in the City newsletter covering the development which has earned the technique points. Technique points used for this incentive may be reused to obtain additional incentives.

(4) Increased Signage – 12 Technique Points Required. The applicant may increase the allowed signage pursuant to Chapter 21A.45 SMC by:

(a) Adding one additional monument sign; or

(b) Increasing the size of the allowed sign by 10 percent.

(5) Attached Housing – 12 Technique Points Required. One hundred percent of the lots within a proposed residential development may be designed to accommodate attached housing consistent with SMC 21A.30.020. (Ord. O2016-429 § 7 (Att. G); Ord. O2008-236 § 1. Formerly 21A.85.070)


21A.85.050 Review.

(1) Process. The use of preferred LID approaches or full LID design shall be reviewed concurrently with a primary proposal to consider the proposed site plan and methods used to earn the incentives as follows:

(a) For the purpose of this section, a “primary proposal” is defined as a proposed subdivision, binding site plan, conditional use permit, or commercial site development permit;

(b) The applicant shall identify the proposed techniques and incentives at the time of the first permit application for the primary proposal;

(c) When the primary proposal requires a public hearing under this chapter or SMC Title 19 or 20, the public hearing on the primary proposal shall serve as the hearing on the LID approaches proposed, and the reviewing authority shall make a consolidated decision on the proposed development and use of techniques and the resulting incentives;

(d) When the primary proposal does not require a public hearing under this chapter or SMC Title 19 or 20, the LID approach proposal shall be subject to the decision criteria for conditional use permits outlined in Chapter 21A.100 SMC and to the procedures set forth in SMC Title 20;

(e) All notices required by Chapter 20.05 SMC for the proposed development shall include a brief description of the proposed LID approaches and associated incentives;

(f) A notice on title and conditions on the face of final plat or equivalent recorded document shall be required documenting the use of LID approaches and identifying limitations on future development; and

(g) A maintenance plan shall be prepared and distributed to all property owner(s) that addresses structural and drainage maintenance, vegetation management, establishment and appropriate long-term irrigation. The applicant shall obtain written agreement from all property owners to comply with the maintenance plan and to maintain and retain all LID approaches employed on the site and credited for incentives for a period of not less than 15 years from the date of construction. The agreement must include wording that if all or part of any LID approach ceases to function, is removed, or in the case of reduction in impervious surface limits exceeds the limit as approved as part of this chapter, equivalent LID approach(es) must be installed and all other storm water management requirements met prior to removal. The applicant shall provide the City with a copy of the maintenance plan and all written agreements with property owners obtained under this section.

(2) Review. In evaluating the feasibility of a preferred LID approach proposal or Sammamish comprehensive LID proposal, the director shall have the authority to request additional technical information prepared by a certified professional to:

(a) Determine whether the development proposal is consistent with this chapter;

(b) Determine if a proposed approach is consistent with the standards of the current Surface Water Design Manual, City of Sammamish Stormwater Comprehensive Plan, or the Low Impact Development Technical Guidance Manual for Puget Sound, or other suitable reference, as determined by the director;

(c) Determine whether the proposed combination of techniques adequately work together toward meeting the goals of this chapter;

(d) Determine if the monitoring plans and bonding measures proposed by the applicant are sufficient to protect the public benefit, health, safety, and welfare, consistent with this chapter; and

(e) Determine that the proposed LID approaches shall function as intended.

(3) Health and Safety. Approval of all proposed LID approaches, Sammamish comprehensive LID, and incentives grants shall be subject to the review of the City to determine that the proposed development does not pose an unreasonable threat to the public health, safety, or welfare on or off the development proposal site and is consistent with the general purposes of this chapter and the public interest.

(4) Adjustments.

(a) Minor. When reviewing and issuing construction permits in an approved development, the department may allow minor adjustments in the approved approaches and incentives used by the development proposal involving the location and site-specific approaches or incentives.

(b) Major. Changes to a development proposal that result in significant adjustments to the project shall require resubmittal of the development proposal pursuant to subsection (1) of this section. Significant adjustments include, but are not limited to, elimination of proposed LID approaches, increases in the number of dwelling units generated, or additional reduction of proposed street improvements. (Ord. O2016-429 § 7 (Att. G); Ord. O2008-236 § 1. Formerly 21A.85.080)


Chapter 21A.90 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS – NOTICE METHODS

Sections:

21A.90.010    Applications – Limitations on refiling of applications.


21A.90.010 Applications – Limitations on refiling of applications. 

Upon denial of a zone reclassification or a special use permit, no new application for substantially the same proposal shall be accepted within one year from the date of denial. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


Chapter 21A.95 COMMERCIAL SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMITS

Sections:

21A.95.010    Purpose.

21A.95.020    Applicability.

21A.95.030    Public comments.

21A.95.040    Application of development standards.

21A.95.050    Approval.

21A.95.060    Financial guarantees.

21A.95.070    Project phasing – Limitation of permit approval.

21A.95.080    Modification to an approved permit.

21A.95.090    Administrative rules.


21A.95.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish an optional comprehensive site review process of proposed commercial development resulting in a permit that can combine any or all of the following:

(1) Site development requirements specified prior to building and/or grading permit applications.

(2) Site review and application of rules and regulations generally applied to the whole site without regard to existing or proposed internal lot lines.

(3) Site development coordination and project phasing occurring over a period of years.

(4) Evaluation of commercially zoned property for the creation or alteration of lots when reviewed concurrently with a binding site plan application. (Ord. O2003-132 § 14)


21A.95.020 Applicability.

(1) An application for commercial site development permit may be submitted for commercial development projects on sites consisting of one or more contiguous lots legally created and zoned to permit the proposed uses.

(a) A commercial site development permit is separate from and does not replace other required permits such as conditional use permits or shoreline substantial development permits. A commercial site development permit may be combined and reviewed concurrently with other permits.

(b) Prior to the issuance of a building permit, all applications for apartment, townhouse, commercial, or office projects must apply for and receive a commercial site development permit. In the event of any question, the City manager or his or her designee shall be responsible for determining the applicability of a commercial site development permit, and how the commercial site development permit shall be processed in conjunction with other applicable permits.

(c) If any of the following scenarios apply to a multifamily, commercial or office proposal, then the applicant must apply for and obtain a CSDP first, prior to issuance of any other permit. In the event of any question, the City manager or his/her designee shall be responsible for determining the applicability of a CSDP.

(i) If three residential units or more will not be located on an individual parcel. This includes three individual single-family dwelling units, townhouse units, apartment units or a combination of dwelling types. Note: Accessory dwelling units are not counted as a residential unit for purposes of this calculation.

(ii) Any new office, multifamily, commercial or office building. Note: New institutional buildings are also included in this definition.

(iii) An office, multifamily, commercial, institutional expansion, tenant improvement or change of use that results in an increase in the number of dwelling units; an increase in impervious surface which triggers a new level of surface water review; a change in the number of ingress or egress points from the site (whether at the applicant’s request or expansion in any of the following areas: building square footage, parking space requirements, or peak a.m. or peak p.m. traffic trips.

(iv) Any office, multifamily, commercial, institutional expansion, tenant improvement or change of use that will impact sensitive areas, shoreline or buffers.

(v) Any office, multifamily, commercial or institutional expansion that will require drainage review in accordance with the King County Surface Water Design Manual. (Ord. O2018-466 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 14)


21A.95.030 Public comments. 

All public comments shall be in writing and signed, shall reference the proposed commercial site development permit application, and shall include the full name, address and telephone number of the person commenting. All comments shall be received within the designated comment period. The designated comment period shall commence on the day following publication or posting of the application notice and shall terminate at 4:30 p.m. on the fifteenth day thereafter. If the department determines that application notice shall be published as well as posted, the department shall make every attempt to have the comment periods run concurrently. If, however, more than one method of notification is used, the termination date shall be calculated from the last notification date. If the fifteenth day is a nonwork day for the City, the designated comment period shall cease at 4:30 p.m. on the next City work day immediately following the fifteenth day. (Ord. O2003-132 § 14)


21A.95.040 Application of development standards.

(1) An application for commercial site development permit shall be reviewed pursuant to Chapter 43.21C RCW, SEPA, as implemented by Chapter 197-11 WAC; Chapter 9.04 KCC as adopted by SMC Title 13, Surface Water Management; Chapter 14A.01 SMC, Public Works Standards Adopted; Chapter 16.15 SMC, Clearing and Grading; Chapter 16.05 SMC, Construction Codes; Chapter 20.15 SMC, State Environmental Policy Act Procedures; SMC Title 21A, Development Code; SMC Title 25, Shoreline Management; administrative rules adopted pursuant to Chapter 2.55 SMC to implement any such code or ordinance provision; King County board of health rules and regulations; and City approved utility comprehensive plans.

(2) Lot-based standards, such as internal circulation, landscaping signage and setback requirements, are typically applied to each individual lot within the site. However, the director may approve an application for commercial site development where such standards have been applied to the site as if it consisted of one parcel. Lot-based regulations shall not be waived altogether. 

(3) The director may modify lot-based or lot line requirements contained within the building, fire and other similar uniform codes adopted by the City, provided the site is being reviewed concurrently with a binding site plan application. (Ord. 2018-466 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 14)


21A.95.050 Approval. 

(1) The director may approve, deny, or approve with conditions an application for a commercial site development. The decision shall be based on the following factors:

(a) Conformity with adopted City and state rules and regulations in effect on the date the complete application was filed, including but not limited to those listed in SMC 21A.95.040.

(b) Consideration of the recommendations or comments of interested parties and those agencies or departments having pertinent expertise or jurisdiction, consistent with the requirements of this title. 

(2) Subsequent permits for the subject site shall be issued only in compliance with the approved commercial site development plan. Additional site development conditions and site review will not be required for subsequent permits provided the approved plan is not altered.

(3) Approval of the proposed commercial site development shall not provide the applicant with a vested right to build without regard to subsequent changes in the building and fire codes listed in Chapter 16.05 SMC.

(4) The director shall mail a copy of the decision to the applicant and any other person who has presented written comment to the department. (Ord. O2003-132 § 14)


21A.95.060 Financial guarantees. 

Performance guarantees consistent with the provisions of SMC Title 27A may be required to assure that development occurs according to the approved plan. (Ord. O2003-132 § 14)


21A.95.070 Project phasing – Limitation of permit approval.

(1) A commercial site development permit may be approved with project phasing and other project-specific conditions to mitigate impacts on the environment or on public facilities and services including transportation, utilities, drainage, police and fire protection, schools, and parks. Project phasing shall mean a phasing plan designed to address impacts on the environment or on public facilities and services as those impacts become relevant in the project.

(2) A commercial site development permit approved with a phasing plan shall be null and void if the applicant fails to meet the conditions and time schedules specified in the approved phasing plan.

(3) A commercial site development permit approved without a phasing plan shall be null and void if the applicant fails to file a complete building permit application(s) for all buildings within three years of the approval date, or by a date specified by the director, and fails to have all valid building permits issued within four years of the commercial site development permit approval date. (Ord. O2016-413 § 8 (Att. G))


21A.95.080 Modification to an approved permit.

A subsequent building permit application may contain minor modifications to an approved commercial site development plan provided a modification does not:

(1) Increase the building floor area by more than 10 percent;

(2) Increase the number of dwelling units;

(3) Increase the total impervious surface area; provided, that relocatable facilities for schools shall be exempt from this restriction;

(4) Result in an insufficient amount of parking and/or loading;

(5) Locate buildings outside an approved building envelope; provided, that relocatable facilities for schools shall be exempt from this restriction;

(6) Change the number of ingress and egress points to the site;

(7) Significantly increase the traffic impacts of a.m. or p.m. peak-hour trips to and from the site;

(8) Significantly increase the quantity of imported or exported materials or increase the area of site disturbance.

Modifications that exceed the conditions of approval as stated in this section and require a new review as determined by the director shall only be accomplished by applying for a new commercial site development permit for the entire site. The new application shall be reviewed according to the laws and rules in effect at the time of application. (Ord. O2018-466 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2003-132 § 14)


21A.95.090 Administrative rules.

The director may promulgate administrative rules and regulations pursuant to Chapter 2.55 SMC, to implement the provisions and requirements of this chapter. (Ord. O2003-132 § 14)


Chapter 21A.97 DEVELOPMENT PERMIT FEES

Sections:

21A.97.010    King County Code Title 27 (Development Permit Fees) adopted.


21A.97.010 King County Code Title 27 (Development Permit Fees) adopted.

King County Code Title 27 (Development Permit Fees), a copy of which is attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter as Attachment A, is hereby adopted by reference, as now in effect or hereafter amended, as if fully set forth herein. (Ord. O2015-401 § 1)


Chapter 21A.100 REVIEW PROCEDURES – NOTICE REQUIREMENTS

Sections:

21A.100.010    Code compliance review – Actions subject to review.

21A.100.020    Code compliance review – Notice requirements and comment period.

21A.100.030    Code compliance review – Decisions and appeals.

21A.100.040    Director review – Actions subject to review.

21A.100.050    Director review – Decision regarding proposal.

21A.100.055    Director review – Procedure for issuance of interpretations.

21A.100.060    Director review – Decision and interpretation final unless appealed.

21A.100.070    Examiner review – Zone reclassifications and special use permits.

21A.100.080    Combined review.

21A.100.090    Establishment of hearing rules.

21A.100.100    Records.

21A.100.110    Modifications and expansions of uses or developments authorized by existing land use permits – Permits defined.

21A.100.120    Modifications or expansions of uses or developments authorized by existing land use permits – When use now permitted outright.

21A.100.130    Modifications or expansions of uses authorized by existing land use permits – Required findings.

21A.100.140    Modifications and expansions – Use or development authorized by an existing planned unit development approval.

21A.100.150    Modifications and expansions – Uses or development authorized by existing conditional use, special use, or unclassified use permits.


21A.100.010 Code compliance review – Actions subject to review.

The following actions shall be subject to administrative review for determining compliance with the provisions of this title and/or any applicable development conditions that may affect the proposal:

(1) Building permits;

(2) Grading permits; and

(3) Temporary use permits. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.100.020 Code compliance review – Notice requirements and comment period.

(1) The department shall provide posted and published notice pursuant to Chapter 21A.90 SMC for temporary use permits.

(2) Any written comments on applications subject to code compliance review shall be submitted within 15 days of the date of published notice or the posting date, whichever is later. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.100.030 Code compliance review – Decisions and appeals.

(1) The department shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny permits based on compliance with this title and any other development condition affecting the proposal.

(2) Decisions on temporary use permits may be appealed to the hearing examiner.

(3) Permits approved through code compliance review shall be effective for the time periods and subject to the terms set out as follows:

(a) Building permits shall comply with the Uniform Building Codes as adopted by the City in SMC Title 16;

(b) Grading permits shall comply with Chapter 16.15 SMC; and

(c) Temporary use permits shall comply with Chapter 21A.70 SMC. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.100.040 Director review – Actions subject to review. 

Applications for variances, exceptions under SMC 21A.50.070, interpretations under Chapter 21A.05 SMC, and conditional uses shall be subject to the director review procedures set forth in this chapter. (Ord. O2009-248 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.100.050 Director review – Decision regarding proposal. 

(1) Decisions regarding the approval or denial of proposals subject to director review shall be based upon compliance with the required showings of Chapter 21A.110 SMC, or in the case of interpretations, based upon compliance with the requirements of Chapter 21A.05 SMC. 

(2) The written decision contained in the record shall show: 

(a) Facts, findings and conclusions supporting the decision and demonstrating compliance with the applicable decision criteria; and

(b) Any conditions and limitations imposed, if the request is granted.

(3) The director shall mail a copy of the written decision to the applicant and to all parties of record. 

(4) Rules. The director shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and shall keep a public record of his or her actions, findings, waivers and determinations. (Ord. O2009-248 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.100.055 Director review – Procedure for issuance of interpretations.

(1) A person may submit written analysis and supporting documentation to assist the director in analyzing a code interpretation request.

(2) The director may conduct research or investigation as the director deems necessary to resolve the issue presented in the code interpretation request and may refer the request to department staff and other City staff for review and analysis.

(3) A code interpretation must be in writing, clearly labeled “Code Interpretation,” and describe the basis for the interpretation pursuant to SMC 21A.05.095.

(4) The director shall issue a code interpretation within 60 days after receiving the code interpretation request, unless the director determines that based on the unusual nature of the issue additional time is necessary to respond to the request. If the code interpretation request relates to a specific development proposal that is pending before the department of community development or relates to a code enforcement action that is subject to appeal, the code interpretation shall become final when the department of community development issues its final decision on the underlying development proposal for a Type 1 or 2 decision, the department makes its recommendation on a Type 3 or 4 decision or, based on the code interpretation, the department issues a notice and order, citation or stop work order under SMC Title 23. If the director determines that a code interpretation request does not relate to a specific development proposal that is currently pending before the City or to a code enforcement action, the code interpretation is final when issued by the director.

(5) The director shall maintain a list of indexed code interpretations for public inspection.

(6) The director shall mail copies of the code interpretation to the following: 

(a) The person who requested the code interpretation; 

(b) If the director determines that the code interpretation relates to a specific development proposal that is pending before the City, the applicant and all other parties of record for that proposal; 

(c) If the director determines the code interpretation relates to a specific parcel of property, the taxpayer of record for that parcel; and

(d) Any person who has submitted written comments regarding the director’s review of the code interpretation request. 

(7) When it is final, a code interpretation remains in effect until it is rescinded in writing by the director or it is modified or reversed on appeal by the hearing examiner, the City council or an adjudicatory body. 

(8) A code interpretation issued by the director governs all staff review and decisions unless withdrawn, or modified by the director or modified or reversed on appeal by the City hearing examiner, City council, or an adjudicatory body. (Ord. O2009-248 § 1)


21A.100.060 Director review – Decision and interpretation final unless appealed.

(1) The decision of the director shall be final unless the applicant or an aggrieved party files an appeal to the hearing examiner pursuant to SMC 20.10.080.

(2) The interpretation of the director shall be final except for any appeal allowed as follows:

(a) If the director determines that a code interpretation is necessary for review of a specific development proposal that is currently before the department, and the development project is subject to an administrative appeal, any appeal of the code interpretation shall be consolidated with and is subject to the same appeal process as the underlying development project. If the director determines that a code interpretation request relates to a code enforcement action, any appeal of the code interpretation shall be consolidated with and is subject to the same appeal process as the code enforcement action. If the City of Sammamish hearing examiner makes the City’s final decision with regard to the underlying permit, other approval type or code enforcement action regarding which the interpretation was requested, the hearing examiner’s decision constitutes the City’s final decision on the code interpretation request. If the City council, acting as a quasi-judicial body, makes the City’s final decision with regard to the underlying permit or other approval type regarding which the interpretation was requested, the City council’s decision constitutes the City’s final decision on the code interpretation request.

(b) If the director issues a code interpretation that is not associated with one of the items described in subsection (2)(a) of this section, the interpretation may be appealed to the hearing examiner within 21 days of the date the notice of the interpretation is provided.

(3) The hearing examiner shall review and make decisions based upon information contained in the written appeal and the record.

(4) The hearing examiner’s decision may affirm, modify, or reverse the decision of the director.

(5) As provided by SMC 20.10.240(1) and (2):

(a) The hearing examiner shall render a decision within 10 days of the closing of hearing; and

(b) The decision shall be final unless appealed under the provisions of SMC 20.10.250(1).

(6) Establishment of any use or activity authorized pursuant to a conditional use permit, reasonable use exception, or variance shall occur within two years of the effective date of the decision for such permit or variance; provided, that for schools this period shall be five years. This period may be extended for up to 180 days by the director if the applicant has submitted the applications necessary to establish the use or activity and has provided written justification for the extension.

(7) For the purpose of this section, “establishment” shall occur upon the issuance of all local permit(s) for on-site improvements needed to begin the authorized use or activity; provided, that the conditions or improvements required by such permits are completed within the time frames of said permits.

(8) Once a use, activity or improvement allowed by a conditional use permit or variance has been established, it may continue as long as all conditions of permit issuance remain satisfied. (Ord. O2016-413 § 9 (Att. H); Ord. O2009-249 § 1; Ord. O2009-248 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.100.070 Examiner review – Zone reclassifications and special use permits.

Applications for zone reclassifications and special use permits shall be reviewed by the department subject to the procedures and criteria set forth in Chapter 20.10 SMC. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.100.080 Combined review.

Proposed actions may be combined for review purposes with any other action subject to the same review process, provided:

(1) Notice requirements for combined review shall not be less than the greatest individual action requirement; and

(2) No permit shall be approved without prior review and approval of any required variance. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.100.090 Establishment of hearing rules. 

The department shall establish rules governing the conduct of public hearings before the hearing examiner and City council pursuant to Chapter 2.55 SMC. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.100.100 Records.

The department shall maintain public records for all permit approvals and denials containing the following information:

(1) Application documents; 

(2) Tape recorded verbatim records of required public hearing;

(3) Written recommendations and decisions for proposed actions;

(4) Ordinances showing final council actions;

(5) Evidence of notice;

(6) Written comments received; and

(7) Material submitted as exhibits. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.100.110 Modifications and expansions of uses or developments authorized by existing land use permits – Permits defined.

For the purposes of this chapter, a “land use permit” shall mean a conditional use permit, special use permit, unclassified use permit, or planned unit development. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.100.120 Modifications or expansions of uses or developments authorized by existing land use permits – When use now permitted outright.

Proposed modifications or expansions to a use or development authorized by an existing land use permit shall not require an amendment to the existing land use permit if the use is now permitted outright in the zone district in which it is located and shall not require findings pursuant to SMC 21A.100.130. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.100.130 Modifications or expansions of uses authorized by existing land use permits – Required findings.

Modifications or expansions approved by the department shall be based on written findings that the proposed modifications or expansions provide the same level of protection for and compatibility with adjacent land uses as the original land use permit. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.100.140 Modifications and expansions – Use or development authorized by an existing planned unit development approval. 

Modifications and expansions of uses or developments authorized by an existing planned unit development approval shall be subject to the following provisions:

(1) Any approved modification or expansion shall be recorded.

(2) Modifications to building location and/or dimensions shall be reviewed pursuant to the code compliance process of SMC 21A.100.010 only when:

(a) No buildings are located closer to the nearest property line(s); and 

(b) No increase in square footage of buildings is proposed. 

(3) Modifications beyond those permitted in subsection (2) of this section and all expansions shall be subject to the approval of a conditional use permit. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.100.150 Modifications and expansions – Uses or development authorized by existing conditional use, special use, or unclassified use permits. 

(1) The department may review and approve, pursuant to the code compliance process of SMC 21A.100.010, an expansion of a use or development authorized by an existing conditional use, special use or unclassified use permit provided that:

(a) The expansion shall conform to all provisions of this title and the original land use permit, except that the project-wide amount of each of the following may be increased up to 10 percent: 

(i) Building square footage;

(ii) Impervious surface;

(iii) Parking; or

(iv) Building height.

(b) No subsequent expansions shall be approved under this subsection if the cumulative amount of such expansion exceeds the percentage prescribed in subsection (1)(a) of this section. 

(2) A conditional use permit shall be required for expansions within a use or development authorized by an existing conditional use permit if the expansions are not consistent with the provisions of subsection (1) of this section.

(3) A special use permit shall be required for expansions within a use or development authorized by an existing special use or unclassified use permit, if the expansions to either permit are not consistent with the provisions of subsection (1) of this section.

(4) This section shall not apply to modifications or expansions of telecommunication facilities, the provisions for which are set forth in SMC 21A.55.130 or to modifications or expansions of nonconformances, the provisions for which are set forth in SMC 21A.70.070. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


Chapter 21A.105 SCHOOL IMPACT FEES

Sections:

21A.105.010    Authority.

21A.105.020    Purpose.

21A.105.030    Impact fee program elements.

21A.105.040    Fee calculations.

21A.105.050    Fee collection.

21A.105.060    Assessment of impact fees.

21A.105.070    Adjustments, exceptions, and appeals.

21A.105.080    Exemption or reduction for low- or moderate-income housing.

21A.105.090    Impact fee accounts and refunds.

21A.105.100    Formula for determining school impact fees.


21A.105.010 Authority.

The provisions of this chapter for the assessment and collection of impact fees are adopted pursuant to Chapter 82.02 RCW. (Ord. O2016-412 § 4 (Att. D); Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.105.020 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to implement the capital facilities element of the interim Comprehensive Plan and the Growth Management Act by:

(1) Ensuring that adequate public school facilities and improvements are available to serve new development;

(2) Establishing standards whereby new development pays a proportionate share of the cost for public school facilities needed to serve such new development;

(3) Ensuring that school impact fees are imposed through established procedures and criteria so that specific developments do not pay arbitrary fees or duplicative fees for the same impact; and

(4) Providing needed funding for growth-related school improvements to meet the future growth needs of the City of Sammamish. (Ord. O2016-412 § 4 (Att. D); Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.105.030 Impact fee program elements.

(1) Impact fees will be assessed on every new dwelling unit in the district for which a fee schedule has been established.

(2) Impact fees will be imposed on a district-by-district basis, on behalf of any school district that provides to the City a capital facilities plan, the district’s standards of service for the various grade spans, estimates of the cost of providing needed facilities and other capital improvements, and the data from the district called for by the formula in SMC 21A.105.040. The actual fee schedule for the district will be adopted by ordinance based on this information and the fee calculation set out for SMC 21A.105.040. Any impact fee imposed shall be reasonably related to the impact caused by the development and shall not exceed a proportionate share of the cost of system improvements that are reasonably related to the development. The impact fee formula shall account in the fee calculation for future revenues the district will receive from the development. The ordinance adopting the fee schedule shall specify under what circumstances the fee may be adjusted in the interests of fairness.

(3) The impact fee shall be based on a capital facilities plan developed by the district and approved by the school board, and adopted by reference by the City of Sammamish as part of the capital facilities element of the interim Comprehensive Plan for the purpose of establishing the fee program. (Ord. O2016-412 § 4 (Att. D); Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.105.040 Fee calculations.

(1) The fee for each district shall be calculated based on the formula set out in SMC 21A.105.100.

(2) Separate fees shall be calculated for single-family and multifamily residential units and separate student generation rates must be determined by the district for each type of residential unit. For purposes of this chapter single-family units shall mean single detached dwelling units, and multifamily units shall mean townhouses and apartments.

(3) The fee shall be calculated on a district-by-district basis using the appropriate factors and data to be supplied by the district, as indicated in SMC 21A.105.100. The fee calculations shall be made on a district-wide basis to assure maximum utilization of all school facilities in the district used currently or within the last two years for instructional purposes.

(4) The formula in SMC 21A.105.100 also provides a credit for the anticipated tax contributions that would be made by the development based on historical levels of voter support for bond issues in the school district.

(5) The formula in SMC 21A.105.100 also provides for a credit for school facilities or sites actually provided by a developer that the school district finds to be acceptable. (Ord. O2016-412 § 4 (Att. D); Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.105.050 Fee collection.

Fees shall be collected by the department of community development and maintained in a separate account for each school district, pursuant to SMC 21A.105.070. Fees shall be paid to the district pursuant to administrative rules of an interlocal agreement between the City and the district. (Ord. O2016-412 § 4 (Att. D); Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.105.060 Assessment of impact fees.

(1) In school districts where impact fees have been adopted by City ordinance and except as provided in this section, the City shall collect impact fees, based on the schedules set forth in each ordinance establishing the fee to be collected for the district, from any applicant seeking development approval from the City where such development activity requires final plat or PUD approval or the issuance of a residential building permit or a mobile home permit and the fee for the lot or unit has not been previously paid. No approval shall be granted and no permit shall be issued until the required school impact fees set forth in the district’s impact fee schedule have been paid, unless a deferral has been granted pursuant to Chapter 14A.25 SMC.

(2) Except as provided in SMC 14A.25.030, impact fees shall be assessed and collected, at the option of the applicant, either:

(a) At the time of final plat (for platted development) or building permit application (for nonplatted development); or

(b) At the time of building permit issuance;

which option shall be declared at the time of final plat (for platted development) or building permit application (for nonplatted development) in writing on a form or forms provided by the City.

(3) For existing lots or lots not covered by subsection (2) of this section, application for single-family and multifamily residential building permits, mobile home permits, and site plan approval for mobile home parks, the total amount of the impact fees shall be assessed and collected from the applicant when the building permit is issued, using the impact fee schedules in effect at the time of permit application.

(4) Any application for preliminary plat or PUD approval or multifamily zoning that has been approved subject to conditions requiring the payment of impact fees established pursuant to this chapter shall be required to pay the fee in accordance with the condition of approval.

(5) Applicants for single-family attached or single-family detached residential construction may request deferral of all impact fees due under this chapter in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 14A.25 SMC. (Ord. O2016-412 § 4 (Att. D); Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.105.070 Adjustments, exceptions, and appeals. 

(1) The following are excluded from the application of the impact fees:

(a) Any form of housing exclusively for the senior citizen, including nursing homes and retirement centers, so long as these uses are maintained;

(b) Reconstruction, remodeling, or replacement of existing dwelling units that does not result in additional new dwelling units. In the case of replacement of a dwelling, a complete application for a building permit must be submitted within three years after it has been removed or destroyed;

(c) Shelters for temporary placement, relocation facilities, transitional housing facilities, and community residential facilities as defined in SMC 21A.15.220;

(d) Any development activity that is exempt from the payment of an impact fee pursuant to RCW 82.02.100, due to mitigation of the same system improvement under the State Environmental Policy Act;

(e) Any development activity for which school impacts have been mitigated pursuant to a condition of plat or PUD approval to pay fees, dedicate land or construct or improve school facilities, unless the condition of the plat or PUD approval provides otherwise; provided, that the condition of the plat or PUD approval predates the effective date of a school district’s fee implementing ordinance;

(f) Any development activity for which school impacts have been mitigated pursuant to a voluntary agreement entered into with a school district to pay fees, dedicate land or construct or improve school facilities, unless the terms of the voluntary agreement provide otherwise; provided, that the agreement predates the effective date of a school district’s fee implementing ordinance;

(g) Housing units that fully qualify as housing for persons age 55 and over meeting the requirements of the Federal Housing Amendments Act of 1988, 42 U.S.C. 3607(b)(2)(c) and (b)(3), as subsequently amended, and that have recorded covenants or other legal arrangements precluding school-aged children as residents in those units;

(h) Mobile homes permitted as temporary dwellings pursuant to SMC 21A.70.170; and

(i) Accessory dwelling units as defined in SMC 21A.15.350 and 21A.20.030(B)(5)(a).

(2) Arrangement may be made for later payment with the approval of the school district only if the district determines that it will be unable to use or will not need the payment until a later time; provided, that sufficient security, as defined by the district, is provided to assure payment. Security shall be made to and held by the school district, which will be responsible for tracking and documenting the security interest.

(3) The fee amount established in the schedule shall be reduced by the amount of any payment previously made for the lot or development activity in question, either as a condition of approval or pursuant to a voluntary agreement with a school district entered into after the effective date of a school district’s fee implementing ordinance.

(4) After the effective date of a school district’s fee implementing ordinance, whenever a development is granted approval subject to a condition that the developer actually provide school sites, school facilities, or improvements to school facilities acceptable to the district, or whenever the developer has agreed, pursuant to the terms of a voluntary agreement with the school district, to provide land, provide school facilities, or make improvements to existing facilities, the developer shall be entitled to a credit for the value of the land or actual cost of construction against the fee that would be chargeable under the formula provided by this chapter. The land value or cost of construction shall be estimated at the time of approval, but must be documented. If construction costs are estimated, the documentation shall be confirmed after the construction is completed to assure that an accurate credit amount is provided. If the land value or construction costs are less than the calculated fee amount, the difference remaining shall be chargeable as a school impact fee.

(5) Impact fees may be adjusted by the City, at the City’s discretion, if one of the following circumstances exist; provided, that the discount set forth in the fee formula fails to adjust for the error in the calculation or fails to ameliorate for the unfairness of the fee:

(a) The developer demonstrates that an impact fee assessment was incorrectly calculated; or

(b) Unusual circumstances identified by the developer demonstrate that if the standard impact fee amount was applied to the development, it would be unfair or unjust.

(6) A developer may provide studies and data to demonstrate that any particular factor used by the district may not be appropriately applied to the development proposal, but the district’s data shall be presumed valid unless clearly demonstrated to be otherwise by the proponent.

(7) Any appeal of the decision of the director or the hearing examiner with regard to imposition of an impact fee or fee amounts shall follow the appeal process for the underlying permit and not be subject to a separate appeal process. Where no other administrative appeal process is available, an appeal may be taken to the hearing examiner using the appeal procedures for variances. Any errors in the formula identified as a result of an appeal should be referred to the City council for possible modification.

(8) Impact fees may be paid under protest in order to obtain a building permit or other approval of development activity, when an appeal is filed. (Ord. O2016-412 § 4 (Att. D); Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.105.080 Exemption or reduction for low- or moderate-income housing.

(1) Low- or moderate-income housing projects being developed by public housing agencies or private nonprofit housing developers shall be exempt from the payment of school impact fees. The amount of the school impact fees not collected from low- or moderate-income household development shall be paid from public funds other than impact fee accounts. The impact fees for these units shall be considered paid for by the district through its other funding sources, without the district actually transferring funds from its other funding sources into the impact fee account. The department of community development shall review proposed developments of low- or moderate-income housing by such public or nonprofit developers pursuant to criteria and procedures adopted by administrative rule, and shall determine whether the project qualifies for the exemption.

(2) Private developers who dedicate residential units for occupancy by low- or moderate-income households may apply to the department for reductions in school impact fees pursuant to the criteria established for public housing agencies and private nonprofit housing developers pursuant to subsection (1) of this section, and subject to the provisions of subsection (1) of this section. The department shall review proposed developments of low- or moderate-income housing by such private developers pursuant to criteria and procedures adopted by administrative rule, and shall determine whether the project qualifies for the exemption. If the department recommends the exemption, it shall reduce the calculated school impact fee for the development by an amount that is proportionate to the number of units in the development that satisfy the adopted criteria.

(3) Individual low- or moderate-income home purchasers (as defined pursuant to the King County Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS)) who are purchasing homes at prices within their eligibility limits based on standard lending criteria and meet other means tests established by rule are exempted from payment of the impact fee; provided, that at such time as the property in question is transferred to another owner who does not qualify for the exemption, at which time the fee shall be due and payable.

(4) The department is hereby instructed and authorized to adopt, pursuant to Chapter 2.55 SMC, administrative rules to implement this section.

(5) As a condition of receiving an exemption under subsection (2) or (3) of this section, the owner must execute and record a City-drafted lien, covenant, and/or other contractual provision against the property for a period of 10 years for individual owners, and 15 years for private developers, guaranteeing that the proposed development will continue to be used for low- or moderate-income housing. In the event that the pattern of development or the use of the development is no longer for low- or moderate-income housing, then the owner shall pay the impact fee amount from which the owner or any prior owner was exempt. The lien, covenant, or other contractual provision shall run with the land and apply to subsequent owners. (Ord. O2016-412 § 4 (Att. D); Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.105.090 Impact fee accounts and refunds.

(1) Impact fee receipts shall be earmarked specifically and retained in a special interest-bearing account established by the City solely for the district’s school impact fees. All interest shall be retained in the account and expended for the purpose or purposes identified in subsection (2) of this section. Annually, the City shall prepare a report on each impact fee account showing the source and amount of all monies collected, earned or received, and capital or system improvements that were financed in whole or in part by impact fees.

(2) Impact fees for the district’s system improvements shall be expended by the district for capital improvements including but not limited to school planning, land acquisition, site improvements, necessary off-site improvements, construction, engineering, architectural, permitting, financing, and administrative expenses, relocatable facilities, capital equipment pertaining to educational facilities, and any other expenses that could be capitalized and that are consistent with the school district’s capital facilities plan.

(3) In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments are issued for the advanced provision of capital facilities for which impact fees may be expended and where consistent with the provisions of the bond covenants, impact fees may be used to pay debt service on such bonds or similar debt instruments to the extent that the facilities or improvements provided are consistent with the requirements of this section.

(4) Impact fees shall be expended or encumbered (i.e., committed as part of the funding for a facility for which the publicly funded share has been assured, or building permits applied for, or construction contracts let) by the district for a permissible use within six years of receipt by the City, unless there exists an extraordinary and compelling reason for fees to be held longer than six years. Such extraordinary or compelling reasons shall be identified to the City by the district. The City must prepare written findings concurring with the district’s reasons, and authorizing the later encumbrance or expenditure of the fees prior to the district so encumbering or expending the funds, or directing a refund of the fees.

(5) The current owner of property on which an impact fee has been paid may receive a refund of such fees if the impact fees have not been expended or encumbered within six years of receipt of the funds by the City. In determining whether impact fees have been encumbered, impact fees shall be considered encumbered on a first in, first out basis. The City shall notify potential claimants by first class mail deposited with the United States Postal Service addressed to the owner of the property as shown in the county tax records.

(6) An owner’s request for a refund must be submitted to the City council in writing within one year of the date the right to claim the refund arises or the date that notice is given, whichever date is later. Any impact fees that are not expended or encumbered within these time limitations, and for which no application for a refund has been made within this one-year period, shall be retained and expended consistent with the provisions of this section. Refunds of impact fees shall include any interest earned on the impact fees.

(7) Should the City seek to terminate any or all school impact fee requirements, all unexpended or unencumbered funds, including interest earned, shall be refunded to the current owner of the property for which a school impact fee was paid. Upon the finding that any or all fee requirements are to be terminated, the City shall place notice of such termination and the availability of refunds in a newspaper of general circulation at least two times and shall notify all potential claimants by first class mail addressed to the owner of the property as shown in the county tax records. All funds available for refund shall be retained for a period of one year. At the end of one year, any remaining funds shall be retained by the City, but must be expended for the district, consistent with the provisions of this section. The notice requirement set forth above shall not apply if there are no unexpended or unencumbered balances within the account or accounts being terminated.

(8) A developer may request and shall receive a refund, including interest earned on the impact fees, when:

(a) The developer does not proceed to finalize the development activity as required by statute or City code or the Uniform Building Code; and

(b) No impact on the district has resulted. “Impact” shall be deemed to include cases where the district has expended or encumbered the impact fees in good faith prior to the application for a refund. In the event that the district has expended or encumbered the fees in good faith, no refund shall be forthcoming. However, if within a period of three years the same or subsequent owner of the property proceeds with the same or substantially similar development activity, the owner shall be eligible for a credit. The owner must petition the City and provide receipts of impact fees paid by the owner for a development of the same or substantially similar nature on the same property or some portion thereof. The City shall determine whether to grant a credit, and such determinations may be appealed by following the procedures set forth in SMC 21A.105.070.

(9) Interest due upon the refund of impact fees required by this section shall be calculated according to the average rate received by the City or the district on invested funds throughout the period during which the fees were retained. (Ord. O2016-412 § 4 (Att. D); Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.105.100 Formula for determining school impact fees.

IF:

A =    Student factor for dwelling unit type and grade span X site cost per student for sites for facilities in that grade span = Full cost fee for site acquisition cost

B =    Student factor for dwelling unit type and grade span X school construction cost per student for facilities in that grade span X ratio of district’s square footage of permanent facilities to total square footage of facilities = Full cost fee for school construction

C =    Student factor for dwelling unit type and grade span X relocatable facilities cost per student for facilities in that grade span X ratio of district’s square footage of relocatable facilities to total square footage of facilities = Full cost fee for facilities construction

D =    Student factor for dwelling unit type and grade span “Boeckh index” X SPI square footage per student factor X state match % = State Match Credit, and

A1, B1, C1, D1 = A, B, C, D for elementary grade spans

A2, B2, C2, D2 = A, B, C, D for middle/junior high grade spans

A3, B3, C3, D3 = A, B, C, D for high school grade spans

TC =    Tax payment credit = the net present value of the average assessed value in district for unit type X current school district capital property tax levy rate, using a 10-year discount period and current interest rate (based on the Bond Buyer Twenty Bond General Obligation Bond Index)

FC =    Facilities credit = the per-dwelling unit value of any site or facilities provided directly by the development

THEN: the unfunded need = UN = A1 + ... + C3 - (D1- D2 - D2) - TC

AND the developer fee obligation = F = UN/2

AND the net fee obligation = NF = F - FC

Notes:

1. Student factors are to be provided by the school district based on district records of average actual student generation rates for new developments constructed over a period of not more than five years prior to the date of the fee calculation; if such information is not available in the district, data from adjacent districts, districts with similar demographics, or county-wide averages must be used. Student factors must be separately determined for single-family and multifamily dwelling units, and for grade spans.

2. The “Boeckh index” is a construction trade index of construction costs for various kinds of buildings; it is adjusted annually.

3. The district is to provide its own site and facilities standards and projected costs to be used in the formula, consistent with the requirements of this chapter.

Attachment 

4. The formula can be applied by using the following table:

Table for Calculating School Impact Fee Obligations for Residential Dwelling Units (to be separately calculated for single-family and multifamily units) 

	Elementary school site cost per student X student factor	=

	Middle/junior high school site cost per student X student factor	=

	High school site cost per student X student factor	=

	A1 + A2 + A3	=

	 	 

	Elementary school construction cost per student X student factor	=

	Middle/junior high school construction cost per student X student factor 	=

	High school construction cost per student X student factor	=

	 	 

	(B1 + B2 + B3) X	square footage of permanent facilities	 	=

	total square footage of facilities	 

	 

	Elementary school relocatable facility cost per student X student factor	=

	Middle/junior high school relocatable facility cost per student X student factor	=

	High school relocatable facility cost per student X student factor	=

	 	 

	(C1 + C2 + C3) X	square footage of permanent facilities	 	=

	total square footage of facilities	 

	 	 

	Boeckh index X SPI square footage per student for elementary school X state match % X student factor	=

	Boeckh index X SPI square footage per student for middle/junior high school X state match % X student factor	=

	Boeckh index X SPI square footage per student for high school X state match % X student factor	=

	 	 

	D1 + D2 + D3	=

	 	 

	((1 + I)10)-1	X average assessed value for the dwelling unit type in the school district

	i(1 + i)10

	X current school district capital property tax levy rate where I = the current interest rate as stated in the Bond Buyer Twenty Bond General Obligation Bond Index

Value of site or facilities provided by the development 

    Number of dwelling units in development

1 Unfunded Need = A + B + C - D - TC =

    __________A

    +_________B

    +_________C

Subtotal

    -_________D

    -_________TC

L UNFUNDED NEED UN = _________ divided by 2 =    __________ =     DEVELOPER FEE

    OBLIGATION

    -__________ Less FC (if applicable)

    ___________ NET FEE OBLIGATION

(Ord. O2016-412 § 4 (Att. D). Formerly Exhibit A)


Chapter 21A.110 DECISION CRITERIA

Sections:

21A.110.010    Purpose.

21A.110.020    Temporary use permit.

21A.110.030    Variance.

21A.110.040    Conditional use permit.

21A.110.050    Special use permit.

21A.110.060    Zone reclassification.


21A.110.010 Purpose.

The purposes of this chapter are to allow for consistent evaluation of land use applications and to protect nearby properties from the possible effects of such requests by:

(1) Providing clear criteria on which to base a decision;

(2) Recognizing the effects of unique circumstances upon the development potential of a property;

(3) Avoiding the granting of special privileges;

(4) Avoiding development that may be unnecessarily detrimental to neighboring properties;

(5) Requiring that the design, scope and intensity of development is in keeping with the physical aspects of a site and adopted land use policies for the area; and

(6) Providing criteria that emphasize protection of the general character of neighborhoods. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.110.020 Temporary use permit. 

A temporary use permit shall be granted by the City, only if the applicant demonstrates that:

(1) The proposed temporary use will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare;

(2) The proposed temporary use is compatible with existing land uses in the immediate vicinity in terms of noise and hours of operation;

(3) Adequate public off-street parking and traffic control for the exclusive use of the proposed temporary use can be provided in a safe manner; and

(4) The proposed temporary use is not otherwise permitted in the zone in which it is proposed. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.110.030 Variance.

A variance shall be granted by the City, only if the applicant demonstrates all of the following:

(1) The strict enforcement of the provisions of this title creates an unnecessary hardship to the property owner;

(2) The variance is necessary because of the unique size, shape, topography, or location of the subject property;

(3) The subject property is deprived, by provisions of this title, of rights and privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity and under an identical zone;

(4) The variance does not create health and safety hazards, is not materially detrimental to the public welfare or is not unduly injurious to property or improvements in the vicinity;

(5) The variance does not relieve an applicant from any of the procedural provisions of this title;

(6) The variance does not relieve an applicant from any standard or provision that specifically states that no variance from such standard or provision is permitted;

(7) The variance does not relieve an applicant from conditions established during prior permit review or from provisions enacted pursuant to SMC 21A.50.225, Erosion hazards near sensitive water bodies – Special district overlay, SMC 21A.50.322, Wetland management area – Special district overlay, or SMC 21A.50.355, Lake management areas – Special district overlay;

(8) The variance does not allow establishment of a use that is not otherwise permitted in the zone in which the proposal is located;

(9) The variance does not allow the creation of lots or densities that exceed the base residential density for the zone by more than 10 percent;

(10) The variance is the minimum necessary to grant relief to the applicant;

(11) The variance from setback or height requirements does not infringe upon or interfere with easement or covenant rights or responsibilities; and

(12) The variance does not relieve an applicant from any provisions of Chapter 21A.50 SMC, Environmentally Critical Areas, except for the required building setbacks set forth in Chapter 21A.50 SMC. (Ord. O2005-193 § 2; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.110.040 Conditional use permit.

A conditional use permit shall be granted by the City, only if the applicant demonstrates that:

(1) The conditional use is designed in a manner that is compatible with the character and appearance of an existing or proposed development in the vicinity of the subject property; 

(2) The location, size and height of buildings, structures, walls and fences, and screening vegetation for the conditional use shall not hinder neighborhood circulation or discourage the permitted development or use of neighboring properties;

(3) The conditional use is designed in a manner that is compatible with the physical characteristics of the subject property;

(4) Requested modifications to standards are limited to those that will mitigate impacts in a manner equal to or greater than the standards of this title;

(5) The conditional use is not in conflict with the health and safety of the community; 

(6) The conditional use is such that pedestrian and vehicular traffic associated with the use will not be hazardous or conflict with existing and anticipated traffic in the neighborhood; and

(7) The conditional use will be supported by adequate public facilities or services and will not adversely affect public services to the surrounding area or conditions can be established to mitigate adverse impacts on such facilities. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.110.050 Special use permit.

A special use permit shall be granted by the City, only if the applicant demonstrates that:

(1) The characteristics of the special use will not be unreasonably incompatible with the types of uses permitted in surrounding areas;

(2) The special use will not materially endanger the health, safety and welfare of the community;

(3) The special use is such that pedestrian and vehicular traffic associated with the use will not be hazardous or conflict with existing and anticipated traffic in the neighborhood;

(4) The special use will be supported by adequate public facilities or services and will not adversely affect public services to the surrounding area or conditions can be established to mitigate adverse impacts;

(5) The location, size, and height of buildings, structures, walls and fences, and screening vegetation for the special use shall not hinder or discourage the appropriate development or use of neighboring properties; and

(6) The special use is not in conflict with the policies of the comprehensive plan or the basic purposes of this title. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.110.060 Zone reclassification.

A zone reclassification shall be granted only if the applicant demonstrates that the proposal complies with the criteria for approval specified in SMC 20.10.200 and 20.10.210 and is consistent with the comprehensive plan. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


Chapter 21A.115 ENFORCEMENT

Sections:

21A.115.010    Purpose.

21A.115.020    Authority and application.

21A.115.030    Violations defined.

21A.115.040    Permit suspension, revocation or modification.

21A.115.050    Initiation of revocation or modification proceedings.


21A.115.010 Purpose. 

The purpose of this chapter is to promote compliance with this title by establishing enforcement authority, defining violations, and setting standards for initiating the procedures set forth in SMC Title 23, Code Enforcement, when violations of this title occur. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.115.020 Authority and application.

The director is authorized to enforce the provisions of this code, any implementing administrative rules adopted under Chapter 2.55 SMC, Rules of City Departments, and approval conditions attached to any land use approval, through revocation or modification of permits, or through the enforcement, penalty and abatement provisions of SMC Title 23, Code Enforcement. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.115.030 Violations defined. 

No building permit or land use approval in conflict with the provisions of this title shall be issued. Structures or uses that do not conform to this title, except legal nonconformances specified in Chapter 21A.70 SMC and approved variances, are violations subject to the enforcement, penalty, and abatement provisions of SMC Title 23, including but not limited to:

(1) Establishing a use not permitted in the zone in which it is located;

(2) Constructing, expanding, or placing a structure in violation of setback, height, and other dimensional standards in this title;

(3) Establishing a permitted use without complying with applicable development standards set forth in other titles, ordinances, rules, or other laws, including but not limited to street construction, surface water management, and the fire code;

(4) Failing to carry out or observe conditions of land use or permit approval, including contract development standards;

(5) Failing to secure required land use or permit approval prior to establishing a permitted use; and

(6) Failing to maintain site improvements, such as landscaping, parking, or drainage control facilities as required by this code. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.115.040 Permit suspension, revocation or modification.

(1) Permit suspension, revocation, or modification shall be carried out through the procedures set forth in SMC Title 23. Any permit, variance, or other land use approval issued by the City pursuant to this title may be suspended, revoked, or modified on one or more of the following grounds:

(a) The approval was obtained by fraud;

(b) The approval was based on inadequate or inaccurate information;

(c) The approval, when given, conflicted with existing laws or regulations applicable thereto; 

(d) An error of procedure occurred that prevented consideration of the interests of persons directly affected by the approval;

(e) The approval or permit granted is being exercised contrary to the terms or conditions of such approval or in violation of any statute, law, or regulation;

(f) The use for which the approval was granted is being exercised in a manner detrimental to the public health or safety;

(g) The holder of the permit or approval interferes with the director or any authorized representative in the performance of his or her duties; or

(h) The holder of the permit or approval fails to comply with any notice and order issued pursuant to SMC Title 23.

(2) Authority to revoke or modify a permit or land use approval shall be exercised by the issuer, as follows:

(a) The City council may, after a recommendation from the hearing examiner, revoke or modify any residential density incentive approval, transfer of development credit, preliminary subdivision, zone reclassification, or special use permit;

(b) The hearing examiner may revoke or modify any variance or conditional use permit; provided, that if it was reviewed through a public hearing, a new public hearing shall be held on its revocation or modification; and

(c) The director may revoke or modify any permit or other land use approval issued by the director. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


21A.115.050 Initiation of revocation or modification proceedings.

(1) The director may suspend any permit, variance, or land use approval issued by the department pending its revocation or modification, or pending a public hearing on its revocation or modification;

(2) The department may initiate proceedings to revoke or modify any permit or land use approval it has issued; and

(3) Persons who are aggrieved may petition the department to initiate revocation or modification proceedings, and may petition the director to suspend a permit, variance or land use approval pending a public hearing on its revocation or modification. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


Title 21B TOWN CENTER DEVELOPMENT CODE

Chapters:

21B.05    Authority, Purpose, Interpretation and Administration

21B.10    Zones, Maps and Designations

21B.15    Technical Terms and Land Use Definitions

21B.20    Permitted Uses

21B.25    Development Standards – Density and Dimensions

21B.30    Development Standards – Design Requirements

21B.35    Development Standards – Landscaping and Irrigation

21B.40    Development Standards – Parking and Circulation

21B.45    Signage

21B.75    Affordable Housing

21B.85    Development Standards – Interim Stormwater Standards

21B.95    Unified Zone Development Plans

21B.96    Development Standards – Interim Street Design Standards


Chapter 21B.05 AUTHORITY, PURPOSE, INTERPRETATION AND ADMINISTRATION

Sections:

21B.05.010    Title.

21B.05.020    Authority to adopt code.

21B.05.030    Purpose.

21B.05.040    Conformity with this title required.

21B.05.050    Minimum requirements.

21B.05.060    Interpretation – Applicability and intent.

21B.05.070    Interpretation – General.

21B.05.080    Interpretation – Standard industrial classification.

21B.05.090    Interpretation – Zoning maps.

21B.05.100    Interpretation – Public request – Acknowledgement – Notice.

21B.05.110    Administration and review authority.

21B.05.120    Review.

21B.05.130    Classification of right-of-way.

21B.05.140    Drawings.


21B.05.010 Title.

This title shall be known as the Town Center development code, hereinafter referred to as “this title.” (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.05.020 Authority to adopt code.

The Town Center development code is adopted by City of Sammamish ordinance, pursuant to Article XI, Section 11 of the Washington State Constitution. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.05.030 Purpose.

The general purposes of this title are:

(1) To encourage land use decision making in accordance with the public interest and applicable laws of the state of Washington;

(2) To protect the general public health, safety, and welfare;

(3) To implement the City of Sammamish Comprehensive Plan and Town Center Plan and its policies through land use regulations;

(4) To provide for the economic, social, and aesthetic advantages of orderly development through harmonious groupings of compatible and complementary land uses and the application of appropriate development standards;

(5) To provide for adequate public facilities and services in conjunction with development; and

(6) To promote general public safety by regulating development of lands containing physical hazards and to minimize the adverse environmental impacts of development. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.05.040 Conformity with this title required.

(1) No use or structure shall be established, substituted, expanded, constructed, altered, moved, maintained, or otherwise changed except in conformance with this title.

(2) Creation of or changes to lot lines shall conform with the use provisions, dimensional and other standards, and procedures of this title and SMC Title 19A, Land Division.

(3) All land uses and development authorized by this title shall comply with all other regulations and/or requirements of this title as well as any other applicable local, state, or federal law. Where a difference exists between this title and other City regulations, the more restrictive requirements shall apply.

(4) The provisions contained in SMC Title 21A as specified in the following chapters shall apply to the Town Center: Chapters 21A.50, 21A.55, 21A.60, 21A.65, 21A.70, 21A.80, 21A.90, 21A.100, 21A.105, 21A.110, and 21A.115 SMC.

(5) Where more than one part of this title applies to the same aspect of a proposed use or development, the more restrictive requirement shall apply.

(6) Temporary uses or activities, conducted during an emergency event, or training exercises conducted at emergency sites, designated pursuant to an emergency management plan, shall not be subject to the provisions of this title. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.05.050 Minimum requirements.

In interpretation and application, the requirements set forth in this title shall be considered the minimum requirements necessary to accomplish the purposes of this title. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.05.060 Interpretation – Applicability and intent.

(1) Intent. This chapter and Chapter 21A.100 SMC establish the procedure by which the City of Sammamish will render a formal interpretation of a development regulation. The purpose of such an interpretation includes clarifying conflicting or ambiguous provisions in the City’s development regulations.

(2) Applicability. This chapter and Chapter 21A.100 SMC authorize the director to issue interpretations on regulations related to controls placed on development or land use activities by the City, including but not limited to zoning ordinances, critical areas ordinances, shoreline master program requirements, official controls, subdivision ordinances, and binding site plan ordinances, together with any amendments thereto. Nothing in this chapter and Chapter 21A.100 SMC shall prevent interpretations related to the applicability of specific regulatory requirements contained within the Sammamish Municipal Code to individual projects. Further, nothing in this chapter or Chapter 21A.100 SMC shall preclude the director or hearing examiner from interpreting a regulatory requirement during the course of a public hearing. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A § 21B.05.055))


21B.05.070 Interpretation – General.

(1) In case of inconsistency or conflict, regulations, conditions, or procedural requirements that are specific to an individual land use shall supersede regulations, conditions, or procedural requirements of general application.

(2) A land use includes the necessary structures to support the use unless specifically prohibited or the context clearly indicates otherwise.

(3) In case of any ambiguity, difference of meaning, or implication between the text and any heading, caption, or illustration, the text and the permitted use tables in Chapter 21B.20 SMC shall control. All applicable requirements shall govern a use whether or not they are cross-referenced in a text section or land use table.

(4) Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, words in the present tense shall include past and future tense, and words in the singular shall include the plural, or vice versa. Except for words and terms defined in this title, all words and terms used in this title shall have their customary meanings.

(5) A written interpretation by the director of the provisions of the Sammamish Municipal Code clarifies conflicting or ambiguous wording, or the scope or intent of the provisions of the code. The written interpretation shall control application of the code sections discussed in it to any specific land use application. Written interpretations issued for regulatory requirements that have been legislatively modified, repealed, or otherwise substantially changed shall be considered null and void.

(6) Any written interpretation shall not be applied retroactively, unless specifically required by the terms of the interpretation. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A § 21B.05.060))


21B.05.080 Interpretation – Standard industrial classification.

(1) All references to the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) are to the titles and descriptions found in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1987 Edition, prepared by United States Office of Management and Budget that is hereby adopted by reference. The SIC is used, with modifications to suit the purposes of this title, to list and define land uses authorized to be located in the various zones consistent with the Comprehensive Plan land use map.

(2) The SIC categorizes each land use under a general two-digit major group number, or under a more specific three- or four-digit industry group or industry number. A use shown on a land use table with a two-digit number includes all uses listed in the SIC for that major group. A use shown with a three-digit or four-digit number includes only the uses listed in the SIC for that industry group or industry.

(3) An asterisk (*) in the SIC number column of a land use table means that the SIC definition for the specific land use identified has been modified by this title. The definition may include one or more SIC sub-classification numbers, or may define the use without reference to the SIC.

(4) The director shall determine whether a proposed land use not specifically listed in a land use table or specifically included within a SIC classification is allowed in a zone. The director’s determination shall be based on whether or not permitting the proposed use in a particular zone is consistent with the purposes of this title and the zone’s purpose as set forth in Chapter 21B.10 SMC, by considering the following factors:

(a) The physical characteristics of the use and its supporting structures, including but not limited to scale, traffic and other impacts, and hours of operation;

(b) Whether or not the use complements or is compatible with other uses permitted in the zone; and

(c) The SIC classification, if any, assigned to the business or other entity that will carry on the primary activities of the proposed use. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A § 21B.05.070))


21B.05.090 Interpretation – Zoning maps.

Where uncertainties exist as to the location of any zone boundaries, the following rules of interpretation, listed in priority order, shall apply:

(1) Where boundaries are indicated as paralleling the approximate centerline of the street right-of-way, the zone shall extend to each adjacent boundary of the right-of-way. Non-road-related uses by adjacent property owners, if allowed in the right-of-way, shall meet the same zoning requirements regulating the property owners’ lot;

(2) Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following lot lines, the actual lot lines shall be considered the boundaries;

(3) Where boundaries are indicated as following lines of ordinary high water, or government meander lines, the lines shall be considered to be the actual boundaries. If these lines should change, the boundaries shall be considered to move with them; and

(4) If none of the rules of interpretation described in subsections (1) through (3) of this section apply, then the zoning boundary shall be determined by map scaling. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A § 21B.05.080))


21B.05.100 Interpretation – Public request – Acknowledgement – Notice.

(1) A person may request a code interpretation by submitting a request in accordance with this chapter. The director may also issue a code interpretation on the director’s own initiative.

(2) A request for a code interpretation must be submitted in writing to the director.

(3) A code interpretation request must:

(a) Be in writing and shall be clearly labeled – “Request for Code Interpretation.” Failure to satisfy this requirement relieves the director of any obligation to acknowledge or otherwise process the request;

(b) Identify the person seeking the code interpretation and provide an address to which correspondence regarding the requested code interpretation should be mailed;

(c) Identify the specific section or sections of the City of Sammamish’s development regulations for which an interpretation is requested;

(d) Identify the parcel or site, if the code interpretation request involves a particular parcel of property or site;

(e) Identify the code enforcement action, if the code interpretation request involves a code enforcement case;

(f) Be accompanied by the fee required as set forth by the adopted fee resolution; and

(g) Be limited to a single subject, which may require interpretation of one or more code sections.

(4)(a) Within 21 days after receiving a code interpretation request, the director shall acknowledge receipt of the request. The director shall mail the acknowledgment to the person submitting the request at the address provided in the request. The acknowledgment shall include the following information, as applicable:

(i) If the director determines that the code interpretation request does not contain the information required under this section, the director shall identify in the acknowledgment the deficiencies in the code interpretation request. In such a situation, the director is under no obligation to process the code interpretation request until a code interpretation request complying with this chapter is submitted;

(ii) If the director determines that the code interpretation request is ambiguous or unclear, the director may request that the person making the request clarify the request. The director is under no obligation to process the code interpretation request until an adequately clarified code interpretation request is submitted;

(iii) If the director determines that the code interpretation request presents substantially the same issue as is pending before an adjudicatory body, such as the City hearing examiner, the City council when acting as a quasi-judicial body, any other quasi-judicial agency or any local, state or federal court, the director shall so state in the acknowledgment. The director is then under no obligation to further process the code interpretation request; and

(iv) If a code interpretation is requested regarding an issue that the director has previously addressed through a code interpretation, the director is not obligated to issue another code interpretation and shall so state in the acknowledgment required by this section and shall identify the previous code interpretation.

(b) If the director determines that the code interpretation request relates to a particular parcel of property, the director shall cause notice of the code interpretation request to be given to the taxpayer of record for the subject parcel.

(c) If the code interpretation request relates to a specific development project pending before the City, the director shall cause notice of the code interpretation request to be given to all parties of record for that project, including the applicant.

(d) If the code interpretation is initiated by the City, the director shall cause notice of the code interpretation to be posted on the City’s website and at City Hall in addition to any other notice required by this section.

(e) The notice required under this section must include a copy of any code interpretation request and a copy of the director’s acknowledgment. Notice to property tax payers, applicants, or persons requesting an interpretation may be by United States mail or other appropriate method of delivery. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A § 21B.05.085))


21B.05.110 Administration and review authority.

(1) The director shall have authority to make decisions regarding Town Center development proposals. Unified zone development plans shall be classified as a Type 2 land use application in accordance with SMC Title 20 and Chapter 21B.95 SMC. All other applications shall be processed in accordance with their applicable SMC Title 20 classification.

(2) The director shall have the authority to grant, condition or deny applications for variances and conditional use permits, unless a public hearing is required as set forth in Chapter 20.05 SMC, in which case this authority shall be exercised by the hearing examiner.

(3) The director shall have the authority to issue a written code interpretation in accordance with the review procedures contained within this chapter and Chapter 21A.100 SMC. The director shall issue such interpretations as he or she deems necessary, or upon the request of any person, in cases of any ambiguity, difference of meaning, unclear procedural requirements, or other unclear regulatory requirements of the SMC.

(4) An interpretation related to a development proposal must be requested prior to the date of expiration of any applicable administrative appeal period for a land use decision on the application to which the request relates.

(5) The department shall have authority to grant, condition, or deny commercial and residential building permits, grading and clearing permits, and temporary use permits in accordance with the procedures set forth in SMC Titles 20 and 21A and this title.

(6) Except for other agencies with authority to implement specific provisions of this title, the department shall have the sole authority to issue official interpretations of this title, pursuant to Chapter 2.55 SMC. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A § 21B.05.090))


21B.05.120 Review.

(1) Decision Basis. In issuing an interpretation consistent with this chapter, the director may consider the following:

(a) The purpose and intent statements of the chapters in question;

(b) Consistency with other regulatory requirements governing the same or a similar situation;

(c) The legislative direction of the City council, if any, provided with the adoption of the code sections in question;

(d) The policy direction provided by the Sammamish Comprehensive Plan, or other adopted policy documents, as amended;

(e) Relevant judicial actions related to the interpretation;

(f) Expected result or effect of the interpretation; and

(g) Previous implementation of the regulatory requirements governing the situation.

(2) Content. Consistent with the requirements of Chapter 21A.100 SMC, the director shall provide facts, findings, and conclusions supporting the interpretation. At a minimum these shall include the following:

(a) A brief summary of the issue that requires an interpretation by the director;

(b) The context of the interpretation, if not included or implied from the summary;

(c) Citation of the decision basis from subsection (1) of this section; and

(d) The interpretation, signature, and date. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A § 21B.05.095))


21B.05.130 Classification of right-of-way.

(1) Except when such areas are specifically designated on the zoning map as being classified in one of the zones provided in this title, land contained in rights-of-way for streets or alleys, or railroads, shall be considered unclassified.

(2) Within street or alley rights-of-way, uses shall be limited to street purposes as defined by law.

(3) Where such right-of-way is vacated, the vacated area shall have the zone classification of the adjoining property with which it is first merged. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A § 21B.05.100))


21B.05.140 Drawings.

The City staff is hereby authorized to incorporate drawings as necessary for the purpose of illustrating concepts and regulatory standards contained in this title; provided, that the adopted provisions of the code shall control over such drawings. If there is a conflict between written provisions of code and illustrations, the director shall make a determination as to which applies. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A § 21B.05.110))


Chapter 21B.10 ZONES, MAPS AND DESIGNATIONS

Sections:

21B.10.010    Zones and map designations – Established.

21B.10.020    Zones and map designations – Purpose.

21B.10.030    Mixed-use zone (TC-A).

21B.10.040    Mixed residential zone (TC-B).

21B.10.050    Lower intensity residential zone (TC-C).

21B.10.060    Civic campus zone (TC-D).

21B.10.070    Reserve zone (TC-E).

21B.10.080    Zoning maps and boundaries.


21B.10.010 Zones and map designations – Established.

In order to accomplish the purposes of this title the following zoning designations and zoning map symbols are established:

	Town Center Zoning Designations	Map Symbol

	Mixed-Use	TC-A

	Mixed Residential	TC-B

	Lower Intensity Residential	TC-C

	Civic Campus	TC-D

	Reserve	TC-E

(Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.10.020 Zones and map designations – Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the distribution of zoning designations that reflect the Town Center Plan’s land use goals and policies. The purpose statements for each zone and map designation set forth in the following sections shall be used to guide the application of the zones and designations to all lands within the Town Center. The purpose statements also shall guide interpretation and application of land use regulations within the zones and designations and any changes to the range of permitted uses within each zone through amendments to this title. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.10.030 Mixed-use zone (TC-A).

(1) The purpose of the mixed-use (TC-A) zone is to implement Town Center Plan goals and policies to develop a Town Center core area (TC-A-1) and a number of smaller mixed-use centers (TC-A-2 through A-5). These purposes are accomplished by:

(a) Providing, in the TC-A-1 sub-zone, for a pedestrian-oriented mix of retail, office, residential, and civic uses that functions as the focal point for the Town Center and the City. This sub-zone emphasizes pedestrian-oriented retail and civic uses on the ground floor of core areas and has the greatest allocation of retail floor area of all the Town Center’s mixed-use zones. Office and residential uses are encouraged on upper floors;

(b) Providing, in the TC-A-2 and A-3 sub-zones, for a pedestrian-oriented mix of residential, office, and public uses in a village type setting. Retail uses are allowed as a complementary use;

(c) Providing, in the TC-A-4 and A-5 sub-zones, for a pedestrian-oriented mix of retail and residential uses in a village-type setting. Office uses are allowed;

(d) Requiring unified zone development planning as part of the permit review process to ensure coordinated development consistent with Town Center Plan goals and policies;

(e) Providing for a minimum residential development intensity to support the goal of creating a vibrant and walkable mixed-use environment;

(f) Providing for maximum residential and commercial development intensities consistent with the planned level of infrastructure improvements and community design goals (subject to subsections (1)(a), (b), and (c) of this section); and

(g) Providing development standards that achieve the Town Center Plan’s design goals and policies for a vibrant and distinctive urban environment that functions as a focal point for the Town Center and the City and is sensitive to the natural environment.

(2) Use of this zone is appropriate for lands designated by the Comprehensive Plan and Town Center Plan as Town Center A-1 through A-5. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.10.040 Mixed residential zone (TC-B).

(1) The purpose of the mixed residential (TC-B) sub-zone is to implement Town Center Plan goals and policies by providing for areas with a mixture of housing types that support the desired activities of adjacent mixed-use zones. These purposes are accomplished by:

(a) Providing for a mixture of apartments, townhomes, and limited cottage housing and detached single-family uses;

(b) Providing the opportunity for commercial uses for those areas adjacent to TC-A zones provided the subject property is developed as part of a unified zone development plan with contiguous TC-A zoned properties; and

(c) Providing development standards that achieve the Town Center Plan’s design goals and policies for an attractive mix of housing types that is well connected to the mixed-use zones and preserves sensitive natural areas as an amenity to development.

(2) Use of this zone is appropriate for lands designated by the Comprehensive Plan and Town Center Plan as Town Center B. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.10.050 Lower intensity residential zone (TC-C).

(1) The purpose of the low intensity residential (TC-C) sub-zone is to implement Town Center Plan goals and policies by providing areas of predominately single detached dwelling units and cottage housing that buffer existing residential communities from more intensively developed Town Center zones. These purposes are accomplished by:

(a) Providing for detached single-family housing, townhouses, and cottage housing provided they maintain a relatively low urban density; and

(b) Providing development standards that achieve the Town Center Plan’s design goals and policies for an attractive mix of lower intensity housing types that is well connected to the mixed-use and mixed-residential zones and preserves sensitive natural areas as an amenity to development.

(2) Use of this zone is appropriate for lands designated by the Comprehensive Plan and Town Center Plan as Town Center C. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.10.060 Civic campus zone (TC-D).

(1) The purpose of the civic campus (TC-D) zone is to implement Town Center Plan goals and policies by providing areas for open space, recreational, civic uses, and residential uses that serve both the Town Center and the City. These purposes are accomplished by:

(a) Maintaining and enhancing the Sammamish Commons as a recreational, civic, and environmental resource for the Town Center and the City;

(b) Providing for civic uses that complement the Sammamish Commons and adjacent Town Center uses; and

(c) Providing development standards that achieve the Town Center Plan’s environmental and community design goals of incorporating exemplary environmental stewardship and creating a sense of place reflected in building forms, development patterns, and the public realm.

(2) Use of this zone is appropriate for lands designated by the Comprehensive Plan and Town Center Plan as Town Center D. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.10.070 Reserve zone (TC-E).

(1) The purpose of the reserve (TC-E) zone is to allow current uses to remain while preserving the opportunity for future development. These purposes are accomplished by allowing for single detached dwelling units.

(2) Use of this zone is appropriate for lands designated by the Comprehensive Plan and Town Center Plan as Town Center E. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.10.080 Zoning maps and boundaries.

(1) The location and boundaries of the zones defined by this chapter shall be shown and delineated on zoning maps adopted by ordinance.

(2) Changes in the boundaries of the zones, including application or amendment of interim zoning, shall be made by ordinance adopting or amending a zoning map.

(3) Zoning maps are available for public review at the City of Sammamish offices during regular business hours. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


Chapter 21B.15 TECHNICAL TERMS AND LAND USE DEFINITIONS

Sections:

21B.15.010    Scope of chapter.

21B.15.020    American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO).

21B.15.030    Berm.

21B.15.040    Blank wall.

21B.15.050    Biofiltration swale.

21B.15.060    Building articulation.

21B.15.070    Brewpub.

21B.15.080    Clustered development.

21B.15.085    Collective garden.

21B.15.090    Common open space.

21B.15.100    Condotel.

21B.15.110    Connector street.

21B.15.112    Cooperative.

21B.15.120    Cottage housing.

21B.15.130    Crime prevention through environmental design (CPTED).

21B.15.140    Dark sky standards.

21B.15.150    Departure.

21B.15.160    Duplex.

21B.15.170    Feasible.

21B.15.180    Floor area ratio.

21B.15.190    Green roof.

21B.15.200    Gross developable acreage.

21B.15.210    Indoor recreation area.

21B.15.220    Landscaped open space.

21B.15.225    Liquor and Cannabis Board (LCB).

21B.15.230    Low impact development.

21B.15.234    Marijuana or marihuana.

21B.15.235    Marijuana concentrates.

21B.15.236    Marijuana processor.

21B.15.237    Marijuana producer.

21B.15.238    Marijuana-infused products.

21B.15.239    Marijuana retailer.

21B.15.240    Mixed-use node.

21B.15.250    Mixed-use street.

21B.15.260    Multifamily open space.

21B.15.270    Multifamily.

21B.15.280    Pedestrian-oriented open space (or pedestrian-oriented space).

21B.15.290    Pedestrian-oriented street or corridor.

21B.15.300    Public open space.

21B.15.310    Rain garden.

21B.15.320    Residential street.

21B.15.330    Roofline modulation.

21B.15.340    Sight distance triangle.

21B.15.341    Sign.

21B.15.341.1    Sign, A-frame.

21B.15.342    Sign, awning/marquee.

21B.15.343    Sign, blade.

21B.15.344    Sign, box/cabinet.

21B.15.345    Sign, building-mounted.

21B.15.346    Sign, changing message.

21B.15.347    Sign, channel letter.

21B.15.348    Sign, community banner.

21B.15.349    Sign, directional.

21B.15.349.1    Sign, hanging.

21B.15.349.2    Sign, incidental.

21B.15.349.3    Sign, freestanding.

21B.15.349.4    Sign, fuel price.

21B.15.349.5    Sign, logo.

21B.15.349.6    Sign, monument.

21B.15.349.7    Sign, opaque.

21B.15.349.8    Sign, painted.

21B.15.349.9    Sign, permanent residential development identification.

21B.15.349.10    Sign, pedestal.

21B.15.349.11    Sign, primary.

21B.15.349.12    Sign, secondary.

21B.15.349.13    Sign, shadow.

21B.15.349.14    Sign, temporary.

21B.15.349.15    Sign, window.

21B.15.349.16    Sign, wall.

21B.15.350    Solar access.

21B.15.360    Town Center Stormwater Master Plan.

21B.15.370    Town Center Infrastructure Plan.

21B.15.380    Unified zone development plan (UZDP).

21B.15.390    Usable open space.

21B.15.400    Winery.

21B.15.410    Woonerf.


21B.15.010 Scope of chapter.

This chapter contains definitions of technical and procedural terms used throughout the code and definitions of land uses listed in tables in Chapter 21B.20 SMC. The definitions in this chapter supplement those in Chapter 21A.15 SMC and the Standard Industrial Classification Manual (SIC). See Chapter 21B.05 SMC for rules on interpretation of the code, including use of these definitions. Where there is a conflict between a definition in Chapter 21A.15 SMC and this chapter, the definition herein shall apply. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A § 21B.15.005))


21B.15.020 American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO).

“AASHTO” refers to the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials, which advocates for transportation-related policies and provides technical services to support states in their efforts to efficiently and safely move people and goods. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A § 21B.15.010))


21B.15.030 Berm.

An earthen mound designed to provide visual interest on a site, screen undesirable views, reduce noise, or fulfill other such purposes. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A § 21B.15.011))


21B.15.040 Blank wall.

See SMC 21B.30.240 for the definition and desirable treatments of a “blank wall.” (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A § 21B.15.015))


21B.15.050 Biofiltration swale.

“Biofiltration swale” means a long, gently sloped, vegetated ditch designed to filter pollutants from stormwater. Grass is the most common vegetation, but wetland vegetation can be used if the soil is saturated. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A § 21B.15.020))


21B.15.060 Building articulation.

“Building articulation” means the giving of emphasis to architectural elements (like windows, balconies, entries, etc.) that create a complementary pattern or rhythm, dividing large buildings into smaller identifiable pieces. See SMC 21B.30.210 for applicable standards. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A § 21B.15.025))


21B.15.070 Brewpub.

“Brewpub” means a restaurant that manufactures up to 5,000 barrels of fermented malt beverages per year on premises as an accessory use. Such an accessory use shall not occupy more than 30 percent of the gross floor area of the restaurant. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A § 21B.15.030))


21B.15.080 Clustered development.

“Clustered development” means concentrating lots or buildings in areas to avoid development of sensitive or hazardous areas, or to minimize impervious surfaces and stormwater runoff. (Ord. O2016-429 § 8 (Att. H); Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A § 21B.15.035))


21B.15.085 Collective garden.

“Collective garden” means any area or location where qualifying patients engage in the production, processing, transporting, and delivery of marijuana for medical use. (Ord. O2016-406 § 2 (Att. B); Ord. O2014-376 § 3 (Att. A))


21B.15.090 Common open space.

See SMC 21B.30.090(1)(c) for the definition of “common open space.” (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A § 21B.15.040))


21B.15.100 Condotel.

“Condotel” means a building used as both a condominium and a hotel. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A § 21B.15.042))


21B.15.110 Connector street.

“Connector street” includes key streets that provide important connections within the Town Center. See SMC 21B.30.030 and 21B.30.040 for applicable provisions. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A § 21B.15.045))




21B.15.112 Cooperative.

“Cooperative” means an entity with up to four members located in the domicile of one of the members, registered with the Washington State Liquor and Cannabis Board, and meeting the requirements under Chapter 69.51A RCW where qualifying patients and designated providers share responsibility for acquiring and supplying the resources needed to produce and process marijuana for medical use of members of the cooperative. (Ord. O2016-406 § 2 (Att. B))


21B.15.120 Cottage housing.

“Cottage housing” refers to clusters of small detached dwelling units arranged around a common open space. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A § 21B.15.050))


21B.15.130 Crime prevention through environmental design (CPTED).

“CPTED” refers to “crime prevention through environmental design,” which is a multi-disciplinary approach to deterring criminal behavior through environmental design. CPTED strategies rely upon the ability to influence offender decisions that precede criminal acts. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A § 21B.15.055))


21B.15.140 Dark sky standards.

“Dark sky standards” refer to standards that are intended to stop the adverse effects of light pollution, including energy waste, and the air and water pollution caused by energy waste, harm to human health, harm to nocturnal wildlife and ecosystems, reduced safety and security, reduced visibility at night, and poor nighttime ambience. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A § 21B.15.060))


21B.15.150 Departure.

“Departure” refers to an alternative treatment that may be allowed by this title provided the director determines that the proposal meets the intent of the standards and applicable criteria. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A § 21B.15.065))


21B.15.160 Duplex.

“Duplex” is a building, which is located on one legal lot or parcel, containing two dwelling units designed exclusively for occupancy by two single households living independently of each other. A single-family dwelling containing an approved accessory dwelling unit (ADU) shall not be interpreted as a duplex. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A § 21B.15.065))


21B.15.170 Feasible.

“Feasible” means:

(1) That an action can be accomplished with technologies and methods that have been used in past circumstances;

(2) Studies or tests (for example, a pro forma) reviewed by a knowledgeable professional such as Member, Appraisal Institute (MAI), or traffic engineer (depending on the subject area) demonstrated in similar circumstances that such approaches are currently available and likely to achieve intended results; or

(3) Physical constraints are present that prevent conformance with the applicable standard as determined by the director. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A § 21B.15.070))


21B.15.180 Floor area ratio.

“Floor area ratio” means total occupiable building area, including garage, divided by total lot area. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A § 21B.15.075))


21B.15.190 Green roof.

“Green roof” means a roof of a building that is partially or completely covered with vegetation and soil, or a growing medium, planted over a waterproofing membrane. This does not refer to roofs which are merely colored green, as with green roof shingles. It may also include additional layers such as a root barrier and drainage and irrigation systems. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A § 21B.15.080))


21B.15.200 Gross developable acreage.

“Gross developable acreage” means the total horizontal area of a project site including new roadways internal to the development but excluding the following:

(1) Critical areas and buffers;

(2) Areas below the ordinary high water mark;

(3) Areas that are required to be dedicated on the perimeter of a project site for public rights-of-way. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A § 21B.15.085))


21B.15.210 Indoor recreation area.

See SMC 21B.30.090(1)(d) for the definition of “indoor recreation area.” (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A § 21B.15.090))


21B.15.220 Landscaped open space.

See SMC 21B.30.090(1)(e) for the definition of “landscaped open space.” (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A § 21B.15.095))


21B.15.225 Liquor and Cannabis Board (LCB).

“Liquor and Cannabis Board (LCB)” means the Washington State Liquor and Cannabis Board which carries out Washington liquor, marijuana, and tobacco laws and regulations. (Ord. O2016-406 § 2 (Att. B))


21B.15.230 Low impact development.

Low impact development (LID) is a stormwater and land use management strategy that strives to mimic predisturbance hydrologic processes of infiltration, filtration, storage, evaporation and transpiration by emphasizing conservation, use of on-site natural features, site planning, and distributed stormwater management practices that are integrated into a project design. (Ord. O2016-429 § 8 (Att. H); Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A § 21B.15.100))


21B.15.234 Marijuana or marihuana.

“Marijuana” or “marihuana” means all parts of the plant cannabis, whether growing or not, with a THC concentration greater than 0.3 percent on a dry weight basis; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin. The term does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. (Ord. O2016-406 § 2 (Att. B); Ord. O2014-376 § 3 (Att. A). Formerly 21B.15.235)


21B.15.235 Marijuana concentrates.

“Marijuana concentrates” means products consisting wholly or in part of the resin extracted from any part of the plant cannabis and having a THC concentration greater than 10 percent. (Ord. O2016-406 § 2 (Att. B))


21B.15.236 Marijuana processor.

“Marijuana processor” means a person or entity licensed by the Washington State Liquor and Cannabis Board (“LCB”) to process marijuana into marijuana concentrates, useable marijuana and marijuana-infused products, package and label marijuana concentrates, useable marijuana and marijuana-infused products for sale in retail outlets, and sell marijuana concentrates, useable marijuana and marijuana-infused products at wholesale to marijuana retailers. (Ord. O2016-406 § 2 (Att. B); Ord. O2014-376 § 3 (Att. A))


21B.15.237 Marijuana producer.

“Marijuana producer” means a person or entity licensed by the LCB to produce and sell marijuana at wholesale to marijuana processors and other marijuana producers. (Ord. O2016-406 § 2 (Att. B); Ord. O2014-376 § 3 (Att. A))


21B.15.238 Marijuana-infused products.

“Marijuana-infused products” means products that contain marijuana or marijuana extracts and are intended for human use, are derived from marijuana, and have a THC concentration no greater than 10 percent. The term “marijuana-infused products” does not include either marijuana concentrates or useable marijuana. (Ord. O2016-406 § 2 (Att. B); Ord. O2014-376 § 3 (Att. A))


21B.15.239 Marijuana retailer.

“Marijuana retailer” means a person or entity licensed by the LCB to sell marijuana concentrates, useable marijuana, and marijuana-infused products in a retail outlet. (Ord. O2016-406 § 2 (Att. B); Ord. O2014-376 § 3 (Att. A))


21B.15.240 Mixed-use node.

“Mixed-use node” refers to one of the five TC-A zoned properties in the Town Center, including TC-A-1 through A-5. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A § 21B.15.105))


21B.15.250 Mixed-use street.

“Mixed-use street” refers to a type of street that allows for either a storefront built up to the public sidewalk or a building featuring a landscaped or plaza setback. See SMC 21B.30.030, 21B.30.040, and 21B.30.120 for applicable provisions. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A § 21B.15.110))


21B.15.260 Multifamily open space.

See SMC 21B.30.090(1)(f) for the definition of “multifamily open space.” (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A § 21B.15.115))


21B.15.270 Multifamily.

“Multifamily” means an apartment per 21A.15.355. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A § 21B.15.117))


21B.15.280 Pedestrian-oriented open space (or pedestrian-oriented space).

“Pedestrian-oriented open space” means a publicly accessible space that enlivens the pedestrian environment by providing opportunities for outdoor dining, socializing, relaxing, and/or visual amenities. See SMC 21B.30.160(2) for design criteria for pedestrian open space. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A § 21B.15.120))


21B.15.290 Pedestrian-oriented street or corridor.

“Pedestrian-oriented street or corridor” refers to a type of street or corridor that is intended to be lined with storefronts built up to the edge of the sidewalk. See SMC 21B.30.030, 21B.30.040, 21B.30.070, and 21B.30.120 for applicable provisions. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A § 21B.15.125))


21B.15.300 Public open space.

See SMC 21B.30.090(1)(g) for the definition of “public open space” and SMC 21B.30.160 for applicable design standards and guidelines. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A § 21B.15.130))


21B.15.310 Rain garden.

“Rain garden” means a nonengineered shallow, landscaped depression, with compost-amended native soils and adapted plants, that allows rainwater runoff from impervious areas like roofs, driveways, walkways, and compacted lawn areas to pond, temporarily be stored, pass through the amended soil profile and be absorbed. (Ord. O2016-429 § 8 (Att. H); Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A § 21B.15.135))


21B.15.320 Residential street.

“Residential street” refers to a type of street featuring residential uses and landscaped building setbacks. See SMC 21B.30.030, 21B.30.040, and 21B.30.070 for applicable provisions. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A § 21B.15.140))


21B.15.330 Roofline modulation.

“Roofline modulation” means variation in roof form. See SMC 21B.30.210(3) for details. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A § 21B.15.145))


21B.15.340 Sight distance triangle.

“Sight distance triangle” means a required setback area at the intersection or driveway entrance off a public or private street for any fence, berm, vegetation, on-site vehicle parking area, signs or other physical obstruction between 42 inches and eight feet above the existing street grade. See SMC 21B.25.200 for details. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A § 21B.15.150))


21B.15.341 Sign.

“Sign” means any medium, device, structure, fixture, or placard, including any necessary supporting structure and component parts, that is visible from a public right-of-way or surrounding properties, and uses graphics, symbols, or written copy to convey a message, attract attention to, or advertise a product, place, activity, business, event, good, service, or land use. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.15.341.1 Sign, A-frame.

“Sign, A-frame” means a freestanding, two-panel, foldable, portable temporary sign made of rigid material. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.15.342 Sign, awning/marquee.

“Sign, awning/marquee” means a sign painted on or attached directly to and supported by an awning or marquee. An awning may be constructed of rigid or nonrigid materials and may be retractable or nonretractable. A marquee is a roof-like shelter, as of glass, projecting above an outer door and over a sidewalk or a terrace, which may be attached to a building or be freestanding. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.15.343 Sign, blade.

“Sign, blade” means a small, pedestrian-oriented building-mounted sign that is attached to and supported by the exterior wall of a building with the exposed face of the sign on a plane perpendicular to the wall of the building, projecting more than one foot from the wall of a building and vertical to the ground. 


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.15.343. Blade sign examples.

(Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.15.344 Sign, box/cabinet.

“Sign, box/cabinet” means a building-mounted sign that is attached to and supported by the exterior wall of a building with the exposed face of the sign on a plane parallel to the wall of the building and where the sign or individual letters are contained within a box or cabinet and are internally illuminated.
[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.15.344. Cabinet sign examples.

(Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.15.345 Sign, building-mounted.

“Sign, building-mounted” means a sign that is attached directly to a building or indirectly attached to a building by a support structure. Building-mounted signs may include, but are not limited to, wall, hanging, blade, awning, marquee, opaque, channel, painted, shadow, and window signs. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.15.346 Sign, changing message.

“Sign, changing message” means a sign that contains electronically controlled digital or illuminated text, or a sign that contains text that can be manually changed.
[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.15.346. Changing message sign examples.

(Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.15.347 Sign, channel letter.

“Sign, channel letter” means a wall sign that is comprised of lettering that is attached to and supported by the exterior wall of a building or a structure with the exposed face of the lettering or graphics on a plane parallel to the wall of the building, and where the letters contain an open channel into which neon lighting is inserted.
[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.15.347. Channel letter sign examples.

(Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.15.348 Sign, community banner.

“Sign, community banner” means a temporary sign, located on City banner poles, which advertises an event that would provide civic, cultural, educational, philanthropic, or service opportunities hosted or promoted by the City or a community group that is not-for-profit or nonprofit and nonpolitical with an IRS designation of Section 501(c) or (d). (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.15.349 Sign, directional.

“Sign, directional” means a sign that is primarily designed to guide or direct pedestrian or vehicular traffic to an area, business, place, or convenience, and may include incidental graphics such as trade names and trademarks.
[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.15.349. Directional sign examples.

(Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.15.349.1 Sign, hanging.

“Sign, hanging” means a small, pedestrian-oriented sign that is hung beneath an awning, canopy, or marquee sign or other structure.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.15.349.1. Hanging sign examples.

(Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.15.349.2 Sign, incidental.

“Sign, incidental” means a sign, emblem or decal designed to inform the public of goods, facilities, or services available on the premises, and may include but not be limited to signs designating:

(1) Restrooms;

(2) Hours of operation;

(3) Acceptable credit cards;

(4) Property ownership or management;

(5) Phone booths; and

(6) Recycling containers. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.15.349.3 Sign, freestanding.

“Sign, freestanding” means a sign standing directly upon the ground or having one or more supports standing directly upon the ground, and being detached from any building or fence. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.15.349.4 Sign, fuel price.

“Sign, fuel price” means a manually or electronically controlled sign utilized to advertise the price of gasoline and/or diesel fuel. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.15.349.5 Sign, logo.

“Sign, logo” means a sign, graphic representation, or symbol of a company name, trademark, or abbreviation, uniquely designed for ready recognition. A logo sign may be a wall sign or a freestanding sign. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.15.349.6 Sign, monument.

“Sign, monument” means a freestanding sign that is above ground level and is anchored to the ground by a solid base, with no open space between the sign and the ground. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.15.349.7 Sign, opaque.

“Sign, opaque” means a building-mounted sign that is attached to and supported by the exterior wall of a building or a structure where the surface of the sign is generally comprised of two or more opaque materials on the same plane. Where internally illuminated, the opaque material that comprises the lettering of the sign may be translucent such that it allows limited light to shine through the sign letters.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.15.349.7. Opaque sign examples.

(Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.15.349.8 Sign, painted.

“Sign, painted” means a sign, mural or graphic design painted directly onto a building facade or onto a flat wood or metal surface that is then attached to the building facade.
[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.15.349.8. Painted sign examples.

(Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.15.349.9 Sign, permanent residential development identification.

“Sign, permanent residential development identification” means a permanent sign identifying the residential development upon which the sign is located. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.15.349.10 Sign, pedestal.

“Sign, pedestal” means a temporary, pedestrian-oriented sign placed atop a pedestal that is affixed to a heavy horizontal base.
[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.15.349.10. Pedestal sign examples.

(Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.15.349.11 Sign, primary.

“Sign, primary” means a painted, opaque, awning, marquee, or channel letter sign that is designed to be the primary source of business identification to both pedestrian and vehicular traffic. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.15.349.12 Sign, secondary.

“Sign, secondary” means a window, logo, blade, or hanging sign that generally contains secondary, pedestrian-oriented business identification, business product information, or hours of operation. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.15.349.13 Sign, shadow.

“Sign, shadow” means a wall sign comprised of individual letters or graphics that is attached to and supported by the exterior wall of a building with the exposed face of the sign lettering or graphics on a plane parallel to the wall of the building, where the surface of the sign is generally comprised of a completely opaque material. The sign lettering or graphics are separated from the building facade such that during daylight hours the lettering generates a shadow on the building facade.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.15.349.13. Shadow sign examples.

(Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.15.349.14 Sign, temporary.

“Sign, temporary” means a sign that is designed to be displayed for a limited amount of time and is not permanently placed or affixed such as to prevent its removal. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.15.349.15 Sign, window.

“Sign, window” means a sign that is constructed of neon, stained glass, gold leaf, cut vinyl, etched glass, or similar material in a window. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.15.349.16 Sign, wall.

“Sign, wall” means any sign painted on, or attached directly to and supported by, the wall of a building or structure. All wall signs are building-mounted signs. Wall signs may include, but are not limited to, window, opaque, shadow, painted, channel letter, and logo signs. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.15.350 Solar access.

“Solar access” means the availability of (or access to) unobstructed, direct sunlight. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A § 21B.15.155))


21B.15.360 Town Center Stormwater Master Plan.

“Town Center Stormwater Master Plan” means the applicable Stormwater Master Plan adopted by the City for the Town Center. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A § 21B.15.160))


21B.15.370 Town Center Infrastructure Plan.

“Town Center Infrastructure Plan” means the plan adopted by the City that identifies the infrastructure needed to develop the envisioned Town Center land uses and that identifies principles and application required to develop mixed-use zones in the Town Center. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A § 21B.15.165))


21B.15.380 Unified zone development plan (UZDP).

Refers to a plan that is required for new development in each TC-A sub-zone per Chapter 21B.95 SMC in order to:

(1) Establish the level and intensity of new commercial and residential development;

(2) Provide for coordinated infrastructure such as roads and utilities and public open space;

(3) Define street types and orientation to street of new development; and

(4) Identify the general location of buildings and site improvements and provision of open space, parking, environmental restoration, and nonmotorized circulation. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A § 21B.15.170))


21B.15.390 Usable open space.

See SMC 21B.30.090(1)(b) for the definition of “usable open space.” (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A § 21B.15.180))


21B.15.400 Winery.

“Winery” means a business that produces up to 10,000 cases per year. The maximum gross floor area of a winery is 10,000 square feet, including space for bottling, crushing, lab and office space, tasting room, restaurant, storage, and event space. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A § 21B.15.185))


21B.15.410 Woonerf.

“Woonerf” is a term originating in Holland describing a street where pedestrians and cyclists have legal priority over motorists. Woonerfs are characterized by curbless shared spaces with traffic calming measures such as bollards and landscaping elements. Travel speeds are typically limited to 10 or 15 miles per hour. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A § 21B.15.190))


Chapter 21B.20 PERMITTED USES

Sections:

21B.20.010    Purpose.

21B.20.020    Establishment of uses.

21B.20.030    Interpretation of land use tables.

21B.20.040    Residential land uses.

21B.20.050    Recreational/cultural land uses.

21B.20.060    General services land uses.

21B.20.070    Government/business services land uses.

21B.20.080    Retail land uses.

21B.20.090    Manufacturing land uses.

21B.20.100    Regional land uses.


21B.20.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the distribution of land uses into zones and sub-zones that reflect the Town Center Plan’s goals and policies. Chapter 21B.10 SMC sets forth the purpose of each Town Center zone and sub-zone described herein. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.20.020 Establishment of uses.

The use of a property is defined by the activity for which the building or lot is intended, designed, arranged, occupied, or maintained. The use is considered permanently established when that use will be or has been in continuous operation for a period exceeding 60 days. A use that will operate for less than 60 days is considered a temporary use, and subject to the requirements of Chapter 21A.70 SMC. All applicable requirements of this code, or other applicable state or federal requirements, shall govern a use located in the City of Sammamish. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.20.030 Interpretation of land use tables.

(1) The land use tables in this chapter determine whether a specific use is allowed in a zone district. The zone district is located on the vertical column and the specific use is located on the horizontal row of these tables.

(2) If the letter “X” appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the use is not allowed in that district, except for certain temporary uses.

(3) If the letter “P” appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the use is allowed in that district subject to the review procedures specified in Chapter 21A.100 SMC and the general requirements of the code.

(4) If the letter “U” appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the use is allowed in that district subject to the unified zone development plan application review procedures specified in Chapter 21B.95 SMC. When a site is approved for development under the UZDP then all uses designated with a “U” are permitted on that site.

(5) If the letter “C” appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the use is allowed subject to the conditional use review procedures specified in Chapter 21A.100 SMC and the general requirements of the code.

(6) If the letter “S” appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the regional use is permitted subject to the special use permit review procedures specified in Chapter 21A.100 SMC and the general requirements of the code.

(7) If a number appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the use may be allowed subject to the appropriate review process indicated above, the general requirements of the code and the specific conditions indicated in the development condition with the corresponding number immediately following the land use table.

(8) If more than one letter-number combination appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the use is allowed in that zone subject to different sets of limitation or conditions depending on the review process indicated by the letter, the general requirements of the code and the specific conditions indicated in the development condition with the corresponding number immediately following the table.

(9) All applicable requirements shall govern a use whether or not they are cross-referenced in a section.

(10) “SIC#” refers to the Standard Industrial Classification number. See SMC 21B.05.080 for interpretation and details.

(11) Combining multiple permitted uses in one building is encouraged within the TC-A zone and TC-B zone where the property is included in an approved unified zone development plan. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.20.040 Residential land uses.

(1) Table of Residential Land Uses.

KEY

P – Permitted Use

U – Permitted Use as Part of Adopted Unified Zone Development Plan

C – Conditional Use

S – Special Use

X – Prohibited Use

	SIC#	SPECIFIC LAND USE	TC-A sub-zones	TC-B	TC-C	TC-D	TC-E

	A1	A2	A3	A4	A5

	 	DWELLING UNITS, TYPES:	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	*	Single detached	X	X	X	X	X	P2	P	X	P

	*	Duplex	X	X	X	X	X	P2	P	X	X

	*	Townhouse	U1	U1	U1	U1	U1	P	P	P	X

	*	Apartment	U1	U1	U1	U1	U1	P	X	P	X

	*	Cottage housing	X	X	X	X	X	P2	P	P	X

	*	Mobile home park	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	GROUP RESIDENCES:	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	*	Community residential facility-I	U1	U1	U1	U1	U1	P	P	C	P

	*	Community residential facility-II	U1	U1	U1	U1	U1	P	X	C	X

	*	Dormitory	X	U1,3	U1,3	X	X	P3	X	C	X

	*	Senior citizen assisted housing	U1	U1	U1	U1	U1	P	X	C	X

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	ACCESSORY USES:	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	*	Residential accessory uses4	P1	P1	P1	P1	P1	P	P	X	P

	*	Home business Type 1	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	X	P

	*	Home business Type 2	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	X	C

	*	Electric vehicle charging station8,9,14	P	P	P	P	P	P10	P10	P	P10

	*	Rapid charging station11,14	P	P	P	P	P	P12	P12	P13	P12

	*	Cooperative15	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X

	*	Collective garden15	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	TEMPORARY LODGING:	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	7011	Hotel/motel/condotel1,7	U	U	U	U	U	U5	X	X	X

	*	Bed and breakfast guesthouse7	U6	U6	U6	U6	U6	P6	X	X	X

Development Conditions:

1.    Except for lobbies or other similar entrances, the use is prohibited within 30 feet of the sidewalk on the ground floor of designated pedestrian-oriented streets or corridors.

2.    Provided, that single detached or cottage dwelling units account for no more than 15 percent of the total dwelling units on the development site.

3.    Only as an accessory to a school, college/university, or church.

4.    Accessory dwelling units:

a.    Only one accessory dwelling per primary single detached dwelling unit;

b.    The primary dwelling unit or the accessory dwelling unit shall be owner occupied;

i.    One of the dwelling units shall not exceed a floor area of 1,000 square feet except when one of the dwelling units is wholly contained within a basement or attic;

ii.    When the primary and accessory dwelling units are located in the same building, only one entrance may be located on each street side of the building;

iii.    The total number of occupants in both the primary residence and the accessory dwelling unit combined may not exceed the maximum number established by the definition of “family” in SMC 21A.15.450;

iv.    Additions to an existing structure or the development of a newly constructed detached ADU shall be designed consistent with the existing facade, roof pitch, siding, and windows of the primary dwelling unit;

c.    One additional off-street parking space shall be provided;

d.    The accessory dwelling unit shall be converted to another permitted use or shall be removed if one of the dwelling units ceases to be owner occupied; and

e.    An applicant seeking to build an accessory dwelling unit shall file a notice approved by the department with the records and elections division that identifies the dwelling unit as accessory. The notice shall run with the land. The applicant shall submit proof that the notice was filed before the department shall approve any permit for the construction of the accessory dwelling unit. The required contents and form of the notice shall be set forth in administrative rules.

5.    Properties in the TC-B zone may include the subject use, as determined by the City, if it is contiguous to a TC-A zoned property and included in an approved unified zone development plan.

6.    Only as an accessory to the permanent residence of the operator, provided:

a.    Serving meals to paying guests shall be limited to breakfast; and

b.    The number of persons accommodated per night shall not exceed ten.

7.    The commercial square footage allocation established pursuant to SMC 21B.25.030, development condition No. 6 shall apply to these uses.

8.    Level 1 and Level 2 charging only.

9.    Level 1 and Level 2 charging are permitted in critical aquifer recharge areas and in other critical areas when serving an existing use.

10.    Allowed only as accessory to a primary permitted use or permitted conditional use.

11.    The term “rapid” is used interchangeably with “Level 3” and “fast charging.”

12.    Only as an “electric vehicle charging station – restricted.”

13.    Only as an “electric vehicle charging station – public.”

14.    For definitions see Chapter 21A.15 SMC, Technical Terms and Land Use Definitions, and Chapter 21A.40 SMC for parking requirements.

15.    All marijuana related uses both medical and recreational, including marijuana collective gardens, marijuana cooperatives, marijuana producers, marijuana processors, marijuana distributors, and marijuana retailers, are prohibited in all zones in the City of Sammamish.

(Ord. O2016-406 § 4 (Att. D); Ord. O2012-327 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2011-300 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.20.050 Recreational/cultural land uses.

(1) Table of Recreational/Cultural Land Uses.

KEY

P – Permitted Use

U – Permitted Use as Part of Adopted Unified Zone Development Plan

C – Conditional Use

S – Special Use

X – Prohibited Use

	SIC#	SPECIFIC LAND USE	TC-A sub-zones	TC-B	TC-C	TC-D	TC-E

	A1	A2	A3	A4	A5

	 	PARK/RECREATION:	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	*	Park5	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P

	*	Trails5	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P

	*	Sports club1,5	U	U	U	U	U	U2	X	X	X

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	AMUSEMENT/ENTERTAINMENT:	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	*	Theater5	U3	X	X	X	X	U2,3	X	C4	X

	793	Bowling center5	U	X	X	X	X	U2	X	X	X

	7999	Amusement and recreation services5	U	U	U	U	U	U2	X	C	X

	*	Amusement arcades5	U	X	X	X	X	U2	X	X	X

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	CULTURAL:	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	823	Library5	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	P	X

	841	Museum5	U	U	U	U	U	U2	X	X	X

	842	Arboretum5	U	U	U	U	U	P	P	C	P

	*	Conference center5	U	U	U	U	U	U2	X	X	X

Development Conditions:

1.    Only for stand-alone sports clubs that are not part of a park.

2.    Properties in the TC-B zone may include the subject use, as determined by the City, if it is contiguous to a TC-A zoned property and included in an approved unified zone development plan.

3.    Adult use facilities shall be prohibited within 660 feet of any residential zones, any other adult use facility, schools, licensed daycare centers, parks, community centers, public libraries or churches which conduct religious or educational classes for minors.

4.    Limited to community theaters integrated with the design of the Sammamish Commons.

5.    The commercial square footage allocation established pursuant to SMC 21B.25.030, development condition No. 6 shall not apply to these uses if they are publicly owned and operated. The commercial square footage allocation established pursuant to SMC 21B.25.030, development condition No. 6 shall apply to these uses if they are privately owned and operated except for those portions of the facility dedicated to sports fields, or other improvements that will result in a low-intensity use (including, but not limited to, soccer fields, tennis courts, basketball courts, swimming pools, etc.).

(Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.20.060 General services land uses.

(1) Table of General Services Land Uses.

KEY

P – Permitted Use

U – Permitted Use as Part of Adopted Unified Zone Development Plan

C – Conditional Use

S – Special Use

X – Prohibited Use

	SIC#	SPECIFIC LAND USE	TC-A sub-zones	TC-B	TC-C	TC-D	TC-E

	A1	A2	A3	A4	A5

	 	PERSONAL SERVICES:	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	7211

7215

7231

7241

7251	Dry cleaners, photographic studios, beauty salons, barber shops, shoe repair shops, shoe shine parlors11	U	U	U	U	U	U1	X	X	X

	7215	Coin operated laundries11	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X

	*	Daycare I11	U	U	U	U	U	P2	P2	X	P2

	*	Daycare II11	U	U	U	U	U	P2	X	X	X

	866	Churches, synagogues, temples, mosques	U	U	U	U	U	C	X	X	P

	83	Social services3	U4	U4	U4	U4	U4	U4,5	P5

C6	C6	C6

	*	Theatrical production services11	U7	U7	U7	U7	U7	X	X	X	X

	*	Artist studios11	U	U	U	U	U	U1	X	X	X

	*	Interim recycling facility11	U8	U8	U8	U8	U8	P9	P9	P9	X

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	HEALTH SERVICES:	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	801 – 804	Office/outpatient clinic11	X	U	U	U	U	U1	X	X	X

	805

807

808

809	Nursing and personal care facilities, medical/dental lab, miscellaneous health11	X	U	U	U	U	U1	X	X	X

	*	Marijuana producer12	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X

	*	Marijuana processor12	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X

	*	Marijuana retailer12	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X

	*	Cooperative12	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X

	*	Collective garden12	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X

	 	EDUCATION SERVICES:	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	*	Elementary school, middle/junior high school, secondary or high school11	X	U	X	X	U	U1	X	X	X

	*	Vocational school, specialized instruction school, school district support facility11	U	U	U	U	U	U1,10	X	X	X

Development Conditions:

1.    Properties in the TC-B zone may include the subject use, as determined by the City, if it is contiguous to a TC-A zoned property and included in an approved unified zone development plan.

2.    Only as an accessory to residential use, provided:

a.    Outdoor play areas shall be completely enclosed by a solid wall or fence, with no openings except for gates, and have a minimum height of six feet; and

b.    Outdoor play equipment shall maintain a minimum distance of 20 feet from property lines adjoining residential zones.

3.    Except SIC Industry Group Nos.:

a.    835 – Daycare services; and

b.    836 – Residential care, which is otherwise provided for on the residential permitted land use table.

4.    Limited to a maximum of 5,000 gross square feet per establishment, except when within a re-use of a public school facility subject to the provisions of Chapter 21A.70 SMC.

5.    Only as a re-use of a public school facility subject to the provisions of Chapter 21A.70 SMC.

6.    Only as a re-use of a surplus nonresidential facility subject to Chapter 21A.70 SMC.

7.    Adult use facilities shall be prohibited within 660 feet of any residential zones, any other adult use facility, schools, licensed daycare centers, parks, community centers, public libraries or churches which conduct religious or educational classes for minors.

8.    With the exception of drop box facilities for the collection and temporary storage of recyclable materials, all processing and storage of material shall be within enclosed buildings. Yard waste processing is not permitted.

9.    Limited to drop box facilities accessory to a public or community use such as a school, fire station or community center.

10.    School district support school only allowed when adjacent to an existing or proposed school.

11.    The commercial square footage allocation established pursuant to SMC 21B.25.030, development condition No. 6 shall not apply to these uses if they are publicly owned and operated. The commercial square footage allocation established pursuant to SMC 21B.25.030, development condition No. 6 shall apply to these uses if they are privately owned and operated except for those portions of the facility dedicated to sports fields, or other improvements that will result in a low-intensity use (including, but not limited to, soccer fields, tennis courts, basketball courts, swimming pools, etc.).

12.    All marijuana related uses both medical and recreational, including marijuana collective gardens, marijuana cooperatives, marijuana producers, marijuana processors, marijuana distributors, and marijuana retailers, are prohibited in all zones in the City of Sammamish.

(Ord. O2016-406 § 4 (Att. D); Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.20.070 Government/business services land uses.

(1) Table of Government/Business Service Land Uses.

KEY

P – Permitted Use

U – Permitted Use as Part of Adopted Unified Zone Development Plan

C – Conditional Use

S – Special Use

X – Prohibited Use

	SIC#	SPECIFIC LAND USE	TC-A sub-zones	TC-B	TC-C	TC-D	TC-E

	A1	A2	A3	A4	A5

	 	GOVERNMENT SERVICES:	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	*	Public agency or utility office	U	U	U	U	U	U2	X	P	X

	*	Public agency archives	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	P	X

	9221

9224	Police or fire facility	U	U	U	U	U	U2	X	P	C3

	*	Utility facility	U1	U1	U1	U1	U1	P4

C5	P4

C5	P4

C5	P4

C5

	*	Commuter parking lot	U6	U6	U6	U6	X	C	X	C	P

	*	Private stormwater management facility	U	U	U	U	U	P	P	P	P

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	BUSINESS SERVICES:	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	48

482

653

752

4724	Communication offices, telegraph and other communications, real estate agent offices, automotive parking, travel agencies10	U	U	U	U	U	U2	X	C	X

	*	General business service, professional office10	U	U	U	U	U	U2	X	C	X

	*	Off-street required parking lot10	U7	U7	U7	U7	U7	P	P7	P	X

	7941	Professional sport teams/promoters10	X	U	U	X	X	U2	X	X	X

	873	Research, development and testing10	X	U	U	X	X	U2	X	C	X

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	ACCESSORY USES:	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	*	Commercial/industrial accessory uses10	U8	U8	U8	U8	U8	U2,8	X	X	X

	*	Helistop10	U9	U9	U9	U9	U9	C9	C9	C9	C9

Development Conditions:

1.    Except for lobbies or other similar entrances, the use is prohibited within 30 feet of the sidewalk on the ground floor of designated pedestrian-oriented streets or corridors.

2.    Properties in the TC-B zone may include the subject use, as determined by the City, if it is contiguous to a TC-A zoned property and included in an approved unified zone development plan.

3.    Fire facility conditions:

a.    All buildings and structures shall maintain a minimum distance of 20 feet from property lines adjoining residential zones;

b.    Any buildings from which fire-fighting equipment emerges onto a street shall maintain a distance of 35 feet from such street;

c.    No outdoor storage.

4.    Excluding bulk gas storage tanks.

5.    Limited to bulk gas storage tanks which pipe to individual residences but excluding liquefied natural gas storage tanks.

6.    Commuter parking lots shall be within structures (surface parking lots are not allowed).

7.    Provided off-street required parking must be located on a lot which would permit, either outright or through a land use permit approval process, the land use the off-street parking will serve.

8.    Storage limited to accessory storage of commodities sold at retail on the premises or materials used in the fabrication of commodities sold on the premises.

9.    Limited to emergency medical evacuation sites in conjunction with police, fire or health service facilities.

10.    The commercial square footage allocation established pursuant to SMC 21B.25.030, development condition No. 6 shall apply to these uses.

(Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.20.080 Retail land uses.

(1) Table of Retail Land Uses.

KEY

P – Permitted Use

U – Permitted Use as Part of Adopted Unified Zone Development Plan

C – Conditional Use

S – Special Use

X – Prohibited Use

	SIC#	SPECIFIC LAND USE	TC-A sub-zones	TC-B	TC-C	TC-D	TC-E

	A18	A28	A38	A48	A58

	*	Building, hardware and garden materials10	U1,5	U2,6	U2,6	U2,6	U2,6	U1,3,4,6	X	X	X

	*	Department and variety stores10	U5	U2,6	U2,6	U2,6	U2,6	U3,4,6	X	X	X

	54	Food stores10	U5	U2,6	U2,6	U3,6	U3,6	U3,4,6	X	X	X

	*	Farmers market	P	P	P	P	P	P	X	P	X

	56

5941	Apparel and accessory stores, sporting goods and related stores10	U5	U2,6	U2,6	U2,6	U2,6	U3,4,6	X	P9	X

	*	Furniture and home furnishings stores10	U2	U2,6	U2,6	U2,6	U2,6	U3,4,6	X	X	X

	58	Eating and drinking places10	U	U	U	U	U	U3,4	X	P	X

	*	Brewpub10	U	U	U	U	U	U3,4	X	P	X

	5912	Drug stores10	U2	U2,6	U2,6	U3,6	U3,6	U3,4,6	X	X	X

	5921	Liquor stores10	U2	X	X	U2,6	X	X	X	X	X

	5932	Used goods: antiques/secondhand shops10	U3	U3,6	U3,6	U3,6	U3,6	U3,4,6	X	X	X

	594	Book, stationery, video and art supply stores10	U2,7	U2,6,7	U2,6,7	U2,6,7	U2,6,7	U4,6,7	X	P7	X

	594	Hobby, toy, game shops, photographic and electronic shops, jewelry stores10	U3,7	U3,6,7	U3,6,7	U3,6,7	U3,6,7	U3,4,6,7	X	X	X

	594

5992	Fabric and florist shops10	U2	U3,6	U3,6	U2,6	U3,6	U3,4,6	X	X	X

	*	Personal medical supply stores10	U3	U3,6	U3,6	U3,6	U3,6	U3,4,6	X	X	X

	*	Pet shops10	U3	U3,6	U3,6	U3,6	U3,6	U3,4,6	X	X	X

	*	Marijuana retailer11	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X

Development Conditions:

1.    Outdoor storage and/or sales area restrictions:

a.    Applicable areas are prohibited along the frontage of designated pedestrian-oriented streets, except where the areas are designed as pedestrian-oriented spaces.

b.    Applicable areas shall be limited in size to areas no more than 20 percent of the enclosed gross floor area of the applicable establishment.

2.    Limited to 10,000 square feet gross floor area for each establishment.

3.    Limited to 4,000 square feet gross floor area for each establishment.

4.    Properties in the TC-B zone may include the subject use, as determined by the City, if it is contiguous to a TC-A zoned property and included in an approved unified zone development plan.

5.    Limited to 40,000 square feet gross floor area for each establishment.

6.    Use permitted only when provided within a building featuring a vertical mix of uses where the subject use is the ground floor and office and/or residential uses are provided on the upper floor or floors. The director may allow flexibility to this requirement provided the overall plan meets the goals and policies of the Town Center Plan in terms of mixed uses and pedestrian-oriented character.

7.    Adult use facilities shall be prohibited within 660 feet of any residential zones, any other adult use facility, schools, licensed daycare centers, parks, community centers, public libraries or churches which conduct religious or educational classes for minors.

8.    For all nonresidential uses subject to a size limitation in the TC-A or TC-B zones, the City may allow flexibility to the maximum size of individual businesses provided the director determines that the business is well-integrated with surrounding development and meets the goals and policies of the Town Center Plan. Factors in making this determination include the site design, building design, parking location and design, context, surrounding mix of uses, streetscape design, pedestrian amenities, compatibility with other businesses within the sub-zone and the entire Town Center, traffic impacts, and environmental quality.

9.    Use permitted only when accessory to a permitted use. Such use shall be limited to 2,000 square feet gross floor area for each establishment.

10.    The commercial square footage allocation established pursuant to SMC 21B.25.030, development condition No. 6 shall apply to these uses.

11.    All marijuana related uses both medical and recreational, including marijuana collective gardens, marijuana cooperatives, marijuana producers, marijuana processors, marijuana distributors, and marijuana retailers, are prohibited in all zones in the City of Sammamish.

(Ord. O2016-406 § 4 (Att. D); Ord. O2014-376 § 3 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.20.090 Manufacturing land uses.

(1) Table of Manufacturing Land Uses.

KEY

P – Permitted Use

U – Permitted Use as Part of Adopted Unified Zone Development Plan

C – Conditional Use

S – Special Use

X – Prohibited Use

	SIC#	SPECIFIC LAND USE	TC-A sub-zones	TC-B	TC-C	TC-D	TC-E

	A1	A2	A3	A4	A5

	27	Printing and publishing5	U1,4	U1,4	U1,4	U1,4	U1,4	U1,2,4	X	X	X

	357	Computer and office equipment5	U4	U4	U4	U4	U4	U2,4	X	X	X

	38	Measuring and controlling instruments5	X	U3,4	U3,4	U3,4	U3,4	U2,3,4	X	X	X

	*	Marijuana producer6	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X

	*	Marijuana processor6	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X

	*	Cooperative6	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X

	*	Collective garden6	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X

Development Conditions:

1.    Limited to photocopying and printing services offered to the general public.

2.    Properties in the TC-B zone may include the subject use, as determined by the City, if it is contiguous to a TC-A zoned property and included in an approved unified zone development plan.

3.    Only within enclosed buildings, and as an accessory use to retail sales.

4.    Facilities with less than 5,000 square feet of building footprint (for subject use only).

5.    The commercial square footage allocation established pursuant to SMC 21B.25.030, development condition No. 6 shall apply to these uses.

6.    All marijuana related uses both medical and recreational, including marijuana collective gardens, marijuana cooperatives, marijuana producers, marijuana processors, marijuana distributors, and marijuana retailers, are prohibited in all zones in the City of Sammamish.

(Ord. O2016-406 § 4 (Att. D); Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.20.100 Regional land uses.

(1) Table of Regional Land Uses.

KEY

P – Permitted Use

U – Permitted Use as Part of Adopted Unified Zone Development Plan

C – Conditional Use

S – Special Use

X – Prohibited Use

	SIC#	SPECIFIC LAND USE	TC-A sub-zones	TC-B	TC-C	TC-D	TC-E

	A1	A2	A3	A4	A5

	*	Public agency training facility	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	C	X

	*	Cogeneration facility	U1	U1	U1	U1	U1	C1	C1	C1	X

	*	Communication facility	U,S	U,S	U,S	U,S	U,S	S	S	S	X

	*	Earth station	U2,3	U2,3	U2,3	U2,3	U2,3	C2	C2	P	X

	*	Transit bus base	U,S	U,S	U,S	U,S	U,S	S	S	S	S

	7941	Stadium/arena	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	S	X

	8221

8222	College/university	U,S	U,S	U,S	U,S	U,S	U4,S	S	S	S



Development Conditions:

1.    Limited to cogeneration facilities that are intended primarily for use within the applicable building, development, or mixed-use node.

2.    Must be located on rooftops and effectively screened from view from surrounding streets and residential uses.

3.    Limited to no more than three satellite dish antennas.

4.    Properties in the TC-B zone may include the subject use, as determined by the City, if it is contiguous to a TC-A zoned property and included in an approved unified zone development plan.

(Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


Chapter 21B.25 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS – DENSITY AND DIMENSIONS

Sections:

21B.25.010    Purpose.

21B.25.020    Interpretation of tables and general development capacity provisions.

21B.25.030    Densities and dimensions.

21B.25.040    Provisions to obtain additional (bonus) residential density or commercial development capacity.

21B.25.050    Measurement methods.

21B.25.060    Minimum urban residential density.

21B.25.070    Calculations – Allowable dwelling units, lots or floor area.

21B.25.080    Calculations – Gross developable acreage.

21B.25.090    Calculations – Site area used for minimum density calculations.

21B.25.100    Lot area – Prohibited reduction.

21B.25.110    Measurement of setbacks.

21B.25.120    Setbacks – Specific building or use.

21B.25.130    Setbacks – Modifications.

21B.25.140    Setbacks – From regional utility corridors.

21B.25.150    Setbacks – From alley.

21B.25.160    Setbacks – Required modifications.

21B.25.170    Setbacks – Projections and structures allowed.

21B.25.180    Height – Exceptions to limits.

21B.25.190    Lot divided by zone boundary.

21B.25.200    Sight distance requirements.


21B.25.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish density and dimensional standards for development to implement Town Center policy goals and objectives. The standards are established to provide a balance between certainty and flexibility in project design, and promote compatibility between uses. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.25.020 Interpretation of tables and general development capacity provisions.

(1) SMC 21B.25.030 contains general density and dimension standards for all Town Center zones. Additional provisions, requirements, incentives, rules, and exceptions are set forth elsewhere in this title.

(2) Commercial development capacity will be allocated during the unified zone development process set forth in Chapter 21B.95 SMC for the mixed-use nodes (also see SMC 21B.25.040 and the Town Center Plan, Chapter IV, Land Use Element).

(3) Development standards are listed down the left side of both tables, and the zones are listed at the top. The matrix cells contain the minimum requirements of the zone. The parenthetical numbers in the matrix identify specific requirements applicable either to a specific use or zone. A blank box or the words “none” or “NA” indicates that there are no specific requirements. If more than one standard appears in a cell, each standard will be subject to any applicable footnote following the standard.

(4) See SMC 21B.25.040 for methods to acquire additional residential and commercial development capacity. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.25.030 Densities and dimensions.

(1) Table of Densities and Dimensional Standards for Town Center Zones.

	 	TOWN CENTER ZONES

	STANDARDS	TC-A	TC-B	TC-C	TC-D	TC-E

	Maximum Residential Density1,2,3 (DU/Acre)	40 du/ac	20 du/ac	8 du/ac	20 du/ac	1 du/ac

	Allocated Residential Density1,3,4,20 (DU/Acre)	16 du/ac	8 du/ac	4 du/ac	8 du/ac	1 du/ac

	Minimum Residential Density1,3,5 (DU/Acre)	16 du/ac	8 du/ac	None	None	None

	Allocated Commercial Area18	Variable6,7	None8	None	10,0008,19	None

	Minimum Lot Width	NA	NA	30 ft9	NA	30 ft

	Minimum Street Setback10,11,12	0 ft	10 ft13	15 ft	15 ft	15 ft

	Minimum Side Yard Setback11,14	NA	NA	7 ft9	7 ft	10 ft

	Minimum Back Yard Setback11,14	NA	20 ft	20 ft	20 ft	20 ft

	Maximum Floor Area Ratio	NA	0.515	0.515	NA	NA

	Maximum Height16	60 – 70 ft17	50 ft	35 ft	60 ft	35 ft

Development Conditions:

1.    Densities are based on gross developable acreage as established by SMC 21B.25.080.

2.    Maximum density means the absolute maximum density allowed after all incentives and bonus units are added per SMC 21B.25.040. Units purchased through the City’s TDR program do not count toward maximum residential density. The number of allowed units on a property may exceed the maximum allowed density by the number of TDRs purchased.

3.    Density applies only to dwelling units and not to sleeping units.

4.    Allocated density is the density allowed by right, before any additional units are added per SMC 21B.25.040. See Figure 21B.25.040a for clarification on the density allocation for all Town Center zones.

5.    For TC-A zones, the 16 du/acre minimum density applies to the average net density for the entire sub-zone (or development site if it does not cover the whole sub-zone). Minimum densities for individual properties will be determined during the unified zone development process.

6.    A maximum of 600,000 square feet of commercial floor area are available within the Town Center, allocated during the unified zone development process, with base allocations divided as follows:

a.    200,000 square feet in the TC-A-1 sub-zone.

b.    90,000 square feet in the TC-A-2 sub-zone.

c.    90,000 square feet in the TC-A-3 sub-zone.

d.    70,000 square feet in the TC-A-4 sub-zone.

e.    20,000 square feet in the TC-A-5 sub-zone.

f.    10,000 square feet in the TC-D sub-zone.

An additional 120,000 square feet of “bonus” commercial floor area may be allocated to the sub-zones per the bonus criteria set forth in SMC 21B.25.040.

7.    Additional commercial floor area may be available from the commercial development capacity bonus pool per SMC 21B.25.040.

8.    Commercial floor area may be permitted in the TC-B zone provided the site is developed as part of a unified zone development plan with an adjacent TC-A zone, as agreed upon in the UZDP (subject to the size and type of development). See SMC 21B.95.020(2)(c) for details.

9.    Minimum lot width and minimum side yard setbacks internal to developments may be modified for zero lot line configurations (see SMC 21B.30.260(4)) and townhouse developments.

10.    See SMC 21B.30.030 for greater specificity, exceptions, and departures to minimum street setbacks.

11.    See SMC 21B.30.090 for open space and landscaped area requirements.

12.    Minimum setbacks for private garages or carports shall be 20 feet. This setback allows sufficient space to park most vehicles in the driveway without blocking movement along the sidewalk.

13.    The minimum street setback may be reduced to zero if the site is part of a unified zone development plan.

14.    See also Chapter 21B.30 SMC for greater specificity, exceptions, and departures for side and rear yard setbacks. For townhouse and multifamily development, the minimum side and back yard setback shall be 20 feet along any property line abutting R-1 through R-8 zones and TC-C and TC-E zones, except for structures in on-site play areas, which shall have a setback of five feet.

15.    Maximum floor area ratio (total building area available for occupation, including garage, divided by total lot area) applies only to detached single-family houses and duplexes.

16.    See SMC 21B.25.050(3) for measurement of height.

17.    The maximum height as measured in SMC 21B.25.050(3) is 70 feet (with a maximum of six stories above the adjacent street(s)) west of 228th Avenue SE and 60 feet (with a maximum of five stories above adjacent street(s)) east of 228th Avenue SE.

18.    See Chapter 21B.20 SMC for commercial uses subject to the commercial allocation cap.

19.    Commercial floor area may be permitted in the TC-D zone, provided it is developed consistent with the unified zone development principles set forth in SMC 21B.95.050.

20.    See SMC 21B.75.020 for calculations of affordable housing units related to allocated density.

(Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.25.040 Provisions to obtain additional (bonus) residential density or commercial development capacity.

(1) Bonus Residential Dwelling Units. SMC 21B.25.030 identifies the “maximum density” and “allocated density” for each Town Center zone. Projects may obtain additional density by complying with the affordable housing provisions set forth in Chapter 21B.75 SMC, by the incorporation of site amenities subject to TC-D zone residential dwelling unit transfers, and/or through the City’s transfer of development rights (TDR) program (subject to the adoption by the City council including the Town Center as a receiving site). Bonus provisions vary by zone. Specifically:

(a) TC-A Zones. Applicants may select from the following options for obtaining additional dwelling units, subject to the provisions below:

(i) Additional dwelling units are awarded from the Town Center’s available affordable housing bonus pool subject to compliance with affordable housing provisions set forth in Chapter 21B.75 SMC. Within each quadrant, the bonus pool units shall be distributed on a first come, first served basis, up to the maximum number of bonus pool units, provided the development does not exceed the density limit for the zone.

(ii) Additional dwelling units may also be awarded by the City from its TC-D residential density allocation pursuant to design criteria of subsection (2)(b) of this section.

(iii) Once the affordable housing bonus pool is exhausted, developments may obtain additional units through the City’s TDR program or through the provisions of subsection (2)(d) of this section.

(b) TC-B Zones. Additional dwelling units may be awarded from a combination of the following, up to the zone’s specified maximum density:

(i) Until the affordable housing bonus pool is exhausted, up to 25 percent of additional requested dwelling units may be taken from the bonus pool (subject to compliance with affordable housing provisions set forth in Chapter 21B.75 SMC). The bonus pool units shall be distributed on a first come, first served basis, provided the development does not exceed the density limits for the applicable zone.

(ii) Additional dwelling units may also be awarded by the City from its TC-D residential density allocation pursuant to design criteria of subsection (2)(b) of this section.

(iii) Additional dwelling units may be obtained through the City’s TDR program.

(c) TC-C Zones. Developments may obtain additional dwelling units only through the City’s TDR program, up to the zone’s specified maximum density.

(d) TC-D Zone. Developments may obtain additional dwelling units only through the City’s TDR program, up to the zone’s specified maximum density.

(e) TC-E Zone. Bonus dwelling units are not available in this zone.

See Figures 21B.25.040a and 21B.25.040b for clarification on the distribution of bonus dwelling units per zone.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.25.040a. Illustrating the base and maximum residential development allocations (by the number of dwelling units) for the Town Center zones. Note that the pool of dwelling units referenced in the upper box is available for distribution as bonus units.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.25.040b. Standards for allocating bonus dwelling units per Town Center zones.

(2) Bonus Commercial and Residential Development Capacity. SMC 21B.25.030 and Figure 21B.25.040c specify commercial floor area allocations by zones and sub-zones with an additional 120,000 square feet of commercial floor area available through bonus incentives. Subsections (2)(a) and (b) of this section provide the distribution and criteria for allocating bonus commercial floor area, respectively. Subsection (2)(b) of this section also includes provisions for allocating bonus residential dwelling units. Subsection (2)(c) of this section provides for the opportunity for additional commercial or residential development capacity through the City’s TDR program. Subsection (2)(d) of this section provides an option for the City to sell units from its TC-D residential density allocation to other properties within the Town Center.

(a) Distribution of Bonus Commercial Development Capacity.

	SUB-ZONE	ALLOCATION	MAXIMUM BONUS DISTRIBUTION1,2	MAXIMUM ALLOCATION WITH INCENTIVE1,2

	TC-A-1	200,000	50,000	250,000

	TC-A-2	90,000	22,500	112,500

	TC-A-3	90,000	22,500	112,500

	TC-A-4	70,000	17,500	87,500

	TC-A-5	20,000	5,000	25,000

	TC-D	10,000	2,500	12,500

	TOTAL	480,000	120,000	600,000

Table notes:

1.    Bonus floor area shall be distributed on a proportional basis per the maximum levels indicated above until all 120,000 square feet of the available bonus floor area has been distributed. If it becomes clear after five years of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter that due to development patterns, the bonus development capacity will not be utilized in any of the A zones or the D zone, the director may allow the allocation of bonus square feet of development to another part of the Town Center, provided the other provisions in this section are met.

2.    Bonus floor area allocation is subject to the design criteria specified in subsection (2)(b) of this section.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.25.040c. Illustrating the base commercial area allocations by zone and the pool of additional commercial area available for bonuses.

(b) Design Criteria for Awarding Bonus Commercial and Residential Development Capacity. Developments requesting available bonus commercial and residential development capacity (where awarded by the City from its TC-D residential density allocation) shall achieve a higher level of design performance than those specifically required in the Town Center development regulations. In order to qualify for bonus floor area or dwelling units, developments shall incorporate at least five of the development features listed below as determined in the unified zone development plan or other applicable review process.

(i) An extensive pedestrian network connected to the City’s trail system with lighting, landscaping, and other amenities.

(ii) Creative and effective vehicular circulation system that minimizes impacts of motorized vehicles on the pedestrian environment.

(iii) A unique multi-use central open space with special amenities and activities.

(iv) Increased use of structured parking.

(v) Enhanced off-street pedestrian routes that connect to the existing/planned trail system.

(vi) Special accommodation of transit services.

(vii) Extensive environmental restoration and/or tree retention.

(viii) Environmental certification of all structures (LEED, Built Green or other similar certification).

(ix) Enhanced commitment for affordable housing.

(x) Includes a use or uses that will expand the range of activities in the Town Center. Such use or uses might include a gym, dance studio or health center, cultural or performing arts facilities, educational facilities, artists’ studios, medical clinics, assembly areas, small business centers and similar uses that will encourage economic diversity, additional local services, pedestrian activity and/or support for other business or community activities.

(xi) Other significant features that exceed the development standards and regulations.

(xii) Low impact development site planning principles/practices that minimize stormwater runoff generated by the development. Such principles may include limited site disturbance, protection of natural drainage paths/features, minimize soil disturbance/compaction and/or restoration of compacted soils back to their original state.

The City shall maintain documentation of bonus floor area awarded in UZDP applications and which development features were utilized to obtain the bonus.

(c) Commercial and residential bonus development capacity may be accessed by use of TDR program. The ratio of TDR credit/amount of commercial or residential development shall be determined by the director and reported periodically to City council.

(d) The City is authorized to sell dwelling units from its TC-D residential density allocation to other properties zoned TC-A within the Town Center. The City shall limit the sale of dwelling units to projects that have a pending land use application within the Town Center at the time of closing of the sale. The price of such units shall be based upon a market analysis performed within 180 days of closing on the sale and the proceeds shall be used for public benefits within the Town Center. Each unit transferred from the TC-D zone into the TC-A zone shall be worth one dwelling unit for development in the TC-A zone. For example, if 10 dwelling units are purchased from the TC-D zone, they may be used to develop 10 dwelling units in the TC-A zone.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.25.040d. Examples of exemplary development worthy of consideration for commercial space allocation.

(Ord. O2020-497 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-429 § 9 (Att. I); Ord. 2011-310 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.25.050 Measurement methods.

The following provisions shall be used to determine compliance with this title:

(1) Street setbacks shall be measured from the existing edge of a street right-of-way or temporary turnaround, except as provided by SMC 21B.25.150;

(2) Lot widths shall be measured by scaling a circle of the applicable diameter within the boundaries of the lot; provided, that an access easement shall not be included within the circle; and

(3) Building height shall be measured from the average finished grade to the highest point of the roof. The average finished grade shall be determined by first delineating the smallest square or rectangle that can enclose the building and then averaging the elevations taken at the midpoint of each side of the square or rectangle; provided, that the measured elevations do not include berms. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.25.060 Minimum urban residential density.

Minimum density for residential development in the urban areas designated by the Comprehensive Plan shall be based on the tables in this chapter and adjusted as provided for in SMC 21B.25.090. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.25.070 Calculations – Allowable dwelling units, lots or floor area.

Permitted number of units, lots or floor area shall be determined as follows:

(1) The allowed number of dwelling units or lots (base density) shall be computed by multiplying the site area specified in SMC 21B.25.080 by the applicable allocated residential density number;

(2) The maximum density (unit or lot) limits shall be computed by adding the bonus or transfer units authorized by SMC 21B.25.040(1) or Chapter 21B.75 SMC to the allocated residential units computed under subsection (1) of this section;

(3) The allowed commercial floor area includes all leasable floor area designed for commercial tenant occupancy, including basements, mezzanines, and upper floors, if any, expressed in square feet and measured from the interior face of exterior walls. Structured or underground parking areas and areas housing mechanical equipment shall be excluded from commercial floor area calculations; and

(4) When calculations result in a fraction, the fraction shall be rounded to the nearest whole number as follows:

(a) Fractions of 0.50 or above shall be rounded up; and

(b) Fractions below 0.50 shall be rounded down. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.25.080 Calculations – Gross developable acreage.

(1) All site areas may be used in the calculation of allocated and maximum allowed residential density or project floor area except as outlined under the provisions of subsection (2) of this section.

(2) Submerged lands, landslide hazard areas and buffers, Category I through IV wetlands and buffers, and Type S, F, Np, and Ns streams and buffers shall not be credited toward allocated and maximum density or floor area calculations. Property used for new roadways, trails, stormwater facilities, or other features used by residents or the general public shall be counted as part of the site area for density calculations. Property transferred to the City for the construction of public roadways or other public feature shall be counted as part of the site area if the City and property owner reach such an agreement as part of the transfer. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.25.090 Calculations – Site area used for minimum density calculations.

Minimum density shall be determined by multiplying the minimum density (dwelling units/acre) as set forth in SMC 21B.25.030(1) by the gross developable acreage of the project site as forth in SMC 21B.25.080. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.25.100 Lot area – Prohibited reduction.

Any portion of a lot that was used to calculate compliance with the standards and regulations of this title shall not be subsequently subdivided or segregated from such lot. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.25.110 Measurement of setbacks.

(1) Street Setback. The street setback is measured from the street right-of-way or the edge of a surface improvement which extends beyond a right-of-way, whichever is closer to the proposed structure, to a line parallel to and measured perpendicularly from the street right-of-way or the edge of the surface improvement at the depth prescribed for each zone.

(2) Side Yard Setback. The side setback is measured from the side lot line adjacent to another private property to a line parallel to and measured perpendicularly from the side lot lines at the depth prescribed for each zone.

(3) Back Yard Setback. The back yard setback is measured from the rear lot line adjacent to another private property to a line parallel to and measured perpendicularly from the rear lot lines at the depth prescribed for each zone.

(4) Corner Lots. For corner lots, setbacks from all street rights-of-way shall conform to setback and other development standards for front yards. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.25.120 Setbacks – Specific building or use.

When a building or use is required to maintain a specific setback from a property line or other building, such setback shall apply only to the specified building or use. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.25.130 Setbacks – Modifications.

The following setback modifications are permitted:

(1) When the common property line of two lots is covered by a building(s), the setbacks required by this chapter shall not apply along the common property line; and

(2) When a lot is located between lots having nonconforming street setbacks, the required street setback for such lot may be the average of the two nonconforming setbacks or 60 percent of the required street setback, whichever results in the greater street setback. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.25.140 Setbacks – From regional utility corridors.

(1) In subdivisions and short subdivisions, areas used as regional utility corridors shall be contained in separate tracts.

(2) In other types of land development permits, easements shall be used to delineate such corridors.

(3) All buildings and structures shall maintain a minimum distance of five feet from property or easement lines delineating the boundary of regional utility corridors, except for utility structures necessary to the operation of the utility corridor or when structures are allowed by mutual agreement in the utility corridor. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.25.150 Setbacks – From alley.

Accessory structures and accessory dwelling units, where built on top of an existing garage, may be built to a property line abutting an alley, provided sufficient turning movement and emergency vehicle access are provided within the alley. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.25.160 Setbacks – Required modifications.

In addition to providing the standard street setback, a lot adjoining a half-street or designated arterial shall provide an additional width of street setback sufficient to accommodate construction of the planned half-street or arterial. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.25.170 Setbacks – Projections and structures allowed.

Provided, that the required setbacks from regional utility corridors of SMC 21B.25.140 and the sight distance requirements of SMC 21B.25.200 are maintained, structures may extend into or be located in required setbacks, as follows:

(1) Fireplace structures, bay or garden windows, enclosed stair landings, closets, or similar structures may project 30 inches into a street setback, provided such projections are:

(a) Limited to two per facade; and

(b) Not wider than 10 feet;

(2) Unenclosed porches and entry features may project six feet into the street setback;

(3) Eaves may not project more than:

(a) Twenty-four inches into a street setback;

(b) Eighteen inches across a lot line in a zero lot line development; provided, that any neighboring building and its associated eaves are 10 feet from the lot line;

(4) Fences may be allowed within front, side, or back yard setback per SMC 21B.30.180. For fences along an alley, see SMC 21B.30.260(3);

(5) Rockeries, retaining walls and curbs may project into or be located in any setback, provided these structures do not exceed a height of six feet from the property line grade;

(6) Fences located on top of rockeries, retaining walls or berms are subject to the requirements of SMC 21B.30.180;

(7) Telephone poles and lines; power poles and lines; cable TV and Internet lines; light and flagpoles; trellises not exceeding eight feet in height, not wider than 10 feet; culverts; underground water facilities; underground sewer facilities; and accessory facilities for the provision of utilities, such as drains, but excluding electrical and cellular equipment cabinets, and similar utility boxes and vaults;

(8) The following may project into or be located within a setback, but may only project into or be located within a setback area if an agreement documenting consent between the owners of record of the abutting properties is recorded with the King County department of records and elections prior to the installment or construction of the structure:

(a) Sprinkler systems, electrical and cellular equipment cabinets and other similar utility boxes and vaults;

(b) Security system access controls;

(c) Structures, except for buildings, associated with trails and on-site recreation spaces and play areas required in SMC 21B.30.060 and 21B.30.170 such as benches, picnic tables and drinking fountains; and

(d) Surface water management facilities as required by City of Sammamish stormwater management regulations;

(9) Mailboxes and newspaper boxes may project into or be located within street setbacks but will not be allowed in TC-A zones;

(10) Fire hydrants and associated appendages;

(11) Metro bus shelters may be located within street setbacks;

(12) Unless otherwise prohibited in SMC 21B.25.200 and Chapter 21B.45 SMC, freestanding and monument signs four feet or less in height, with a maximum sign area of 20 square feet, may project into or be located within street setbacks;

(13) Storm water vaults, structures, and conveyance systems, both above and below ground, provided such projections are:

(a) Consistent with setback, easement and access requirements specified in the current Surface Water Design Manual; or

(b) In the absence of said specifications, not within 10 feet of the property line for stormwater vaults and structures, and not within five feet of the property line for conveyance systems; and

(14) Building elements that (a) do not restrict pedestrian access to or views from the street into the setback area or (b) make a fire or safety hazard or adverse impact. Such elements may, in some conditions, include canopies, awnings, blade signs, and lights.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.25.170a. Retaining wall standards.

(Ord. O2016-429 § 9 (Att. I); Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.25.180 Height – Exceptions to limits.

The following structures may be erected above the height limits set forth in SMC 21B.25.030:

(1) An additional two feet in height is allowed for structures with green roofs occupying at least 50 percent of the area of the roof;

(2) Roof structures housing or screening elevators, stairways, tanks, rooftop wind generators, ventilating fans or similar equipment required for building operation and maintenance may exceed the height limit by up to 10 feet in the TC-A and

TC-B zones provided the design meets the provisions of SMC 21B.30.140;

(3) Fire or parapet walls may exceed the height limit by up to 10 feet in the TC-A and TC-B zones provided the design meets the building design provisions of Chapter 21B.30 SMC; and

(4) Skylights, flagpoles, chimneys, church steeples, crosses, spires, communication transmission and receiving structures, and similar structures. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.25.190 Lot divided by zone boundary.

When a lot is divided by a zone boundary, the following rules shall apply:

(1) When a lot contains both residential and nonresidential zoning, the zone boundary between the zones shall be considered a lot line for determining permitted building height and required setbacks on the site;

(2) When a lot contains residential zones of varying density:

(a) Any residential density transfer within the lot shall be allowed from the portion with the lesser residential density to that of the greater residential density;

(b) Compliance with these criteria shall be evaluated during review of any development proposals in which such a transfer is proposed; and

(3) Uses on each portion of the lot shall only be those permitted in each zone pursuant to Chapter 21B.20 SMC. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.25.200 Sight distance requirements.

Except for utility poles and traffic control signs, the following sight distance provisions shall apply to all intersections and site access points:

(1) A sight distance triangle area as determined by subsection (2) of this section shall contain no fence, berm, vegetation, on-site vehicle parking area, signs or other physical obstruction between 42 inches and eight feet above the existing street grade;

(2) The sight distance triangle at:

(a) A street intersection shall be determined by measuring 15 feet along both street property lines beginning at their point of intersection. The third side of the triangle shall be a line connecting the endpoints of the first two sides of the triangle; or

(b) A site access point shall be determined by measuring 15 feet along the street lines and 15 feet along the edges of the driveway beginning at the respective points of intersection. The third side of each triangle shall be a line connecting the endpoints of the first two sides of each triangle; and

(3) The director may require modification or removal of structures or landscaping located in required street setbacks, if:

(a) Such improvements prevent adequate sight distance to drivers entering or leaving a driveway; and

(b) No reasonable driveway relocation alternative for an adjoining lot is feasible.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.25.200a. The area of a sight distance triangle between 42 inches and eight feet above the existing street grade shall remain open.

(Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


Chapter 21B.30 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS – DESIGN REQUIREMENTS

Sections:

Article I. Site Planning Elements

21B.30.010    Purpose.

21B.30.020    Applicability.

21B.30.030    Site planning – Streetfront orientation.

21B.30.040    Site planning – Street layout.

21B.30.050    Site planning – Multiple building/large lot/multiple lot developments.

21B.30.060    Site planning – Pedestrian and nonmotorized vehicle circulation.

21B.30.070    Site planning – Internal vehicular circulation.

21B.30.080    Site planning – Side and back yard compatibility.

21B.30.090    Site planning – Open space.

21B.30.100    Site planning – Stormwater facility planning.

21B.30.110    Site planning – Street corners.

Article II. Site Design Elements

21B.30.120    Site design elements – Pedestrian amenities.

21B.30.130    Site design elements – Internal pedestrian paths.

21B.30.140    Site design elements – Mechanical equipment and service areas.

21B.30.150    Site design elements – Street design.

21B.30.160    Site design elements – Open space design.

21B.30.170    Site design elements – Trail corridors.

21B.30.180    Site design elements – Fences and retaining walls.

21B.30.190    Site design elements – Lighting.

Article III. Building Design

21B.30.200    Building design – Character.

21B.30.210    Building design – Architectural scale.

21B.30.220    Building design – Details.

21B.30.230    Building design – Exterior materials and colors.

21B.30.240    Building design – Blank walls.

21B.30.250    Building design – Parking garage design.

Article IV. Single-Family, Duplexes, and Cottages

21B.30.260    Single-family – Subdivision design.

21B.30.270    Single-family and duplexes – Lot and building design.

21B.30.280    Single-family – Cottage housing.

Article I. Site Planning Elements


21B.30.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to implement the goals and policies of the Town Center Plan by providing site planning, pedestrian access and amenities, and building design standards that:

(1) Orient development to adjacent streets and open spaces;

(2) Provide an attractive and connected system of sidewalks, trails, and pathways throughout the Town Center;

(3) Provide for compatibility and an appropriate transition between developments;

(4) Preserve and integrate sensitive natural features as an amenity for developments;

(5) Locate and design service elements and mechanical equipment to minimize impacts to the visual environment and surrounding uses;

(6) Provide a hierarchy of public and private open spaces in the Town Center;

(7) Emphasize human scale, fine detailing, quality building materials, and an inviting appearance in new buildings; and

(8) Provide a site layout and facilities that encourage pedestrian and bicycle access and reduce vehicle trip miles. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.30.020 Applicability.

The design requirements within this chapter shall apply to all development proposals within the Town Center unless otherwise noted. For example, some sections apply only to commercial and multifamily development, while others apply only to detached single-family development. Unless otherwise indicated, duplexes, apartments, and townhomes are considered multifamily residences. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.30.030 Site planning – Streetfront orientation.

The streetfront orientation standards for Town Center properties vary depending on the type of street(s) or public open space the property fronts on. These standards provide for five different street types: (1) pedestrian-oriented streets (and corridors) – which are intended to be lined with storefronts, (2) mixed-use streets – which could include storefronts or a combination of retail, office, civic, and/or residential uses with modest landscaped setbacks, (3) residential streets – which include residential streets with modest landscaped setbacks; (4) connector streets – which are treated similar to residential streets but with some extra flexibility; or (5) 228th Avenue SE – where trees and other landscaping elements should be emphasized along the streetfront.

Figure 21B.30.030a illustrates an example configuration of street types based on the vision illustration in the Town Center Plan. Pedestrian-oriented streets and mixed-use street designations shall be designated by the adopted unified zone development plans (see Chapter 21B.95 SMC) for TC-A zoned properties. The criteria for designating street types are set forth in SMC 21B.30.040(2). The standards herein thus apply to developments that front onto these street types.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.030a. An example configuration of street types in the Town Center based on the vision illustration in the Town Center Plan. Street alignments and designations are conceptual only and may be significantly revised during the unified zone development planning process.

(1) Properties Adjacent to Pedestrian-Oriented Streets and Corridors (Including Specified Park Edges).

(a) Buildings shall be located adjacent to (within three feet of) the sidewalk and feature a “pedestrian-oriented facade.” To meet this requirement, the ground floor facade shall incorporate the following characteristics:

(i) Transparent window area along a minimum of 75 percent of the ground floor facade between a height of two and eight feet above the ground;

(ii) The primary building entry shall be on this facade; and

(iii) Weather protection shall be provided at least six feet in depth (measured perpendicular to the building front) along at least 75 percent of the facade width.

(iv) If the building occupies a corner site, then the standards apply to both streets, unless the director finds such orientation not feasible.

Specific requests, exceptions, and departures to the above requirements:

(v) Buildings may be set back from the sidewalk where pedestrian-oriented space (as defined in SMC 21B.30.090(1)) or setback landscaping, as approved by the director, is included between the sidewalk and the building. In this case, no parking or vehicular circulation is allowed between the street right-of-way and the building.

(vi) For buildings fronting on two pedestrian-oriented streets, pedestrian entries shall be placed on both facades or at the street corner. Individual unified zone development plans (see Chapter 21B.95 SMC) may provide greater specificity and/or departures to this requirement.

(vii) Civic uses fronting on pedestrian-oriented streets warrant greater flexibility in the application of the transparency and weather protection requirements due to their unique disposition. However, alternative frontage treatments shall meet the following objectives, as determined by the director:

(A) The building emphasizes civic uses and includes a visually prominent element within the subject TC-A zone. The building shall be visually prominent from the street;

(B) The design treatment contributes to the desired pedestrian-oriented character of the TC-A zone;

(C) The design treatment provides continuous visual interest at the pedestrian scale along the adjacent sidewalk;

(D) There is a direct pedestrian connection between the building and the street; and

(E) There is no parking between the building and the street.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.030b. Pedestrian-oriented facade requirements.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.030c. Acceptable and unacceptable pedestrian-oriented facade examples.

(b) Surface parking lots shall be located behind buildings and away from pedestrian-oriented streets. A safe, attractive pathway consistent with SMC 21B.30.130 shall be provided between parking areas and the storefront and street. New surface parking lots adjacent to a pedestrian-oriented street are prohibited.

(c) Driveways for surface parking lots are prohibited on pedestrian-oriented streets unless the director determines there is no feasible or preferred option to meet the Town Center Plan’s goals and policies.

(d) Parking structures located adjacent to pedestrian-oriented streets shall be designed with commercial space fronting on the street consistent with standards herein. Such commercial space shall be at least 30 feet deep. Vehicular entrances and other ground floor openings of the parking garage are allowed but shall not count as transparent window area for the purpose of determining compliance with pedestrian-oriented street frontage requirements. Also see SMC 21B.40.150 for related parking structure provisions.

(e) There shall be a pedestrian walkway at least six feet wide between the parking area or garage and the public right-of-way.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.030d. Acceptable and unacceptable structured parking configurations along pedestrian-oriented streets.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.030e. Examples of civic building orientation.

(2) Properties Adjacent to Mixed-Use Streets.

(a) Buildings featuring nonresidential uses on the ground floor may be placed up to the edge of the sidewalk (unless otherwise noted herein) only if they feature a pedestrian-oriented facade (see Figure 21B.30.030b).

(b) All other developments shall feature at least 10 feet of landscaping or pedestrian-oriented space between the sidewalk or front property line and any building, parking area, storage, or service area. Exceptions and departures:

(i) See SMC 21B.25.170 for projections and structures allowed within the setback area.

(ii) Reduced building setbacks shall be permitted where the director determines that the proposed streetfront design will create an attractive, safe, and comfortable pedestrian environment. At least one of the following features shall be integrated into the design (or preferably a combination of features). Adopted unified zone development plans may include more detailed departure criteria.

(A) The building’s facade includes artwork or special treatment that adds interest to the streetscape;

(B) The building includes effective pedestrian cover and lighting; and/or

(C) The setback area includes an especially attractive treatment or feature, such as a fountain, water feature, special masonry, special material detailing, or specially designed raised planter area with stormwater function.

All buildings with setback departures shall meet minimum transparency requirements set forth in subsection (2)(h) of this section.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.030f. Building setback departure examples along a designated mixed-use street.

(c) Required Landscaping Types.

(i) Type II, III, or IV landscaping (or a combination thereof) is required between sidewalk and any building without pedestrian-oriented facade. However, landscaping types and species shall be utilized and maintained to maximize for views between windows and the street for safety, as determined by the director.

(ii) Type III landscaping is required between sidewalk and any parking lot.

(iii) Type I or Type II landscaping shall be used to screen any unwanted views, such as service areas or mechanical equipment, as determined by the director.

Alternative landscaping types may be considered for approval by the director, provided the project applicant can successfully demonstrate that the landscaping enhances the pedestrian environment along the sidewalk and effectively screens any unwanted views. Specific examples include:

(iv) Landscaping includes a colorful mixture of native and drought tolerant shrubs, perennials, and groundcover that provides four-season interest;

(v) Landscaping includes a distinctive mixture of trees, shrubs, and groundcover that do not meet specific landscaping type definitions, but meet the intent of the standards;

(vi) Terraced planting beds with a combination of shrubs, perennials, and groundcover; and

(vii) Landscape plan integrates pre-existing vegetation with new trees, shrubs, perennials, and groundcover.

(d) Buildings shall feature primary pedestrian entrances that face the street. Exceptions and departures:

(i) Buildings organized around a courtyard may feature entrances facing the courtyard provided there is clear pedestrian access between the courtyard and the street.

(ii) For corner buildings fronting on both a pedestrian-oriented street and mixed-use street, pedestrian entrances for nonresidential uses shall be placed on the pedestrian-oriented street, adjacent to the street corner, or both streets.

(e) Surface parking lots shall be located to the side or back of buildings. No more than 50 percent and not more than 130 linear feet of the ground floor street frontage of a lot may be occupied by parking lots or vehicular access areas. Parking lots with more than 64 feet of frontage on a street shall include an architectural feature (in addition to the required landscaping) that maintains visual continuity and interest along the street. Examples could include a landscaped trellis, decorative low wall (perhaps doubling as a sitting ledge), weather protection element, or architectural columns.

Exception: Adopted unified zone development plans may include provisions that provide for flexibility in the location and frontage design of temporary surface parking facilities in conjunction with the phasing plan. However, design elements shall be included along the sidewalk edge to mitigate impacts of the parking area on the street and enhance the pedestrian environment, even if the parking areas are only temporary.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.030g. Example architectural treatments that maintain visual continuity and interest along the street (all are from Mill Creek Town Center).

(f) Parking lots shall not be located adjacent to street corners. Parking garages may be located at street corners provided commercial uses occupy the ground floor at the street corner. The depth of the commercial space shall be at least 30 feet wide and deep.

(g) Structured parking facilities shall generally be concealed within or under buildings and away from streetfronts. Where in-structure parking is provided on the ground floor, for example, provide residential or retail uses along the streetfront, with parking facilities placed behind the uses and away from streets. Structured parking on upper floors along streets is discouraged, but may be allowed if the facade meets transparency standards herein and articulation standards set forth in SMC 21B.30.210. Except for required driveways, ground-level structured parking exposed to the street shall be prohibited, except where the design features that add visual interest to the pedestrian and minimize unwanted views into garage are included.

(h) Transparent windows and/or doors shall cover at least 50 percent of the ground floor facade of nonresidential uses between four and eight feet above the sidewalk. For residential uses, the standard for transparency is 15 percent and applies to all vertical surfaces of the facade facing the street as determined by the director. Reduced transparency proposals will be considered provided alternative design treatments create an interesting pedestrian experience and meet the goals and policies of the Town Center Plan and the adopted unified zone development plan. Examples could include, but are not limited to, a vertical trellis with vine plants, a mural, a series of terraced planting beds between the facade and the sidewalk, or distinctive building details that provide interest at a pedestrian scale. A blank wall with no windows and a simple evergreen planting screen will not be enough to meet the intent of the guidelines.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.030h. Acceptable and unacceptable development along mixed-use streets.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.030i. Acceptable and unacceptable parking lot configurations along mixed-use streets. Note that in the middle example, plantings between parking area and sidewalk should allow for visibility so that a driver and pedestrian can see one another and avoid a collision.

(3) Properties Adjacent to Residential Streets.

(a) Standards below apply to all development except for single detached dwelling units and duplexes. (See SMC 21B.30.260 through 21B.30.280 for related site planning standards.)

(b) Developments shall feature at least 10 feet of landscaping, pedestrian-oriented space, or a combination thereof, between the sidewalk or front property line and any building, parking area, or service area. Exceptions and departures:

(i) See SMC 21B.25.170 for projections and structures allowed within the setback area.

(ii) Reduced setbacks shall be permitted where the director determines that the proposed streetfront design will create an attractive, safe, and comfortable pedestrian environment and the privacy and comfort of residents are ensured. The finished ground floor elevation of dwelling units within 10 feet of the sidewalk should be elevated at least 30 inches above the level of the sidewalk to increase privacy of residents while enhancing the residents’ ability to observe activity on the street. For example, proposals for a reduced planting area width could include terraced planting beds along the sidewalk and/or special building detailing that adds special interest at a pedestrian scale. The far left image in Figure 21B.30.030h is a good example.

(c) Required landscaping types between the sidewalk and any building, parking area, or service area shall include:

(i) Type II, III, or IV landscaping (or a combination thereof) is required between sidewalk and any building. However, landscaping types and species shall be utilized and maintained to maximize for views between windows and the street for safety, as determined by the director;

(ii) Type III landscaping is required between sidewalk and any parking lot; and

(iii) Type I or Type II landscaping may be used to screen any unwanted views, such as service areas or mechanical equipment.

Alternative landscaping types will be considered provided the director determines that the landscaping achieves design and environmental goals and policies of the Town Center Plan, especially:

(iv) To maintain existing vegetated corridors and restore degraded corridors; and

(v) To create a hierarchy of public and private open spaces.

(d) Buildings shall feature pedestrian entrances that face the streets. Exceptions and departures:

(i) Buildings organized around a courtyard may feature entrances facing the courtyard provided there is clear pedestrian access between the courtyard and the street.

(ii) For street corner sites, the pedestrian entries may be placed on either or both streets.

(iii) Residential buildings with entrances that are visible from the street and which connect to the street by a clear and well-lit pathway are acceptable.

(e) Parking Standards.

(i) Parking lots (including structured parking of more than two vehicles) shall be located behind, to the side, back, or underneath buildings. No more than 50 percent of the street frontage shall be occupied by surface or structured parking. Exceptions may be considered by the director provided the building/parking area location takes advantage of unique site features and the design treatment along the street minimizes the visual impacts of parking areas on the streetscape and adds visual interest to pedestrians;

(ii) Where alleys are present, vehicular access shall be from the alley;

(iii) One shared driveway access is permitted from residential streets for each building. Additional driveways may be permitted at the director’s discretion where such driveways do not negatively impact the pedestrian environment; and

(iv) Individual private driveways and garages onto a public street are prohibited. Such private garages may be accessed off of internal private streets.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.030j. Acceptable and unacceptable development along residential streets.

(f) For residential uses, the standard for transparency is 15 percent and applies to all vertical surfaces of the facade facing the street as determined by the director.

(4) Properties Adjacent to Connector Streets. Properties shall comply with frontage standards for residential streets in subsection (3) of this section with the following exceptions:

(a) Developments are exempt from subsection (3)(d) of this section, which requires pedestrian building entries to face the street.

(b) Developments are exempt from parking lot location standards set forth in subsection (3)(e)(i) of this section provided the minimum required landscaping between the street and the parking area be increased from 10 to 20 feet in width and the parking areas are effectively screened from views from the right-of-way by trees and shrubs.

(5) Properties Adjacent to 228th Avenue SE.

(a) Developments shall adhere to at least one of the sets of standards, Options 1, 2, or 3 below (or any combination of the three).

Option 1: Developments shall maintain a landscaped buffer a minimum of 50 feet in width between the back of the sidewalk and any building or parking area. Pathways and pedestrian-oriented space are permitted within the designated landscape buffer area provided the buffer design meets the design criteria set forth below. The required landscape buffer shall include:

(i) Retention of existing trees and understory native vegetation to the extent practical and desirable as determined by the director; and

(ii) Infill landscaping shall be planted that will provide full screening of buildings (up to a height of 15 feet for multi-story buildings) and structures and also all signs, parking lots, and storage areas within five years.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.030k. Trees and landscaping should be the predominant feature along 228th Avenue SE within the Town Center.

Option 2: The facades, site layout and building orientation of developments shall adhere to the requirements for pedestrian-oriented streets, although one driveway (20 feet maximum width) is permitted if the director determines that no other access option is feasible.

Option 3: Developments shall be shielded from 228th Avenue SE by at least a 20-foot-wide strip of landscaping. At a minimum, the landscaping shall include:

(iii) One row of evergreen trees, no more than 10 feet or three-fourths the width of the tree crown at maturity, whichever is greater, on center. The mature height of these trees shall not be less than 40 feet. The tree planting shall consist of at least two different species;

(iv) One or more rows of evergreen trees and shrubs spaced no more than six feet apart. The shrubs shall have a mature height of at least eight feet and be at least 75 percent evergreen. The planting of small trees and shrubs shall feature at least three different species;

(v) Smaller shrubs and groundcover to completely cover the landscape strip within three years;

(vi) Irrigation to maintain the plantings as approved by the director; and

(vii) The plantings shall obscure at least 50 percent of the building and parking upon development occupancy and be designed to obscure 100 percent of all within 10 years.

(b) Additional Standards Applicable to All Options.

(i) Sign Standards along 228th Avenue SE.

(A) The only signs visible from 228th Avenue SE shall be either monument signs no taller than seven feet above grade or wall signs less than 30 square feet or 18 inches multiplied by the length of the front facade measured parallel to 228th Avenue SE (whichever is smaller);

(B) Except for wall signs on pedestrian-oriented facades built up to the sidewalk, all signs visible from 228th Avenue SE are limited to signs that advertise a commercial node or group of businesses rather than a single business; and

(C) For all other sign standards, see Chapter 21B.45 SMC.

(ii) Accessory use parking, service areas, mechanical equipment, storage areas, blank walls and outdoor sales areas shall not be visible from 228th Avenue SE.

(iii) Required landscaping may include parts of the public right-of-way if the director determines that pedestrian safety or access is not adversely impacted and the area is not needed for future public improvements. In this case, the project proponent shall be responsible for the irrigation and maintenance of the landscaping for the duration of the occupancy.

(iv) Single-purpose residential development shall be set back at least 50 feet from the public right-of-way.

(6) Orientation to a Public Park. The site development orientation to a public park for properties in the TC-A zones shall be determined during the unified zone development planning process.

For other properties adjacent to a park, orientation requirements shall be set by the director during the permit application review process. All of the following shall apply:

(a) Buildings with nonresidential uses on the ground floor facing a park with usable outdoor space shall feature transparent windows or entries over at least 50 percent of the ground floor facade of nonresidential uses between four and eight feet above the sidewalk.

(b) For residential uses, the standard for transparency is 15 percent and applies to all vertical surfaces of the facade facing the street as determined by the director.

(c) In lieu of subsection (6)(a) of this section, new development may be screened from the public park by at least 10 feet of Type I landscaping.

(d) Parking and service areas shall be screened from a public park by at least 15 feet of Type I landscaping. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A §  21B.30.100))


21B.30.040 Site planning – Street layout.

The Transportation Element of the Town Center Plan includes goals, policies, and actions aimed at producing a connected hierarchy of streets that accommodates desired Town Center land uses and human activities. Streets within the mixed-use nodes will be planned during the unified zone development planning process (see Chapter 21B.95 SMC) with reference to the Town Center Infrastructure Plan. Other streets may be planned either collectively or by individual property owners. The following provisions serve as guidelines for the unified zone development planning process and development standards if the roads are planned by a private property owner in the TC-B or TC-C zones.

Figure 21B.30.040a illustrates a conceptual layout of streets within the Town Center. While it is expected that the network of streets that is eventually built will differ from this configuration, the provisions below are intended to ensure that new streets meet the goals and policies of the Town Center Plan.

(1) Connected Network of Streets. Project applicants shall demonstrate to the director’s satisfaction how the proposed development meets the following policies of the Town Center Plan:

(a) Provide for a safe and connected network of roadways to serve Town Center development;

(b) Limit the placement of buildings or other development features that inhibit the desired connectivity of the Town Center circulation network; and

(c) Configure roadways to minimize impacts to environmentally critical areas.

(2) Provide for a Hierarchy of Streets. Provide for a hierarchy of streets, including:

(a) Connector roads that provide for automobile, service, bicycles, and pedestrian circulation throughout the Town Center. Development in the Town Center shall accommodate connector streets in the northwest, northeast, and southeast quadrants consistent with the goals and policies of the Town Center Plan.

(b) Pedestrian-oriented streets. TC-A-1, A-2, and A-3 zoned areas shall include designated pedestrian-oriented street segment, as determined by the City through the unified zone development planning process. Pedestrian-oriented streets are intended to be streets featuring continuous storefronts or plaza spaces, wide sidewalks, street trees, bioretention, and on-street parking. Designations for pedestrian-oriented streets could cover an entire street, a single block, or a portion of a block, depending upon the area. Pedestrian-oriented street designations are intended for areas where a concentration of pedestrian activity is desired. See SMC 21B.30.030(1) for related development frontage standards.

(c) Mixed-use streets, which are all other new streets besides connector roads and pedestrian-oriented streets within the TC-A zones. These are localized streets which should include generous sidewalks, street trees, bioretention, on-street parking (to the extent possible), and slow moving traffic.

(d) Residential streets, which are all other new streets besides connector roads within the TC-B and TC-C zones. These are localized streets within residential neighborhoods and should contain sidewalks, planting strips with street trees or bioretention, on-street parking on one or both sides, and slow moving traffic.

(e) Alleys are encouraged where useful to access parking or service areas.

(3) Maximum Block Dimensions for Individual Development. For an individual development, unless otherwise stated in a unified zone development plan, the maximum block length in any direction is 480 feet and maximum block perimeter is 1,400 feet. Departures are permitted in the TC-A zones subject to unified zone development plan approval and compliance with the Town Center Plan’s goals and policies. Departures for streets in all other Town Center zones shall be considered by the director based on one or more criteria listed below.

(a) Topography, right-of-way, existing construction or physical conditions, or other geographic conditions impose an unusual hardship on the project applicant, and an equivalent alternative which can meet the Town Center Plan’s goals and policies is available;

(b) A departure provides the opportunity for a public open space or other public amenity that would otherwise not be possible;

(c) The location of institutional or other similar uses requires a larger block size; and/or

(d) A private internal road(s) or pedestrian route may be used to meet cross circulation standards as determined by the director per the following:

(i) Adjacent properties do not rely on applicable roadway for primary vehicular access;

(ii) Roadway should be designed to look and function like public streets (planting strips, street trees, sidewalks, and parallel parking, where appropriate per the director); and

(iii) Roadway or pedestrian route shall be accessible to the public.

(4) Multimodal Transportation. The layout of streets shall include consideration of vehicular, transit, bicycle, and pedestrian circulation.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.040a. A desirable configuration of connected public and private streets and alleys in the Town Center. Also see the Town Center Infrastructure Plan for more guidance on the street layout for the areas west of 228th Avenue SE.

(Ord. O2016-429 § 10 (Att. J); Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A §  21B.30.110))


21B.30.050 Site planning – Multiple building/large lot/multiple lot developments.

(1) Large Lots with Multiple Buildings. All development permit applications for sites over two acres or with multiple buildings, except for single-family development, shall demonstrate that the project is based on a unifying site planning concept that meets the following criteria:

(a) Incorporates open space and landscaping as a unifying element;

(b) Where possible, incorporates screening, environmental mitigation, utilities, and drainage as positive elements (ex: create a “natural” open space or wet pond as a site feature to accommodate surface water runoff);

(c) Provides pedestrian paths or walkways connecting all businesses and the entries of multiple buildings;

(d) Incorporates low impact development measures and stormwater management systems as part of the site plan, unless infeasible. Participating in a multi-property stormwater facility or system will also satisfy this requirement; and


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.050a. Example of an attractive stormwater pond used as a site amenity.

(e) Building entrances shall not be focused around a central parking lot but be connected by a sidewalk/pathway system and/or open space(s).

The director may waive or modify this standard if it has been addressed within an adopted unified zone development plan.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.050b. The Juanita Village site plan exemplifying objectives for multiple building large lot development.

(Ord. O2016-429 § 10 (Att. J); Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A §  21B.30.120))


21B.30.060 Site planning – Pedestrian and nonmotorized vehicle circulation.

Project applicants shall be prepared to demonstrate that the proposal includes an integrated pedestrian circulation system that connects buildings, open space, and parking areas with the adjacent street sidewalk system, trail network, and adjacent properties. Specific standards:

(1) Trail Network. Developments shall provide off-street trails that meet the goals and policies of the Town Center Plan. The conceptual trails plan in Figure 21B.30.060a shall serve as an example of a desirable trail network within the Town Center. The trail network is to be accessible for pedestrians, cyclists, and other nonmotorized vehicles, although some sections may be for pedestrians only. Trails within the TC-A zones shall be planned during the unified zone development planning process (see Chapter 21B.95 SMC). Other trails may be planned either collectively or by individual property owners. The conceptual trails plan serves as a guideline for development in the TC-A zones (through the unified zone development planning process) and as a standard for development in the TC-B or TC-C zones. Alternative trail configurations may be considered, provided the project applicant can demonstrate that the proposed trail network is equal to or better than the conceptual trails plan in terms of trail connectivity, accessibility, scenic values, safety, and minimizing environmental impacts, as determined by the director. See SMC 21B.30.170 for trail corridor design standards.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.060a. Conceptual trail network for the Town Center.

(2) Access to Sidewalk. All buildings shall have clear pedestrian access to a public sidewalk. Where a use fronts onto two streets, access shall be provided from the road closest to the main entrance, but preferably from both streets. The walkway shall be at least six feet wide. The director may require wider pathways where significant pedestrian activity is expected. Exceptions will be granted for sites with existing physical constraints that prevent conformance with the standard, as determined by the director.

(3) Entrances. Developments shall adapt building access to site conditions for level, convenient, clearly identified pedestrian entry.

(4) On-Site Connections. Pedestrian paths or walkways connecting all businesses and the entries of multiple commercial buildings frequented by the public on the same development site shall be provided.

(5) Future Connectivity. For sites abutting vacant or underdeveloped land, the director may require new development to provide for the opportunity for future connection to its interior pathway system through the use of pathway stub-outs, building configuration, and/or parking lot layout. For example, a grid of pedestrian connections at intervals of 200 to 300 feet in the TC-A and TC-B zones would meet the intent statements above and be scaled consistent with the Town Center vision.

(6) Parking Lot Pathways. A paved walkway or sidewalk shall be provided for safe walking areas through surface parking lots greater than 180 feet long (measured either parallel or perpendicular to the streetfront). Walkways shall be provided for every three parking aisles or a distance of less than 180 feet shall be maintained between paths (whichever is more restrictive). Such access routes through parking areas shall be separated from vehicular parking and travel lanes by use of contrasting paving material which may be raised above the vehicular pavement. Speed bumps may not be used to satisfy this requirement.

(7) Americans with Disabilities Act. All pathways shall conform to the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.060b. Pedestrian paths in parking lots.

(Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A §  21B.30.130))


21B.30.070 Site planning – Internal vehicular circulation.

(1) Vehicular Circulation. Developments shall provide a safe and convenient network of vehicular circulation that connects to the surrounding road/access network and provides opportunities for future connections to adjacent parcels, where applicable.

(2) Internal Access Roads. Interior access roads in multi-building commercial or multifamily developments shall look and function more like public streets. This includes planting strips and street trees or bioretention on both sides, sidewalks on one or both sides, and perpendicular parking on one or both sides. The use of these features will be determined for developments in the TC-A zones through the unified zone development planning process (see Chapter 21B.95 SMC), depending on the size and configuration of the development and nature of uses and the circulation system. The director may approve innovative and special street designs, such as a woonerf people street, provided pedestrian safety and other street functions are achieved.

(3) Driveway Standards and Guidelines for All Nonresidential and Multifamily Development.

(a) Driveways to surface parking lots are prohibited on pedestrian-oriented streets, unless there are no alternatives, as determined in the unified zone development planning process;

(b) Driveways shall be restricted to no more than one entrance and exit lane per 300 lineal feet (lf) of frontage. Properties with less than 300 lineal feet of frontage shall be restricted to one entrance and exit lane for vehicular access. For corner properties, the separate street frontages shall be measured separately unless both streets are classified as an arterial or collector;

(c) Vehicular access to corner lots shall be located on the lowest classified roadway and as close as practical to the property line most distant from the intersection;

(d) Driveway widths shall be minimized per the director to reduce pedestrian conflicts. Driveway lanes shall be no wider than 11 feet per entry or exit lane unless the director determines wider lanes are appropriate for the use and that the design does not significantly impact vehicular circulation, stormwater runoff, public safety, pedestrian movement, or visual qualities; and

(e) All dedicated truck loading zones and service areas for commercial businesses, except for on-street loading zones and businesses under 20,000 square feet that use parking spaces for incidental deliveries, shall be in the back of the building and shall not face a pedestrian or residential street. For related standards on loading zones, see SMC 21B.40.070. (Ord. O2016-429 § 10 (Att. J); Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A §  21B.30.140))


21B.30.080 Site planning – Side and back yard compatibility.

The following specific requirements take precedence over the minimum setback requirements listed in SMC 21B.25.030.

(1) Specific Side and Back Yard Setback Requirements.

(a) TC-A Zones and Other Unified Zone Development Plan Sites.

(i) Zero feet for windowless fire walls up to 35 feet in height are allowed unless provisions for taller fire walls are allowed through a unified zone development plan.

(ii) Ten feet minimum for all other buildings and portions of buildings over 35 feet high unless otherwise permitted by an adopted unified zone development plan.

(b) Nonresidential and Multifamily Buildings in Any Town Center Zone Except TC-A. Minimum 15 feet for buildings up to 35 feet in height. One foot of additional setback is required for each foot of height over 35 feet (applied to building portions over 35 feet high). These side yard setbacks do not apply to lot lines that divide individual townhouse units within a building.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.080a. Setbacks for multifamily buildings in all zones except TC-A.

(2) Solar Access and Privacy for Multifamily Dwelling Units.

(a) Buildings or portions thereof containing dwelling units whose only solar access is from the applicable side of the building (facing towards the side property line) shall be set back from the applicable side or back property lines at least 15 feet;

(b) Transparent windows shall occupy no more than 10 percent of any facade within 15 feet of the side or back property line facing an adjacent property where either property’s residential privacy may be compromised; and

(c) Balconies shall be set back at least 10 feet from side or back yard property lines separating adjacent residential or mixed-use properties. Balconies or rooftop decks within 15 horizontal feet of a side or back property line shall utilize opaque guard rails to minimize impacts to privacy on adjacent properties.

The director may relax or waive these requirements where he or she finds that it achieves no practical increase in privacy. Consideration shall be given to the physical and development conditions on-site and any applicable recorded agreements between property owners.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.080b. Side yard and setbacks for solar access.

(3) Side and Back Yard Design Options for Nonresidential and Multifamily Development. Project applicants shall incorporate one or more of the following design options into the site’s design:

(a) Provide a zero lot line fire wall for commercial or mixed-use developments within unified zone development plan areas;

(b) Provide a shared internal roadway along the property line;

(c) Provide a trail or other internal pathway along the property line. This may be required in some areas to implement the Town Center Trails Plan;

(d) Retain existing native or desirable mature vegetation along the side or back property line. Chapter 21B.35 SMC standards for tree protection apply;

(e) Provide Type I, II, or III landscaping at least seven feet deep along side and back property lines. A fence may be included with the landscaping. This option may be used only where options (a), (b), or (c) above are not viable as determined by the director; and/or

(f) Other treatments that meet the intent of the standards as approved by the director. Factors that shall be considered in determining the appropriate treatment include views, applicable uses, connectivity, environmental conditions, and desired level of privacy;

(g) A rain garden or other low impact development measure may be incorporated as part of the treatments above.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.080c. Side and back yard design options for nonresidential and multifamily development.

(4) Table of Landscaped Separators and Buffers. In order to mitigate the impacts of new development on adjacent residential areas, public open spaces, and public trails, the required buffer standards listed in the table below are established. A new development use or facility listed in the first column shall include the buffer indicated in the cell in the applicable Adjacent Uses and Zoning column. The buffers are only required where the new and existing developments have a common property line (not properties across the street from one another). The director may modify the requirements if such a revision results in a public benefit and better condition for the adjacent properties. See subsection (5) of this section for buffers and setbacks for interface between TC-A and TC-C and TC-A and E zones. Other ways to provide separation include artistically treated walls and dense vegetated screens. Where this chart conflicts with another standard in these regulations, the widest dimension shall apply.

	PROPOSED NEW DEVELOPMENT	ADJACENT USES AND ZONING

	Existing Single-Family Residential and Undeveloped Land in the TC-C or TC-E Zones or Land Outside the Town Center1	Existing Multifamily, Mixed-Use, or Undeveloped Land in the TC-B Zones	Street Right-of-Way (Note: screening standards for specific street types noted in SMC 21B.30.030 take precedence over this chart)	Public Trail or Public Open Space

	USES AND ZONES	New Multifamily Residential	20 feet of Type I, Type II, or Type IV landscaping	None required	None required	10 feet of any type of landscaping

	New Townhouse, Cottage Housing, or Cluster Development	10 feet of Type I, Type II, or 20 feet of Type IV landscaping	None required	None required	None required

	New Commercial or Mixed-Use	20 feet of Type I landscaping	10 feet of Type I, Type II, or Type III landscaping	None required	None required with a pedestrian-oriented facade; 10 feet of Type I, Type II, or Type III landscaping without a pedestrian-oriented facade

	FACILITIES	Parking Area	20 feet of Type I or Type II landscaping	10 feet of Type I or Type II landscaping	10 feet of Type III landscaping	6 feet of Type I, Type II, or Type III landscaping

	Service, Loading, or Waste Management Areas	20 feet of Type I landscaping	15 feet of Type I or Type II landscaping	10 feet of Type I landscaping	6 feet of Type I or Type II landscaping

Notes:

1.    These buffers do not apply to new development that is adjacent to single-family residences in the TC-A or TC-B zones.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.080d. Side yard treatment examples. The left example would be appropriate in denser TC-A areas, while the middle image could represent an attractive treatment between multifamily developments in the TC-A or B zones. The right image shows a good example along the edge of the Town Center boundary or adjacent to pre-existing homes in the TC-C or E zones.

(5) Where TC-A zones are adjacent to either TC-C or E zoned properties, the following shall apply.

(a) Portions of buildings and structures, including parking garages, over 35 feet in height shall be set back from TC-C and E zoned properties at least 50 feet and shall be buffered by at least a 20-foot-wide strip of Type I, II or IV landscaping if there is not another improvement, such as a roadway or parking lot between the structure and the building, which requires a different form of buffering;

(b) Storage areas, service areas, activities and site elements that could cause significant adverse glare, shading, noise or odor impacts to residential properties in the TC-C or E zoned properties shall be set back at least 50 feet from TC-C and E zoned properties and shall be buffered by at least a 20-foot-wide strip of Type I, II or IV landscaping if they are within 60 feet of the TC-C or E zoned properties. Parking lots and standard mechanical equipment for heating and cooling of buildings shall not be considered to cause adverse impacts but service areas for large trucks and exhaust from restaurants may be considered to cause such impacts;

(c) All structures in TC-A zoned properties over 10 feet in height and all parking lots shall be set back from TC-C and E zoned properties and buffered by at least a 20-foot-wide strip of Type I, II or IV landscaping;

(d) Trails and parks may be located adjacent to TC-C and E zoned properties. Active recreation areas such as sports fields and children’s play area shall be buffered by at least a 10-foot-wide strip of Type I, II or IV landscaping unless the City and adjacent property owners agree that such landscaping is not necessary;

(e) Public and private roadways may be located adjacent in TC-A zoned properties adjacent to TC-C and E zoned properties. The director may require that the roadway be buffered from the TC-C and E zoned properties if (s)he determines that such a roadway will cause significant adverse impacts to existing residences. The director may also require additional landscaping to either side of the roadway to mitigate significant adverse impacts to properties in TC-C or E zones; and

(f) Land areas in TC-A zones adjacent to TC-C and E zones that are left unimproved after development of the A zone property shall be landscaped with Type I, II or IV landscaping as described in SMC 21B.35.030. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A §  21B.30.150))


21B.30.090 Site planning – Open space.

(1) Intent and Explanation of Terms. The Sammamish Town Center Plan Policy OS-1 calls for “a hierarchy of interconnected public and private open spaces, ranging from an active town centralized plaza or town square to less formal gathering areas, quiet residential courts, and natural open spaces.” To implement this directive, this section and SMC 21B.30.160 establish standards for several different types of open spaces in different settings within the Town Center. This section establishes requirements for the amounts and location of open spaces, and SMC 21B.30.160 sets standards for the characteristics and elements of each type of required open space. To facilitate the application of these two sections, the following terms are employed.

(a) “Pedestrian-oriented open space” means publicly accessible spaces that enliven the pedestrian environment by providing opportunities for outdoor dining, socializing, relaxing, etc., and visual amenities that contribute to the unique character of the Town Center. Pedestrian-oriented open spaces are often, but not necessarily, associated with commercial and civic uses where pedestrian activity is particularly encouraged.

(b) “Usable open space” means space that accommodates human activity, generally featuring some pavement, lawn area, or element such as a play area that allows for movement. Gardens with pathways for strolling and trails or walkways may be considered usable open space. Usable open space may be either public or private. Steep slopes, critical areas, and vehicle circulation and parking areas shall not be considered usable open space.

(c) “Common open space” means spaces that are available to all the residents in a particular development. Types of common open space include landscaped courtyards or decks, front porches, gardens with pathways, children’s play areas, or other multi-purpose recreational and/or green spaces.

(d) “Indoor recreation area” means a room or indoor space where formal or informal recreational activities, such as exercise, classes, reading, meetings, board games, etc., can take place.

(e) “Landscaped open space” means areas featuring primarily vegetation or special pavements and outdoor furniture. Pedestrian-oriented, usable, common and multifamily open space may also be considered landscaped open space provided the landscaped elements meet the standards set forth in Chapter 21B.35 SMC. Calculations to determine compliance with landscaped area standards shall apply to development on each lot. Public rights-of-way or alleys shall not count as lot area in the calculations. Critical areas, if within the applicable lot, shall be counted as landscaped open space in the calculations.

(f) “Multifamily open space” means private open space primarily, but not necessarily, exclusively for the use of the development’s residents. Multifamily open space may be in the form of balconies, decks, common open space (courtyards or gardens, etc.), or interior open space as noted in subsection (3) of this section.

(g) “Public open space” means publicly accessible open space on public land or land that has been officially dedicated to open space for public use through an easement or other agreement.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.090a. Examples of different types of open spaces.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.090b. Examples of pedestrian-oriented open space, common open space, and landscaped open space.

(2) Open Space Requirements for Nonresidential Uses.

(a) All nonresidential development, including commercial portions of mixed-use development, shall provide pedestrian-oriented open space as determined in the unified zone development planning process described in Chapter 21B.95 SMC. For nonresidential developments in the TC-A-4 and A-5 zones, the pedestrian open space shall be at least equal to one percent of the net developable site area plus one percent of the gross nonresidential building floor area, exclusive of structured parking; and

(b) All other portions of the site not occupied by building, pavement for circulation or human activity, or pedestrian open space shall be landscaped open space meeting the requirements in Chapter 21B.35 SMC.

(3) Open Space Requirements for Multifamily Uses (Excluding Townhouses and Cottage Housing).

(a) The intent of these standards is to provide a variety of private and common open spaces to serve the development. All multifamily development, including multifamily portions of mixed-use development, shall provide open space at least equal to 10 percent of the building living space, not counting corridors, lobbies, etc. For buildings that are adjacent to or across the street from a public park, the minimum required open space shall be five percent of the livable floor area of dwelling units within each building. The required open space may be provided in a combination of the following ways.

(i) One hundred percent of the required open space may be in the form of common open space available to all residents and meeting the requirements of SMC 21B.30.160(3)(a). Common open space may be in the form of courtyards, front porches, patios, play areas, gardens or similar spaces;

(ii) Up to 50 percent of the required open space may be provided by private or common balconies meeting the requirements of SMC 21B.30.160(3)(b);

(iii) Up to 50 percent of the required open space may be provided by shared roof decks located on the top of buildings which are available to all residents and meet the requirements of SMC 21B.30.160(3)(c); and/or

(iv) Up to 25 percent of the required open space may be provided by common indoor recreation areas meeting the requirements of SMC 21B.30.160(3)(d).

(b) All other portions of the site not occupied by building, pavement for circulation or human activity, or pedestrian open space shall be landscaped open space meeting the requirements in Chapter 21B.35 SMC. For those multifamily developments not within a unified zone development plan area, the minimum amount of landscaped open space is 30 percent of the net developable site area. Pathways and common open spaces as described in SMC 21B.30.160(3) may be counted towards the 30 percent site area requirement, upon the director’s approval.

(4) Open Space Requirements for Townhouses. Townhouses and other ground based multifamily residential units with individual exterior entries shall provide open space at least equal to 10 percent of the building living space, not counting automobile storage. The required open space may be provided by one or more of the following ways:

(a) Usable on-site open space that has minimum dimensions of at least 12 feet on all sides and is configured to accommodate human activity such as outdoor eating, gardening, toddler play, etc.;

(b) Balconies, decks and/or front porches meeting the requirements of SMC 21B.30.160(3)(b); and/or

(c) At least 50 square feet of landscaped open space meeting the requirements of Chapter 21B.35 SMC in the front yard of the house.

(5) Open Space Requirements for Detached Single-Family Housing and Duplexes. See the requirements set forth in SMC 21B.30.270.

(6) Open Space Requirements for Cottage Housing. See the requirements set forth in SMC 21B.30.280.

(7) Maintenance and Dedication of Cooperative Public Open Space.

(a) Public open space that is dedicated to the City as a park shall meet the following criteria:

(i) The dedicated area is at least one acre in size, except when adjacent to an existing or planned public park;

(ii) The dedicated land provides one or more of the following:

(A) Shoreline access;

(B) Regional trail linkages;

(C) Habitat linkages;

(D) Recreation facilities; or

(E) Heritage sites.

(iii) The dedicated area is located within 1,200 feet of the project site.

(b) Unless the open space is dedicated to the City pursuant to subsection (7)(a) of this section, maintenance of any recreation space retained in private ownership shall be the responsibility of the owner or other separate entity capable of long-term maintenance and operation in a manner acceptable to the City. There shall be a public easement or other instrument to ensure continued public access.

(8) Children Play Areas. The TC-A-1, A-2, and A-3 zones shall include at least one children’s play area, play fountain, or other facility. This area should include active recreation opportunities for all age groups (e.g., sports courts). Size and location will be determined during the unified zone development planning process.

(9) Open Space Tracts in Clustered Developments. Any open space resulting from lot clustering shall not be altered or disturbed except as specified on recorded documents creating the open space. Such open spaces may be retained under ownership by the subdivider, conveyed to residents of the development, or conveyed to a third party. When access to the open space is provided, the access shall be located in a separate tract. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A §  21B.30.160))


21B.30.100 Site planning – Stormwater facility planning.

(1) Policy Intent. This section is intended to implement the Town Center Plan natural systems section in Chapter IV by directing project proponents to conform to Town Center Stormwater Master Plan and unified zone development plan recommendations, employing low impact development techniques, and where feasible, treating stormwater management facilities as visual, open space and natural resources.

Acknowledging that not all low impact development techniques will be effective on all sites, the intent of these guidelines is to achieve what is possible to improve stormwater conditions on site in an integrated manner coordinated with other stormwater management efforts.

(2) Adherence to Sub-Basin Plans and Unified Zone Development Plan. Project proponents shall demonstrate that their proposals adhere to the recommendations of the applicable Stormwater Sub-basin Plan and Stormwater Master Plan for the Town Center.

(3) Low Impact Development (LID) Requirements. The project shall adhere to the low impact development standards and requirements in the Stormwater Master Plan for the Town Center.

(a) Rain gardens and similar landscape measures to treat stormwater may be counted as part of landscaped open space, pedestrian-oriented space, and common open space for the purpose of meeting the requirements of SMC 21B.30.090; provided, that the director finds that they are located and designed to enhance the visual, pedestrian-oriented or residential qualities of the development as well;

(b) Green roofs may be counted for up to 50 percent of the required multifamily residential open space required in SMC 21B.30.090(3) if there is access for residents to the roof and elements, such as seating to allow them to enjoy the space;

(c) Stormwater ponds meeting the requirements of subsection (4) of this section may be counted as landscaped area in meeting the requirements of SMC 21B.30.090; and

(d) Areas where native vegetation is retained may be counted as landscaped area in meeting the requirements of SMC 21B.30.090.

(4) Visual Standards for Stormwater Management Ponds and Biofiltration Swales and Other Stormwater Management Features (Reference Chapter 21B.35 SMC).

(a) Intent. To integrate detention ponds, grass swales and other features into site design while maintaining biofiltration efficiency.

(b) Where possible, integrate biofiltration swales and ponds into the overall site design. Methods of filtration are listed below in order of preference:

(i) Locate biofiltration swales, ponds, or other approved stormwater management systems as part of a landscape feature such as a screen, natural area or garden. Trees may be planted near the grass swale as long as they do not substantially shade the grass within the swale. The swale or pond should be designed so it does not impede pedestrian circulation or shared parking between two or more properties;

(ii) Where topography is favorable, locate the biofiltration swale, wet pond, or other approved stormwater management system within the paved parking or service area. The swale or pond should be landscaped as part of the required internal parking lot landscaping and oriented so it does not impede pedestrian circulation; or

(iii) Locate the swale along the front edge of the property. Incorporate landscaping and screening to visually enhance the swale without reducing maintainability and sun exposure; and

(iv) The incorporation of landscaping into biofiltration swale designs is encouraged if the biofiltration swale is located and/or designed as a positive landscaping feature with approved design and plant materials. Where appropriate, shade tolerant plants should be used.

(v) The sloped edges of unfenced bioswales shall be no greater than two and one-half percent. Where slopes are greater than two and one-half percent, the swale shall be fenced or vegetated to avoid safety hazards.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.100a. Examples of integrating stormwater management systems into development.

(Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A §  21B.30.170))


21B.30.110 Site planning – Street corners.

(1) Street Corner Treatments. All development proposals located at street corner sites in the TC-A-1, A-2, and A-3 zones shall include at least one of the design treatments described below (in order of preference, subsection (1)(a) of this section being the highest):

(a) Locate a building on the street corner (preferably with a corner entry); or

(b) Provide pedestrian-oriented space at the corner leading directly to a building entry or entries.

If the director determines that subsection (1)(a) or (b) of this section is not feasible, and if the site is not on a pedestrian-oriented street, provide for one of the following options:

(c) Install substantial landscaping: At least 30 feet by 30 feet or 900 square feet of ground surface area with trees, shrubs, and groundcover in a decorative manner that provides four-season interest. The space shall include a special architectural element, such as a trellis, to add identity or demarcation of the area. Such an architectural element may have a sign incorporated into it (as long as such sign does not identify an individual business or businesses); or

(d) Other treatments will be considered, provided they meet the intent of the standards and guidelines as determined by the director.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.110a. Street corner treatment.

Note: Ensure that “sight triangles” are maintained for visibility from vehicles. See SMC 21B.25.200. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A §  21B.30.180))

Article II. Site Design Elements


21B.30.120 Site design elements – Pedestrian amenities.

(1) Durable Pedestrian Furniture. Pedestrian furniture provided in public spaces shall be made of durable, vandal- and weather-resistant materials that do not retain rainwater and can be reasonably maintained over an extended period of time.

(2) Streetscape Amenity Requirements for Pedestrian-Oriented and Mixed-Use Streets. Streetscape amenities shall be included along all designated pedestrian-oriented streets and mixed-use streets. For each 100 cumulative lineal feet of pedestrian-oriented street frontage, at least three of the desired amenity elements listed below shall be included. At least one element shall be seating. Along designated mixed-use streets, at least two amenity elements shall be included unless otherwise noted. The type, location, and design of chosen amenities shall contribute to a well-balanced mix of features on the street, as determined by the director. All amenities below are valued at one amenity element unless otherwise noted. Desired amenities include:

(a) Seating. Each six feet of seating area or four fixed individual seats count as one amenity element. Seating areas should generally be located in areas that provide views of pedestrian activity. Seating ledges shall be at least 12 inches wide to qualify;

(b) Trash Receptacles. To qualify as an amenity, at least one trash receptacle is needed per 100 linear feet of sidewalk.

(c) Permanent landscaping elements including planting beds, large containers, and other landscaping elements that add visual interest to the sidewalk as determined by the director;

(d) Special pavement patterns and/or tree grates;

(e) Bicycle racks;

(f) Informational kiosks (worth two amenity elements);

(g) Transit shelters (worth two amenity elements unless provided by applicable transit agency);

(h) Decorative clocks (worth two amenity elements);

(i) Artwork as approved by the arts commission (worth two amenity elements);

(j) Special lighting; and

(k) Other amenities that meet the intent as determined by the director.

Features above that are publicly funded, already required by code, and/or obstruct pedestrian movement shall not qualify as an amenity to meet this standard.

(3) Seating Requirement. For developments in TC-A and B zones with residential units not on pedestrian-oriented or mixed-use streets, provide one bench or seating area for every 600 feet of street frontage. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A §  21B.30.200))


21B.30.130 Site design elements – Internal pedestrian paths.

(1) Internal Pathway Standards and Guidelines.

(a) All internal pedestrian walkways shall have at least six-foot-wide unobstructed walking surfaces. Walkways adjacent to a building entrance or pedestrian-oriented facade shall be at least 12 feet wide from the building to the face of the curb.

(b) Where walks are adjacent to parking areas, they shall be set back or widened so that overhanging parked vehicles do not narrow the pathway width to less than six feet. See also subsection (2)(b) of this section for landscaping requirements.

(2) Landscaping along Pathways.

(a) Pedestrian walks shall be separated from structures at least three feet for landscaping, except where the adjacent building features a pedestrian-oriented facade or other treatment, such as the use of a trellis with vine plants on wall or sculptural, mosaic, bas-relief artwork, or other decorative wall treatments, that adds visual interest at a pedestrian scale that is acceptable to the director.

(b) All internal walkways along pedestrian-oriented building fronts and walkways on the edge of parking areas shall feature at least one street tree (on average) for every 30 feet of walk. Trees may be sited to maintain entry sign visibility.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.130a. Provide landscaping between walkways and buildings that do not comply with pedestrian-oriented facade requirements.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.130b. Acceptable and unacceptable internal walkways.

(Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A §  21B.30.210))


21B.30.140 Site design elements – Mechanical equipment and service areas.

(1) Service Enclosure Space Standards. The storage space for the collection of trash and recyclables shall be provided on-site. The applicant shall demonstrate to the director’s satisfaction that the service area is adequate to handle the anticipated trash containers and equipment and does not conflict with the primary pedestrian entrance to the building. The following provisions in subsections (1)(a) through (d) of this section provide guidance for trash and service space:

(a) One and one-half square feet per dwelling unit in multiple-dwelling developments except where the development is participating in a county-sponsored or approved direct collection program in which individual recycling bins are used for curbside collection;

(b) Two and one-half square feet per every 1,000 square feet of building gross floor area in office, educational and institutional developments;

(c) Four square feet per every 1,000 square feet of building gross floor area in manufacturing and other nonresidential developments; and

(d) Six square feet per every 1,000 square feet of building gross floor area in retail developments.

(2) Service Element Location Standards and Guidelines.

(a) Service and storage areas shall be located to minimize impacts on the pedestrian environment and adjacent uses. Such areas may not be located in any required setback areas.

(b) Multifamily Service Element Location.

(i) Service elements should generally be concentrated and located where they are accessible to service vehicles and convenient for tenant use. For buildings with more than 20 dwelling units, the trash/service area shall be located within the building.

(ii) Collection points located in separate buildings/structures or outdoors shall be no more than 200 feet from a common entrance of a residential building.

(c) For nonresidential uses, storage space may be allocated to a centralized collection point. Nonresidential buildings greater than 30,000 gross square feet of floor area shall provide a trash/service area within the building.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.140a. Service element location.

(3) Outdoor Service Enclosure Standards.

(a) Service areas visible from the street, pathway, pedestrian-oriented space or public parking area (alleys are exempt) shall be enclosed and screened around their perimeter by a solid wall or fence at least six feet high.

(b) Service enclosures should be designed consistent with the architecture of the primary structures. This includes the use of similar material and/or detailing. Acceptable materials include masonry, ornamental metal or wood, or some combination of the three.

(c) Trash and recyclable collection points shall be identified by signs not exceeding two square feet.

(d) If the area is adjacent to a public or private street, sidewalk, or internal pathway or within 10 feet of an adjacent property, it shall be fully enclosed, including a roof, with access away from pedestrian circulation patterns.

(e) Service enclosures shall have gate openings at least 12 feet wide for haulers. In addition, the gate opening for any building or other roofed structure used primarily as a collection point shall have a vertical clearance of at least 12 feet.

(f) Weather protection of recyclables shall be ensured by using weather-proof containers or by providing a roof over the storage area.

(g) Collection points shall be located and configured so that the enclosure gate swing does not obstruct pedestrian or vehicle traffic, or does not require that a hauling truck project into any public right-of-way.

(h) The architectural design of any outdoor collection point enclosure shall be consistent (in terms of design details, materials, articulation, color, and/or finish) with the design of the primary building and/or site structures. Metal fencing, especially chain link fencing, is not acceptable.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.140b. Service enclosure example – note the use of materials similar to the nearby building.

(i) Only recyclable materials generated on site shall be collected and stored at such collection points. Except for initial sorting of recyclables by users, all other processing of such materials shall be conducted off site.

(j) The director may waive or modify specific storage space and collection point requirements set forth in this section if the director finds, in writing, that an alternate recycling program design proposed by the project applicant meets the needs of the development and provides an equivalent or better level of storage and collection for recyclables.

(4) Roof-Mounted Mechanical Equipment and Other Systems.

(a) Roof-mounted mechanical equipment should be located so as not to be visible from the street, public open space, parking areas, and from the ground level of adjacent properties. Screening features should utilize similar building materials and forms to blend with the architectural character of the building. SMC 21B.25.180 provides exceptions to height limits for any screening necessary to hide or enclose roof-mounted equipment.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.140c. Options for reducing visibility of roof-mounted equipment.

(b) Locate and screen utility meters, electrical conduit, and other service and utilities apparatus so as not to be visible from adjoining and nearby streets and minimize visual impacts from private internal streets, open spaces, and pedestrian walkways. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A §  21B.30.220))


21B.30.150 Site design elements – Street design.

(1) Street Design Standards. The streets shall be designed consistent with the goals and policies of the Town Center Plan, the adopted street standards, and the development principles of the Town Center Infrastructure Plan. To meet this standard, project applicants shall use the figures below, reproduced from the Town Center Plan, reproduced as Figure 21B.30.150a, as a guide to determining the appropriate sidewalk width, landscaping elements, and roadway width and configuration until the City develops a more specific set of roadway standards applicable to the Town Center. During the permit application review process, the City will determine the appropriate cross-section(s) for the road(s) being proposed. Some flexibility to the design of the streets may be granted by the City based on unique environmental challenges or where alternative designs can better meet the Town Center Plan’s goals and policies.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.150a. Conceptual street cross-sections for the Town Center’s roads. Colors next to each cross-section match those of roadway(s) shown in the conceptual plan to the left.

(2) Crosswalks and Driveways.

(a) Crosswalks are required when a walkway crosses a paved area accessible to vehicles.

(b) Project applicants shall continue the sidewalk pattern and material across driveways.

(3) Traffic Calming. Street design should include traffic calming measures as indicated in the Town Center Infrastructure Plan, unified zone development plan (see Chapter 21B.95 SMC), and/or other applicable street design standards as determined by the City. Examples include raised crosswalks, traffic circles, and medians, where directed by the director to increase pedestrian and vehicular safety, reduce traffic speeds, ease congestion, and enhance streetscapes.

(4) Low Impact Development. Street design shall include low impact development measures as indicated in the Town Center Infrastructure Plan, Town Center Stormwater Master Plan, unified zone development plan, and/or other applicable street design standards as determined by the City.

(5) Multimodal Transportation. The planning and design of streets shall include consideration of vehicular, transit, bicycle, and pedestrian circulation. (See Figure 21B.30.060a, Conceptual trail network for the Town Center.) (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A §  21B.30.230))


21B.30.160 Site design elements – Open space design.

(1) General Requirements for All “Common,” “Pedestrian-Oriented” and “Public Open Space” Open Space Design Criteria. The design of all “common,” “pedestrian-oriented” and “public open space” required per SMC 21B.30.090 shall meet the following design criteria to the director’s satisfaction:

(a) All open spaces shall be physically and visually accessible from the adjacent street or major internal pedestrian route. Open spaces shall be in locations that the intended user(s) can easily access and use, rather than simply left-over or undevelopable space in locations where very little pedestrian traffic is anticipated;

(b) The grade and configuration of the open space shall be suitable to recreational activities (e.g., locate play areas on relatively level ground and picnic areas in sunny locations);

(c) The open space shall feature amenities and activities that encourage pedestrians to use the space. Spaces larger than 2,500 square feet should include a combination of active and/or passive recreational uses that attracts a variety of people. “Active” features could include, for example, a trail, sports court, or children’s play area. “Passive” features could include an informal garden, fountain, sculpture, nature viewing area, picnic area, or seating. No use shall be allowed within the open space that adversely affects the aesthetic appeal or usability of the open space;

(d) Project applicants shall demonstrate how the space incorporates crime prevention through environmental design (CPTED) principles, including:

(i) Natural surveillance, which occurs when parks or plazas are open to view by the public and neighbors. For example, a plaza that features residential units with windows looking down on space means that the space has good “eyes” on the park or plaza;

(ii) Lighting levels according to SMC 21B.30.190 or as noted in this section;

(iii) Landscaping and Fencing. Avoid configurations that create dangerous hiding spaces and entrapment conditions;

(iv) Entrances should be prominent, well lit, and highly visible from inside and outside of the space;

(v) Maintenance. Open spaces shall utilize commercial grade materials that will last and require minimal maintenance costs. Walls, where necessary, shall be designed and treated to deter graffiti. Use and maintain landscape materials that reduce maintenance cost and maintain visibility, where desired, although some maintenance for landscaping is expected;


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.160a Illustrating CPTED principles.

(e) Covered open space, such as a picnic shelter or covered sports court, is encouraged;

(f) Landscape elements shall also serve as a stormwater quality improvement function and as rain gardens. See SMC 21B.30.100(4) and Chapter 21B.35 SMC;

(g) In order to qualify as part of required open space, including multifamily open space, an open space shall conform to the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA); and

(h) Existing trees and significant vegetation shall be maintained in open space areas unless an alternate landscaping plan for such areas is required or approved or unless planned active recreational activities would conflict with existing vegetation. In case of conflicts with planned activities, the design should strike a balance, as determined by the director, where it maximizes active recreation opportunities while trying to maintain the most important stands of trees and vegetation.

(2) Pedestrian-Oriented Open Space Design Criteria. These spaces, as required per SMC 21B.30.090, are intended to be publicly accessible spaces that enliven the pedestrian environment by providing (1) opportunities for outdoor dining, socializing, and relaxing and (2) visual amenities that contribute to the unique character of the Town Center. Design criteria for pedestrian open space:

(a) Sidewalk area, where widened beyond minimum requirements, shall count as pedestrian-oriented open space. The additional sidewalk area may be used for outdoor dining and temporary display of retail goods. The standards in subsections (2)(b) and (c) of this section shall not apply to sidewalks, where used as usable open space;

(b) The following design elements are required for pedestrian-oriented open space:

(i) Pedestrian access to the abutting structures from the street, private drive, or a nonvehicular courtyard;

(ii) Paved walking surfaces of either concrete, porous concrete or approved unit paving;

(iii) Pedestrian-scaled lighting (no more than 14 feet in height) at a level averaging at least two foot-candles throughout the space. Lighting may be on site or building-mounted lighting;

(iv) At least three feet of seating area (bench, ledge, etc.) or one individual seat per 60 square feet of plaza area or open space. This provision may be relaxed or waived where there are provisions for movable seating that meet the intent of the standard as determined by the director;

(v) Spaces shall be positioned in areas with significant pedestrian traffic to provide interest and security – such as adjacent to a building entry; and

(vi) Landscaping that adds visual or seasonal interest to the space;


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.160b. Illustration of key pedestrian-oriented open space standards.

(c) The following features are encouraged in pedestrian-oriented space:

(i) Pedestrian amenities such as a water feature, drinking fountain, and/or distinctive paving or artwork;

(ii) Provide pedestrian-oriented facades on some or all buildings facing the space;

(iii) Consideration of the sun angle at noon and the wind pattern in the design of the space;

(iv) Transitional zones along building edges to allow for outdoor eating areas and a planted buffer;

(v) Movable seating;

(vi) Incorporation of water treatment features such as rain gardens or the use of an area over a vault as a pedestrian-oriented space; and

(vii) Weather protection, especially weather protection that can be moved or altered to accommodate conditions; and

(d) The following features are prohibited within pedestrian-oriented space:

(i) Asphalt or gravel pavement, except where continuous gravel or asphalt paths intersect with the space;

(ii) Adjacent chain link fences;

(iii) Adjacent blank walls; and

(iv) Adjacent dumpsters or service areas.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.160c. Examples of pedestrian-oriented open space. Clockwise from upper left: University Village (Seattle, WA), Pearl District (Portland, OR), Kent Station (Kent, WA), Walnut Creek (CA), Fremont (Seattle, WA), and Mill Creek Town Center (Mill Creek, WA).

(3) Multifamily Open Space Design Criteria.

(a) Common open space includes landscaped courtyards or decks, front porches, gardens with pathways, children’s play areas, or other multi-purpose recreational and/or green spaces. Special requirements and recommendations for common open spaces include the following:

(i) Required setback areas shall not count towards the open space requirement unless they are portions of a space that meets the dimensional and design requirements and guidelines herein as determined by the director;

(ii) Space shall be large enough to provide functional leisure or recreational activity. To meet this requirement, no dimension shall be less than 15 feet in width (except for front porches);

(iii) Spaces (particularly children’s play areas) shall be visible from at least some dwelling units and positioned near pedestrian activity;

(iv) Spaces shall feature paths, landscaping, seating, lighting and other pedestrian amenities to make the area more functional and enjoyable;

(v) Individual entries may be provided onto common open space from adjacent ground floor residential units, where applicable. Small, semi-private open spaces for adjacent ground floor units that maintain visual access to the common area are strongly encouraged to enliven the space. Low walls or hedges (less than three feet in height) are encouraged to provide clear definition of semi-private and common spaces;

(vi) Separate common space from ground floor windows, automobile circulation, service areas and parking lots with landscaping, low-level fencing, and/or other treatments as approved by the director that enhance safety and privacy (both for common open space and dwelling units);

(vii) Space should be oriented to receive sunlight, facing east, west, or (preferably) south, when possible;

(viii) Stairways, stair landings, above grade walkways, balconies and decks shall not encroach into the minimum required common open space areas. An atrium roof covering may be built over a courtyard to provide weather protection provided it does not obstruct natural light inside the courtyard. Front porches are an exception; and

(ix) Unenclosed front porches qualify as common open space provided:

(A) No dimension is less than eight feet; and

(B) The porches are accessible to all residents.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.160d. Good examples of common open space. Clockwise from upper left: Vancouver (WA), Redmond (WA), unknown, and Redmond (WA).


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.160e. This courtyard is too narrow to function as usable open space, particularly given the height of the building.

(b) Private Balconies and Decks. To qualify as open space meeting the requirements of SMC 21B.30.090, such spaces shall be at least 35 square feet, with no dimension less than four feet, to provide a space usable for human activity. The space shall meet ADA standards. This standard also applies to individual front porches if counted toward townhouse open space requirements.

(c) Shared Rooftop Decks. To qualify as open space meeting the requirements of SMC 21B.30.090, such spaces shall meet the following requirements:

(i) Space shall be ADA accessible to all dwelling units;

(ii) Space shall provide amenities such as seating areas, landscaping, and/or other features that encourage use as determined by the director;

(iii) Space shall feature hard surfacing appropriate to encourage resident use; and

(iv) Space shall incorporate features that provide for the safety of residents, such as enclosures and appropriate lighting levels.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.160f. Balconies and roof decks: Examples of what can and cannot be considered open space.

(d) Indoor Recreational Areas. To qualify as open space meeting the requirements of SMC 21B.30.090, such spaces shall meet the following conditions:

(i) The space shall meet ADA standards and shall be located in a visible area, such as near an entrance, lobby, or high traffic corridors; and

(ii) Space shall be designed specifically to serve interior recreational functions and not merely be leftover unrentable space used to meet the open space requirement. Such space shall include amenities and design elements that will encourage use by residents as determined by the director.

(4) Children Play Area Safety Requirements. All children play area apparatus shall meet Consumer Product Safety Standards for equipment, soft surfacing and spacing, and shall be located in an area that is:

(a) At least 400 square feet in size with no dimension less than 20 feet; and

(b) Adjacent to main pedestrian paths or near building entrances. (Ord. O2016-429 § 10 (Att. J); Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A §  21B.30.240))


21B.30.170 Site design elements – Trail corridors.

Trails, as required in SMC 21B.30.060, shall be provided within easements, or tracts, of sufficient width and length consistent with the dimensional standards as defined below.

Proposed public and private trails shall be reviewed by the director for consistency with the following standards:

(1) Trails Master Plan. The Sammamish Trails, Bikeways, and Paths Master Plan provides design standards for the full range of trails and pedestrian routes desired within the City. This document shall be used as a guide to help determine the type of trail to be constructed in specific locations of the Town Center depending on the terrain, environmental conditions, adjacent uses, connectivity, and anticipated usage. Trails shall be constructed per design standards set forth in the Trails, Bikeways, and Paths Master Plan.

(2) Use of Existing Corridors. To the extent practical in implementing the conceptual Town Center Trails Plan as shown in Figure 21B.30.060a, trails should generally be located to minimize the need to remove additional vegetation and create other associated impacts. If sensitive areas exist on or in proximity to an existing cleared or improved corridor, then impacts from constructing the trail shall be mitigated consistent with Chapter 21A.50 SMC, including the recommendations from any required sensitive areas study. Trails may be located in other areas if it is demonstrated that a new corridor creates less overall or less incremental impact to sensitive areas and habitat while still achieving overall project goals and objectives.

(3) Compatibility with Adjacent Land Uses. Trails should be designed and constructed to encourage users to remain on the trail, to diminish the likelihood of trespass and to promote privacy for adjacent landowners. The project applicant shall propose for the department’s review and approval the use of fencing, signage, landscaping or other appropriate means to accomplish this requirement. Any proposed lighting should be directed away from houses along the trail corridor. Ground-level lighting, such as bollards, is preferred. Safety of trail users and adjacent landowners shall be addressed through review of vehicle access and crossing locations and design.

(4) Width. The width of the cleared area, trail corridor, surface and shoulder should be designed consistent with AASHTO standards for public multi-use paved trails (Guide for the Development of Bicycle Facilities, 1999, as amended, American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials), and with U.S. Forest Service standards (Trails Management Handbook, 1991, as amended, and Standard Specifications for Construction of Trails Handbook, 1984, as amended) if unpaved. Cleared areas shall be the minimum necessary consistent with the standards and requirements in the SMC.

(5) Sensitive Areas and Buffers. Trail impacts to sensitive areas should be reviewed consistent with the impact avoidance and mitigation sequencing requirements of Chapter 21A.50 SMC. Mitigation of impacts is required, even for trails located on existing corridors consistent with subsection (2) of this section. Wetland and stream buffers shall be expanded to compensate for the total area of the trail corridor, including all disturbed areas located within the buffer area. No expansion shall be required for trails located on existing improved corridors, including but not limited to utility corridors, road or railroad rights-of-way, within wetland or stream buffers. Mitigation shall be required for all impacts consistent with Chapter 21A.50 SMC.

(6) Location. Except for approved viewing platforms, spur trails, wetland or stream crossings proposed consistent with Chapter 21A.50 SMC, or trails located on existing corridors consistent with subsection (2) of this section, trails that are proposed in proximity to wetlands or streams or associated buffers may only be located in the outer 25 percent of the wetland or stream buffer and should be generally aligned parallel to the stream or perimeter of the wetland. Spur trails and viewing structures should be designed to minimize impacts on sensitive area and wildlife habitat. Viewing platforms shall be placed landward of the wetland or stream edge.

(7) Wildlife. Trails should be designed and constructed to encourage users to remain on the trail through the use of fencing, signage, landscaping or other appropriate means to minimize impacts to wildlife and habitat. In addition to the requirements related to wildlife corridors elsewhere in the SMC, trail location, lighting, construction decisions, and requirements for use (e.g., pet leash requirements, bicycle speed limits, etc.) should be guided by recommendations from sensitive areas studies to avoid, minimize and mitigate impacts to habitat for sensitive species. In a vegetation management plan developed for City review and approval consistent with SMC 21A.50.160, all disturbed areas shall be landscaped with appropriate native vegetation upon completion of trail construction or as soon thereafter as possible. The trail maintenance entity shall ensure that such vegetation survives through an appropriate mechanism. An integrated vegetation and pest management plan shall be developed by the applicant and approved by the department that avoids or minimizes the use of pesticides, herbicides and other hazardous substances.

(8) Surfacing. The director will determine pavement options for the specific trail section. To promote infiltration and groundwater recharge and to minimize slope instability, trail surfaces shall be made of pervious materials unless infeasible. Boardwalks may be used for areas subject to regular inundation, and should be constructed with nonhazardous materials. Impervious materials may also be used if necessary for soil stabilization or to prevent soil erosion, or if the trail is specifically designed and intended to be accessible to physically challenged persons and is identified as such in the City’s adopted Comprehensive Plan, parks plan or trails plan.

(9) Maintenance. Maintenance of any trail corridor or improvements, retained in private ownership, shall be the responsibility of the owner or other separate entity capable of long-term maintenance and operation in a manner acceptable to the City. (Ord. O2016-429 § 10 (Att. J); Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A §  21B.30.250))


21B.30.180 Site design elements – Fences and retaining walls.

Fences are permitted as follows:

(1) Fences up to Three Feet. Fences up to three feet are permitted between any non-pedestrian-oriented street and any building. This standard applies to all properties regardless of whether the frontage is considered a front, street side, or back yard.

(2) Fences up to Six Feet. Fences up to six feet in height may project into the side or back setback, except where otherwise provided in subsection (1) of this section and SMC 21B.30.260(3), regarding fences along an alley.

(3) Fences Exceeding Six Feet. Fences exceeding a height of six feet shall comply with the applicable street and interior setbacks of the zone in which the property is located, except: fences located on a rockery, retaining wall, or berm within a required setback area are permitted subject to the following requirements:

(4) Fences in TC-B, TC-C, and TC-E Zones.

(a) The total height of the fence and the rockery, retaining wall or berm upon which the fence is located shall not exceed a height of 10 feet. This height shall be measured from the top of the fence to the ground on the low side of the rockery, retaining wall or berm;

(b) The total height of the fence itself, measured from the top of the fence to the top of the rockery, retaining wall or berm, shall not exceed six feet; and

(c) Any portion of the fence above a height of eight feet, measured to include both the fence and the rockery, retaining wall, or berm, shall be an open-work fence.

(5) Fences on a Rockery, Retaining Wall, or Berm. Fences located on a rockery, retaining wall or berm outside required setback areas shall not exceed the building height for the zone, measured in accordance with the standards established in the building code (SMC Title 16).

(6) Prohibited Fences. Chain link fences and electric fences are prohibited in the Town Center, except to enclose service areas that are fully screened with landscaping and for public park areas such as dog runs and ball fields. In such cases, the fencing shall be vinyl coated.

(7) Retaining Wall Standards. Retaining walls taller than four feet and visible from a street shall be terraced so that no individual segment is taller than four feet. Terraced walls shall be separated by a landscaping bed at least two feet in width that includes one shrub every three lineal feet of retaining wall. Departures from this standard may be considered provided the combination of wall treatment and landscaping reduces the bulk and scale of the retaining wall and enhances the streetscape. In determining whether departures will be granted, the director will consider the level of visibility of the wall (from adjacent uses, streets, parks, and pathways), quality of landscaping and wall materials, detailing, and overall design quality.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.180a. Retaining wall standards.

(Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A §  21B.30.260))


21B.30.190 Site design elements – Lighting.

(1) Site Lighting Levels.

(a) All publicly accessible areas shall be lighted with average minimum and maximum levels as follows:

(i) Minimum (for low or nonpedestrian and vehicular traffic areas) of one-half foot-candle;

(ii) Moderate (for moderate or high volume pedestrian areas) of one to two foot-candles; and

(iii) Maximum (for high volume pedestrian areas and building entries) of four foot-candles;

(b) Lighting shall be provided at consistent levels, with gradual transitions between maximum and minimum levels of lighting and between lit areas and unlit areas. Highly contrasting pools of light and dark areas shall be avoided; and

(c) Site lighting shall be metal halide or LED unless an alternative is approved by the director.

(2) Light Quality and Shielding.

(a) All fixtures in the Town Center shall be full cut-off, dark sky rated and mounted no more than 25 feet above the ground, with lower fixtures preferable so as to maintain a human scale. Requests for higher lighting fixtures may be considered with the approval of the director;

(b) All fixtures over 14 feet in height shall be fitted with a full cut-off shield conforming to “dark sky” standards;


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.190a. Acceptable and unacceptable parking lot lighting.

(c) Pedestrian-scaled lighting (light fixtures no taller than 14 feet) is required in areas of pedestrian activity, including “pedestrian-oriented open spaces” and “collective open spaces.” Lighting shall enable pedestrians to identify a face 45 feet away in order to promote safety;

(d) Lighting is not permitted to trespass onto adjacent private parcels nor shall light source (luminaire) be visible at the property line. All building lights shall be directed onto the building itself and/or the ground immediately adjacent to it. The light emissions shall not be visible above the roofline of the building;

(e) Uplighting of vegetation, other objects, or the sky is prohibited; and

(f) Solar-powered and high-energy-efficient lighting is encouraged. The director may allow a modest lowering of light level standards for solar-powered lights. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A §  21B.30.270))

Article III. Building Design


21B.30.200 Building design – Character.

(1) The Town Center Plan allows for a diversity of architectural style.

The focus is to promote architecture with a strong sense of human scale, fine detailing, quality materials, sensitive to the environment, oriented to pedestrians, and designed appropriate to the site’s unique context. This approach is intended to allow for a diversity of architectural styles provided they meet the design standards of this chapter.

(2) No Corporate Architecture. Architecture that is defined predominately by corporate identity features (and difficult to adapt to other uses) is prohibited. For example, some fast food franchises have very specific architectural features that reinforce their identity. Buildings that act as signs are prohibited.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.200a. Buildings with acceptable architectural character. Clockwise from top: Woodinville (WA), University Village (Seattle, WA), Whistler (BC), Mill Creek (WA), and Issaquah (WA).

(Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A §  21B.30.300))


21B.30.210 Building design – Architectural scale.

(1) Building Articulation – All Nonresidential Buildings. Building facades (containing a public entry and/or facing a street, park, or pedestrian-oriented space) shall include articulation features every 50 feet to create a pattern of small storefronts and/or to reduce the perceived scale of the building and add visual interest. At least three of the following articulation methods shall be employed at intervals no greater than 50 feet:

(a) Window patterns and/or entries that reinforce the pattern of small storefront spaces; e.g., groups of windows that repeat every 50 feet or less as opposed to a uniform row, or “ribbon,” of windows;

(b) Weather protection features that reinforce 50-foot storefronts. For example, for a business that occupies 150 feet of street frontage, use three separate awnings to articulate the facade;

(c) Change of roofline as described in subsection (3) of this section;

(d) Providing building modulation of at least two feet in depth and four feet in width if tied with a change in roofline as described in subsection (3) of this section or change in building materials or siding style. For all other facades, building modulation shall be at least 10 feet in depth and 20 feet wide;

(e) Placement of building columns or piers that reinforce storefront pattern;

(f) Change in building material or siding style;

(g) Elements such as planters, art pieces, or other features that repeat at intervals of 50 feet or less;

(h) Design that features a top, middle, and bottom (see Figure 21B.30.210c). The maximum articulation interval does not apply to this method; and/or

(i) Other methods that meet the intent of the standards as approved by the director.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.210a. Examples of nonresidential building articulation.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.210b. Acceptable and unacceptable examples of nonresidential building articulation.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.210c. Illustration of a building facade with a distinct top, middle, and bottom

(2) Building Articulation – Townhouses and Multifamily Residential Buildings. Residential buildings and residential portions of mixed-use buildings shall include at least three of the following modulation and/or articulation features at intervals of no more than 35 feet along all facades facing a street, park, common open space, and common parking areas:

(a) Repeating distinctive window patterns at intervals no more than 35 feet;

(b) Vertical building modulation. Minimum depth and width of modulation is 18 inches and four feet, respectively, if tied to a change in color or building material and/or roofline modulation as defined in subsection (3) of this section. Otherwise, minimum depth of modulation is 10 feet and minimum width for each modulation is 15 feet. See Figure 21B.30.210f for vertical building modulation examples. Balconies may be used to meet the modulation if they are recessed or projected from the facade by at least 18 inches. Balconies that appear to be “tacked on” to the facade will not qualify for this option unless they employ high quality materials and add visual interest to the facade as determined by the director;

(c) Change of roofline, as described in subsection (3) of this section;

(d) Horizontal modulation (upper level step-backs). To qualify for this measure, the minimum horizontal modulation (setback) shall be five feet;

(e) Articulation of the building’s top, middle, and bottom. This typically includes a distinctive ground floor or lower floor design, consistent articulation of middle floors, and a distinctive roofline. The maximum articulation interval does not apply to this method;

(f) Other methods that effectively reduce the perceived scale of the building and add visual interest as determined by the director; and/or

(g) Building elements such as balconies, bay windows, porches, canopies, chimneys, or other repetitive feature.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.210d. Residential building articulation.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.210e. Acceptable and unacceptable examples of residential building articulation.

(3) Roofline Modulation.

(a) In order to qualify as an articulation feature in subsection (1) or (2) of this section, rooflines shall be varied by emphasizing dormers, chimneys, stepped roofs, gables, prominent cornice or wall, or a broken or articulated roofline.

(b) The width of any continuous flat roofline should extend no more than 120 feet without modulation. Modulation shall consist of one of the following:

(i) A change in elevation of the visible roofline of at least four feet if the particular roof segment is less than 50 feet wide and at least eight feet if the particular roof segment is greater than 50 feet in length;

(ii) A sloped or gabled roofline segment of at least 20 feet in width and no less than four feet vertical in 12 feet horizontal;

(iii) A combination of the above; or

(iv) Other modulation measures approved by the director.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.210f. Roofline modulation standards.

(4) Maximum Facade Width. The maximum facade width (the facade includes the apparent width of the structure facing the street and includes required modulation) is 120 feet. Buildings exceeding 120 feet in width along the streetfront shall be divided by a minimum 30-foot-wide modulation of the exterior wall, so that the maximum length of a particular facade is 120 feet. Such modulation shall be at least 20 feet or deeper and extend through all floors. Other design features will be considered by the director that effectively break up the scale of the building and add visual interest. The director may waive this provision for special conditions, such as a parking garage or institutional building if the structure is screened from view or located in a visually obscure location. In order to grant such a waiver, the director shall find that the building’s use and purpose warrant a continuous building perimeter.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.210g. Facade width requirement examples.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.210h. Acceptable and unacceptable examples of meeting maximum facade width standards.

(Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A §  21B.30.310))


21B.30.220 Building design – Details.

(1) Details Toolbox. All nonresidential and mixed-use buildings shall be enhanced with appropriate details. All new buildings shall employ at least one detail element from each of the three categories below for each facade facing a street or public space. For example, a large building with multiple storefronts will likely need more than one decorative sign, one transom window, and one decorative kick-plate to meet the intent of the standards.

(a) Window and/or Entry Treatment.

(i) Display windows divided into a grid of multiple panes;

(ii) Transom windows;

(iii) Roll-up windows/doors;

(iv) Other distinctive window treatment that meets the intent of the standards;

(v) Recessed entry;

(vi) Decorative door;

(vii) Arcade;

(viii) Landscaped trellises or other decorative element that incorporates landscaping near the building entry; and/or

(ix) Other decorative or specially designed entry treatment that meets the intent of the standards.

(b) Building Elements and Facade Details.

(i) Custom-designed weather protection element such as a steel or glass canopy, or cloth awning;

(ii) Decorative, custom hanging sign(s);

(iii) Decorative building-mounted light fixtures;

(iv) Bay windows, trellises, towers, and similar elements; and/or

(v) Other details or elements that meet the intent of these standards, as determined by the director.

(c) Building Materials and Other Facade Elements.

(i) Decorative building materials/use of building materials. Examples include decorative use of brick, tile, or stonework;

(ii) Artwork on building (such as a mural) or bas-relief sculpture;

(iii) Decorative kick-plate, pier, belt course, or other similar feature;

(iv) Hand-crafted material, such as special wrought iron or carved wood; and/or

(v) Other details that meet the intent of the standards as determined by the director.

“Custom,” “decorative,” or “hand-crafted” elements referenced above shall be distinctive or “one-of-a-kind” elements or unusual designs that require a high level of craftsmanship as determined by the director.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.220a. Examples of acceptable and unacceptable details.

(2) Window Design. Buildings shall employ techniques to recess or project individual windows above the ground floor at least two inches from the facade or incorporate window trim at least four inches in width that features color that contrasts with the base building color. Exceptions will be considered by the director where buildings employ other distinctive window or facade treatment that adds a sense of depth to the facade and/or visual interest to the building.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.220b. Acceptable and unacceptable window design examples.

(3) Principal Building Entrances. The principal building entrances of all commercial, mixed-use, and multifamily buildings shall feature the following improvements, unless the director determines an alternate solution better provides a safe, comfortable, and inviting entrance:

(a) Pedestrian Covering. Building entrances shall be covered by at least 50 square feet of pedestrian weather protection and be at least six feet wide. Entries are encouraged to satisfy this requirement by being set back into the building facade;

(b) Lighting. Pedestrian entrances shall be lit to at least four foot-candles as measured on the ground plane for commercial buildings and two foot-candles for residential buildings;

(c) Building or Business Name. Primary commercial use entries shall be identified with respect to building and/or business;

(d) Visibility. Building entrances shall be visible from the roadway and/or major public pedestrian pathway;

(e) Transparency. Primary commercial use entries shall feature glass doors or glazing near the door so that the visitor can view people opening the door from the other side;

(f) Security. To the extent feasible, entries shall be visible from areas with high pedestrian activity or where residents can view the entry (passive surveillance); and

(g) Architectural or Artwork Enhancements. Primary building entrances shall be enhanced by two or more of the following measures, which can be used to concurrently satisfy subsection (1) of this section, Details Toolbox:

(i) Special or ornamental doors, windows, or other architectural elements;

(ii) Special paving or materials (e.g., decorative tile work);

(iii) Special architectural lighting;

(iv) Landscaping;

(v) Artwork as approved by the arts commission; and/or

(vi) Other similar feature approved by the director.

The director’s decision on the applicability of an element or treatment to meet this requirement is final.

(4) Secondary Public Access for Commercial Buildings. Whereas these standards require businesses on a pedestrian-oriented street within the downtown to front on streets rather than parking lots, a large number of customers use the “secondary” entry off of a parking lot. Such businesses that have secondary public access shall comply with the following measures to enhance secondary public access (applies only to entries used by the public):

(a) Weather protection at least three feet deep is required over each secondary entry;

(b) A sign may be applied to the awning; provided, that the sign complies with other regulations and guidelines;

(c) There shall be at least two foot-candles illumination on the ground surface;

(d) One or more of the design elements noted in subsection (3)(g) of this section shall be incorporated within or adjacent to the secondary entry; and

(e) To the extent feasible, entries shall be visible from a public right-of-way and/or high pedestrian traffic area.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.220c. Acceptable and unacceptable examples of secondary public access.

(Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A §  21B.30.320))


21B.30.230 Building design – Exterior materials and colors.

(1) Complementary and Quality Materials. The intent of guidelines in this section is that Town Center buildings complement each other in design character and exhibit a high-quality, low-maintenance exterior finish. Generally speaking, materials and colors, except for natural materials such as wood, brick, and stone, should not be employed to call attention to the building. Industrial materials, such as metal manufactured panels, glazing, and concrete, should be finished, detailed, and colored to at least meet industry standards and specifications and should exhibit a high degree of craftsmanship in fabrication and installation. Adhere to the director’s direction regarding materials and colors not covered in this section or where there is a question of quality appropriateness of a proposed material or color.

(2) Metal Siding Standards. If metal siding is used, it shall have visible corner moldings and trim and shall not extend lower than two feet above grade. Masonry, concrete, or other durable material shall be incorporated between the siding and the ground plane. Metal siding may be used only in conjunction with other approved materials and may comprise no more than 25 percent of facades facing public rights-of-way or open space. Glazing, awnings, doors, and other features may count as portions of the facade. Pre-formed panels do not count as metal siding. Metal siding shall be factory finished, with a matte, nonreflective surface.

(3) Concrete Block Standards.

(a) When used for the primary facade, buildings shall incorporate a combination of textures and/or colors to add visual interest. For example, combining split or rock-facade units with smooth blocks can create distinctive patterns. Concrete block may comprise no more than 25 percent of a facade facing a public right-of-way or open space.

(b) Concrete block use on the side of fire walls/zero lot line walls (when visible from a public street, pedestrian plaza, or parking area) shall include changes in textures and shapes, colors, and/or other masonry materials to add visual interest as determined by the director.

(4) Standards for Stucco or Other Similar Troweled Finishes.

(a) Stucco and similar troweled finishes (including exterior insulation and finish system or “EIFS”) shall be trimmed in wood, masonry, or other material and shall be sheltered from extreme weather by roof overhangs or other methods and are limited to no more than 25 percent of the facade area facing a public right-of-way or open space;

(b) Horizontal surfaces exposed to the weather shall be avoided; and

(c) Stucco, EIFS, and similar surfaces should not extend below two feet above the ground plane. Concrete, masonry, or other durable material shall be used below the two-feet-above-grade line to provide a durable surface where damage is most likely.

(5) Wood Products Standards.

(a) Use only exterior-grade wood products;

(b) Plywood sheathing, “T-111,” and other sheet wood products shall not be used for exterior cladding, except as authorized by the director. Architectural-grade panels, such as “Hardy Plank,” specifically fabricated and detailed for exterior cladding are generally acceptable;

(c) Finish wood with exterior-grade sealer, stain, or paint; and

(d) Detail exposed wood member edges to prevent weathering and deterioration.

(6) Stonework Standards. Stone facing shall be of natural or local stone, not Southwest sandstone or other material not typical of the Pacific Northwest.

(7) Prohibited Materials. The following materials are prohibited (in addition to any prohibited materials noted above):

(a) Mirrored glass;

(b) Chain link fencing (except for temporary fencing and for parks);

(c) Fiberglass products and similar sheet products; and

(d) Back-lit vinyl awnings used as signs.

(8) Colors.

(a) Intent. To encourage a wide range of harmonious building colors that complement the Town Center’s natural landscape and the envisioned diverse architectural character. The predominance of earth tones and background colors for building shells is to increase continuity within an otherwise wide range of building types and styles.

(b) Acceptable Colors. The following percentages are intended as a rough guide. The director may allow variations that meet the guidelines’ intent.

(i) Basic Building Shell Colors. Use any of the following colors, indicated as acceptable in Figure 21B.30.230a, for areas that total more than 20 percent of the building shell that is visible from public (including rights-of-way) or adjacent properties: earth tones (brown, beige, tan, red-brown, or ochre); grey or slate; dark, highly saturated (but not bright) colors (forest green, dark red, maroon, burnt orange, olive, dark brown, or terra cotta); or natural colors of materials such as brick, stone, or stained or sealed wood;

(ii) Trim and Secondary Colors. Use one or a combination of the following colors, indicated as acceptable in Figure 21B.30.230a, for up to 20 percent of the facade surfaces that are visible from public or adjacent properties, excluding glazing and roofs: earth tones (brown, beige, tan, red-brown, or ochre); grey or slate; white or ivory; dark, highly saturated (but not bright) colors (forest green, dark red, maroon, burnt orange, olive, dark brown, or terra cotta); natural colors of materials such as brick, stone, or stained or sealed wood; or black or charcoal;

(iii) Accent Colors. Use any accent color indicated as acceptable in Figure 21B.30.230a for not more than 10 percent of any building facade that is visible from public or adjacent properties: earth tones (brown, beige, tan, red-brown, or ochre); grey or slate; white or ivory; dark, highly saturated (but not bright) colors (forest green, dark red, maroon, burnt orange, olive, dark brown, or terra cotta); natural colors of materials such as brick, stone, or stained or sealed wood; primary and bright colors (such as purple or orange), gold, or metallic; or black or charcoal; and

(iv) Roof. Use any color indicated as acceptable in Figure 21B.30.230a for roofs visible from the ground level of public or adjacent properties: earth tones (brown, beige, tan, red-brown, or ochre); grey or slate; dark, highly saturated (but not bright) colors (forest green, dark red, maroon, burnt orange, olive, dark brown, or terra cotta); natural colors of materials such as brick, stone, or stained or sealed wood; or black or charcoal.

	 	Basic Building Shell	Trim	Accent	Roof

	Earth tones (brown, beige, tan, red-brown, or ochre)	λ	λ	λ	λ

	Grey or slate	λ	λ	λ	λ

	White or ivory	 	λ	λ	 

	Dark, highly saturated (but not bright) colors (forest green, dark red, maroon, burnt orange, olive, dark brown, or terra cotta)	λ	λ	λ	λ

	Natural colors of materials such as brick, stone, or stained or sealed wood	λ	λ	λ	λ

	Primary or bright colors (such as purple or orange), pastels, gold, or metallic	 	 	λ	 

	Black or charcoal	 	λ	λ	λ

Figure 21B.30.230a. Building color standard summary matrix.

(c) Color combinations that are signature elements for corporate businesses are restricted to 10 percent of each building facade as accent colors. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A §  21B.30.330))


21B.30.240 Building design – Blank walls.

(1) Blank Wall Definition. A wall (including building facades and retaining walls) is considered a blank wall if:

(a) A ground floor wall or portion of a ground floor wall over six feet in height has a horizontal length greater than 15 feet and does not include a transparent window or door with glazing; or

(b) Any portion of a ground floor wall having a surface area of 400 square feet or greater does not include a transparent window or door.

(2) Blank Wall Treatments. Untreated blank walls visible from a public street, park or pedestrian pathway are prohibited. Methods to treat blank walls can include:

(a) Display windows at least 18 inches deep and integrated into the facade. Tack on display cases do not qualify as a blank wall treatment. Figure 21B.30.030c shows an example of a tack on display case;

(b) Landscape planting bed at least five feet wide or a raised planter bed at least two feet high and three feet wide in front of the wall with planting materials that are sufficient to obscure or screen at least 75 percent of the wall’s surface within three years;

(c) Installing a vertical trellis in front of the wall with climbing vines or plant materials; and/or

(d) Special building detailing that adds visual interest at a pedestrian scale as determined by the director. Such detailing shall use a variety of surfaces; monotonous designs will not meet the intent of the standards.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.240a. Blank wall definition and examples of acceptable treatments.

(Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A §  21B.30.340))


21B.30.250 Building design – Parking garage design.

(1) Parking Garage Design.

(a) Parking garages shall be designed to obscure the view of parked cars at the ground level with parking preferred to the back of buildings or underground.

(b) Ground-level parking garages facing pedestrian-oriented streets are not allowed. Ground-level parking may be allowed on mixed-use streets if street trees approved by the City are provided.

(c) Where the garage wall is built to the sidewalk edge, the facade shall incorporate a combination of artwork, grillwork, special building material or treatment/design, and/or other treatments as approved by the City that enhance the pedestrian environment. Ground-level parking garage floors shall conform to SMC 21B.30.210 and 21B.30.220. Small setbacks with terraced landscaping elements can be particularly effective in softening the appearance of a parking garage and may satisfy this requirement if approved by the director.

(d) Upper-level parking garages shall use articulation treatments or landscaped screening that break up the massing of the garage and add visual interest, and obscure the view of parked cars from adjacent properties.

Figure 21B.30.250a illustrates examples of acceptable parking garage treatments.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.250a. Acceptable parking garage design examples.

(Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A §  21B.30.350))

Article IV. Single-Family, Duplexes, and Cottages


21B.30.260 Single-family – Subdivision design.

(1) Development of “Neighborhoods.” New detached single-family/duplex subdivisions shall be designed to integrate with the larger mixed-use development and with surrounding properties and neighborhoods. Subdivisions shall be designed so that individual, separately developed projects work together to create distinct neighborhoods, instead of disjointed or isolated enclaves. To accomplish this, such developments shall comply with the following standards:

(a) Provide for a connected network of streets per SMC 21B.30.040.

(b) Provide for public open space per SMC 21B.30.090.

(c) Provide for pedestrian-friendly street design per SMC 21B.30.150.

(d) Provide for pedestrian-friendly building design that promotes “eyes on the street” and deemphasizes the garage (see SMC 21B.30.270).

(2) Cul-de-Sac Streets. The use of cul-de-sac streets is not allowed unless the director determines there is no other feasible option (for example, the development site is long and narrow and surrounded on three sides by a critical area).

(3) Alleys.

(a) The use of alleys is encouraged to minimize the appearance of garages from the street. For developments with more than 20 single-family dwelling units, at least 25 percent of the homes should be served by alleys. If a development is to be constructed in phases, then this requirement applies to each phase of construction.

(b) Alleys shall be designed to incorporate landscaping and lighting elements. Specifically:

(i) Landscaping elements may be used as an alternative to fencing to separate private yard space from the alley;

(ii) Fences shall be set back at least three feet from the alley (pavement) to provide for landscaping to soften the fence. See Figure 21B.30.260a for a good example of how landscaping can enhance the design of an alley; and

(iii) Garages shall feature building-mounted lighting to provide illumination of alleys for safety.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.260a. Acceptable and unacceptable alley designs.

(4) Alternative Lot Configurations. Encourage alternative lot configurations, including:

(a) Zero Lot Line. This is a configuration where the house and/or garage are built up to one of the side property lines, providing the opportunity for more usable side yard space. Standards:

(i) Dwelling units and accessory structures may be placed on one interior side property line. The opposite side yard shall be at least 10 feet;

(ii) Privacy Wall. In order to maintain privacy, no windows, doors, air conditioning units, or any other types of openings in the walls along a zero lot line structure are allowed except for windows that do not allow for visibility into the side yard of the adjacent lot. Examples include clerestory or obscured windows; and

(iii) Eaves along a zero lot line may project a maximum of 18 inches over the adjacent property line.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.260b. Zero lot line example.

(b) Courtyard Access Lots. This includes a series of lots clustered around a private internal roadway. Standards:

(i) Maximum number of lots served by a courtyard access: five (this includes lots fronting the street on either side of the courtyard access);

(ii) Maximum length of a courtyard access: 100 feet (or deeper if approved by the local fire department);

(iii) Surface width of courtyard access: 15 feet. Due to the limited length, wider drives are unnecessary (safety and function) and undesirable (aesthetics); and

(iv) An easement of 20 feet in width shall be secured over the applicable parcels to allow lots legal access to the public street. A maintenance agreement shall be required for all applicable lots and shall be recorded on the final plat.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.260c. Examples of courtyard access lots.

(c) Pedestrian-Only Entry Lots. This includes configurations where one or more lots are clustered around a pedestrian easement and/or common open space and do not front on a street. Standards:

(i) A pedestrian entry easement shall be provided to all homes that do not front on a street, alley, or common open space;

(ii) Pedestrian entry easements shall be a minimum of 15 feet wide with a five-foot minimum sidewalk; and

(iii) These lots shall contain private detached or shared garages off an alley or other access if approved by public works and reviewed for conflicts with existing codes.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.260d. Pedestrian-only entry lot configuration examples (right image is from Issaquah Highlands, WA).

(5) Stormwater Management. All developments shall adhere to sub-basin plans per SMC 21B.30.100. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A §  21B.30.400))


21B.30.270 Single-family and duplexes – Lot and building design.

(1) Intent.

(a) To enhance the character of the street;

(b) To deemphasize garages and driveways as major visual elements along the street;

(c) To provide usable yard space for residents; and

(d) To emphasize landscaping in residential neighborhoods and minimize impervious surfaces.

(2) Garage Placement and Design.

(a) Where lots front on a public street and where vehicular access is from the street, garages or carports shall be set back at least five feet behind the front wall of the house or front edge of an unenclosed porch. On corner lots, this standard shall only apply to the designated front yard;

(b) The garage face shall occupy no more than 50 percent of the ground-level facade facing the street;

(c) Where lots abut an alley, the garage or off-street parking area shall take access from the alley, unless precluded by steep topography; and

(d) Garages facing the street shall have similar materials and building forms as the residence, and the front facades shall be enhanced with building details such as decorative lighting or a trellis.

(3) Driveway Standards.

(a) No more than one driveway per dwelling unit;

(b) Driveways for individual lots 50 feet or wider may be up to 20 feet in width; and

(c) Driveways for individual lots less than 50 feet wide may be up to 12 feet in width. Tandem parking configurations may be used to accommodate two-car garages.

(4) Covered Entry. All houses shall provide a covered entry with a minimum dimension of eight feet by six feet. Exceptions may be granted by the director for the use of regional housing styles that do not traditionally contain such entries. Porches up to 200 square feet may project into the front yard. See SMC 21B.25.170.

(5) Windows on the Street. Transparent windows and/or doors are required on at least 15 percent of the facade (all vertical surfaces facing the street) as determined by the director.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.270a. Some single-family design requirements.

(6) Stormwater Management. All developments shall adhere to sub-basin plans per SMC 21B.30.100.

(7) Minimum Landscaped Open Space. All single-family housing lots shall provide landscaped open space at least equal to 40 percent of the lot area. See SMC 21B.30.090(1)(e) and Chapter 21B.35 SMC for the definition and provisions for landscaped open space. Critical areas, naturally vegetated areas, and all other landscaped areas shall be counted as landscaped open space provided they are on the applicable lot.

(8) Minimum Usable Open Space. All residences with garages in the back yard shall provide a contiguous open space equivalent to 10 percent of the lot size. Such open space shall not be located within the front yard. The required open space shall feature a minimum dimension of 15 feet on all sides. For example, a 3,000 square foot lot would require a contiguous open space of at least 300 square feet, or 15 feet by 20 feet in area. Rooftop decks with direct and level access from dwelling units may be used to meet the requirements. Driveways shall not count in the calculations for usable open space. The director may modify this requirement for angled building orientations, nonrectilinear or constrained (such as lots with steep topography) lots.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.270b. Open space requirements for alley-loaded lots.

(9) Duplex Design Standards. Duplexes should be designed similar in nature to single-family homes and shall feature a visible entry and windows facing the street. The visibility of driveways and garages shall be minimized and sufficient private open space provided. Specifically, duplexes shall comply with subsections (1) through (6) of this section with the following exceptions and additional provisions:

(a) Duplexes may include a 20-foot-wide shared driveway or two 12-foot driveways on opposite ends of the lot;

(b) Separate covered entries for each unit are required;

(c) Duplexes on corner lots shall place pedestrian entries on opposite streets; and

(d) At least 10 percent of the street-facing facade shall be windows or other glazing (e.g., door glazing).


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.270c. Diagram illustrating some duplex design standards.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.270d. Examples of duplex standards.

(Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A §  21B.30.410))


21B.30.280 Single-family – Cottage housing.

(1) Intent.

(a) To provide an opportunity for small, detached housing types clustered around a common open space;

(b) To ensure that cottage developments contribute to the overall character of the Town Center;

(c) To provide for centrally located and functional common open space that fosters a sense of community;

(d) To provide for semi-private area around individual cottages to enable diversity in landscape design and foster a sense of ownership;

(e) To minimize visual impacts of parking areas on the street and adjacent properties and the visual setting for the development; and

(f) To promote conservation of resources by providing for clusters of small dwelling units on a property.

(2) Description. Cottage housing refers to clusters of small detached dwelling units arranged around a common open space.

(3) Lot Configuration. Cottages may be configured as condominiums or fee-simple lots provided they meet the standards herein.

(4) Density Bonus. Due to the smaller relative size of cottage units, each cottage shall be counted as one-half a dwelling unit for the purpose of calculating density. For example, a cluster of six cottages would be equivalent to three dwelling units.

(5) Table of Dimensional Standards. Dimensional standards for cottages are identified below:

	Standard	Requirement

	Maximum Floor Area	1,200 SF

	Maximum Floor Area/Ground or Main Floor	800 SF

	Minimum Common Space (see design standards below for more info)	400 SF/unit

	Minimum Private Open Space (see design standards below for more info)	200 SF/unit

	Maximum Height for Cottages	25' (all parts of the roof above 18' shall be pitched with a minimum roof slope of 6:12)

	Maximum Height for Cottage Accessory Structures	18'

	Setbacks (to exterior property lines)	Same as single-family detached (except as noted in subsection (6) of this section

	Minimum Landscaped Open Space (see SMC 21B.30.090(1)(e) and Chapter 21B.35 SMC)	40% of site

	Minimum Distance Between Structures (including accessory structures)	10'

	Minimum Parking Spaces per Cottage	1.5

(6) Units in Each Cluster. Cottage housing developments shall contain a minimum of four and a maximum of 12 cottages located in a cluster to encourage a sense of community among the residents. A development site may contain more than one cottage housing development.

(7) Parking and Driveway Location and Design.

(a) Parking shall be located on the same property as the cottage development;

(b) Parking areas shall be located to the side or rear of cottage clusters and not between the street and cottages. Parking is prohibited in the front and interior setback areas;

(c) Parking and vehicular areas shall be screened from public street and adjacent residential uses by landscaping or architectural screens. For parking lots adjacent to the street, at least 10 feet of Type III landscaping shall be provided between the sidewalk and the parking area. For parking lots along adjacent residential uses, at least five feet of Type I, II, or III shall be required. The director will consider alternative landscaping techniques provided they effectively mitigate views into the parking area from the street or adjacent residential uses and enhance the visual setting for the development;

(d) Parking shall be located in clusters of not more than five adjoining uncovered spaces (except where adjacent to an alley). Exceptions will be considered by the director provided alternative configurations improve the visual setting for development;

(e) Garages may be attached to individual cottages provided all other standards herein are met and the footprint of the ground floor, including garage, does not exceed 1,000 square feet. Such garages shall be located away from the common open spaces; and

(f) No more than one driveway per cottage cluster shall be permitted, except where clusters front onto more than one street.

(8) Common Open Space Requirements.

(a) Shall abut at least 50 percent of the cottages in a cottage housing development;

(b) Shall have cottages abutting on at least two sides;

(c) Cottages adjacent to common open space shall be oriented around and have the main entry from the common open space;

(d) Cottages shall be within 60 feet walking distance of the common open space; and

(e) Open space shall include at least one courtyard, plaza, garden, or other central open space, with access to all units. The minimum dimensions of this open space are 15 feet by 20 feet.

(9) Required Private Open Space. Required private open space shall be adjacent to each dwelling unit, for the exclusive use of the cottage resident(s). The space shall be usable (not on a steep slope) and oriented toward the common open space as much as possible, with no dimension less than 10 feet.

(10) Porches. Cottage facades facing the common open space or common pathway shall feature a roofed porch at least 80 square feet in size with a minimum dimension of eight feet on any side.

(11) Covered Entry and Visual Interest. Cottages facing a public street shall provide:

(a) A covered entry feature (with a minimum dimension of six feet by six feet) visible from the street;

(b) At least 10 feet of landscaped open space between the residence and the street; and

(c) At least two architectural details approved by the director, such as:

(i) Decorative lighting;

(ii) Decorative trim;

(iii) Special door;

(iv) Trellis or decorative building element; and/or

(v) Bay window.

Alternative design treatments may be considered by the director provided the design treatments provide visual interest to the pedestrian.

(12) Character and Diversity. Cottages and accessory buildings within a particular cluster shall be designed within the same “family” of architectural styles. Example elements include:

(a) Similar building/roof form and pitch;

(b) Similar siding materials;

(c) Similar porch detailing; and/or

(d) Similar window trim;

A diversity of cottages can be achieved within a “family” of styles by:

(e) Alternating porch styles (such as roof forms);

(f) Alternating siding details on facades and/or roof gables; and/or

(g) Different siding color.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.280a. Typical cottage housing layouts.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.30.280b. Cottage housing examples.

(13) ADA Accessibility. Developments are encouraged to maximize the number of units that are accessible per ADA requirements as provided in the adopted International Building Code. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A §  21B.30.420))


Chapter 21B.35 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS – LANDSCAPING AND IRRIGATION

Sections:

21B.35.010    Purpose.

21B.35.020    Application.

21B.35.030    Landscaping.

21B.35.040    Landscaping – Drainage.

21B.35.050    Landscaping – Surface parking areas.

21B.35.060    Landscaping – General standards for all landscape areas.

21B.35.070    Landscaping – Additional standards for required landscape areas.

21B.35.080    Landscaping – Advisory tree list.

21B.35.090    Landscaping – Plan design, design review, and installation.

21B.35.100    Maintenance.

21B.35.110    Financial guarantees.

21B.35.120    Water use – Applicability of water budget for landscape areas.

21B.35.130    Water use – Irrigation water budget calculated.

21B.35.140    Water use – Estimated water use calculated.

21B.35.150    Water use – Irrigation efficiency goals and system design standards.

21B.35.160    Water use – Irrigation system design, design review and audit at installation.

21B.35.170    Water use – Irrigation design plan contents.

21B.35.180    Water use – Irrigation schedules.

21B.35.190    Water use – Irrigation system maintenance.

21B.35.200    Tree retention requirements.

21B.35.210    Tree protection standards.

21B.35.220    Tree replacement and enforcement.


21B.35.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to preserve the aesthetic character of the Town Center planning area, to improve the aesthetic and functional quality of the built environment, to promote retention and protection of existing vegetation; to promote water efficiency, to provide a drainage function to manage hydrology closest to the source, to reduce the impacts of development on drainage systems and natural habitats, to increase privacy for residential zones, and to promote native wildlife.

The desired result of landscaping and site design standards is that the Town Center exhibit a predominantly natural landscape character emphasizing mature plants and informal, naturalistic layout. Within this naturalistic backdrop there may be areas of more formal, urban character where the type and intensity of uses or the desire for a more garden-like setting are appropriate.

Another goal of the landscape concept is to improve ecological functions, such as surface water retention, temperature reduction, and habitat enhancement. Landscape schemes that enhance the local ecology are preferred.

(1) Providing visual relief from large expanses of parking areas and reduction of perceived building scale;

(2) Enhancing built structures and open spaces;

(3) Adding visual interest and variety in the Town Center;

(4) Providing physical separation between residential and nonresidential areas;

(5) Providing visual screens and barriers as a transition between differing land uses as required in SMC 21B.30.080(4);

(6) Retaining existing vegetation and significant trees by incorporating them into the site design;

(7) Providing increased areas of permeable surfaces to allow for:

(a) Infiltration of surface water into groundwater resources;

(b) Reduction in the quantity of stormwater discharge; and

(c) Improvement in the quality of stormwater discharge;

(8) Encouraging the use of native plant species by their retention or use in the landscape design;

(9) Requiring water use efficiency through water budgeting and efficient irrigation design standards;

(10) Encouraging the use of a diversity of plant species that promote native wildlife habitat.

(11) Applying bioretention design standards. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.35.020 Application.

Except for communication facilities regulated pursuant to Chapter 21A.55 SMC, all new development shall be subject to the landscaping provisions of this chapter. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.35.030 Landscaping.

The seven types of landscaping screens and stormwater treatment are described and applied as follows:

(1) Type I Landscaping Screen.

(a) Type I landscaping shall function as a full screen and visual barrier. This landscaping is typically found between residential and nonresidential areas and to screen unwanted views;

(b) Type I landscaping shall minimally consist of:

(i) A mix of primarily evergreen trees, shrubs, perennials, and groundcover generally interspersed throughout the landscape strip and spaced to form a continuous screen;

(ii) Between 70 and 90 percent evergreen trees (use of Leyland Cedars is discouraged);

(iii) Trees provided at the rate of one per 100 square feet or one per 10 linear feet, whichever is greater, of landscape strip;

(iv) Evergreen shrubs or perennials provided at the rate of one per 20 square feet of landscape strip;

(v) Perennials;

(vi) Groundcover pursuant to SMC 21B.35.070;

(vii) Applicants shall demonstrate to the director’s satisfaction that the selected plant materials and configuration will be able to completely screen 80 percent of the unwanted views within three years of planting and fully screen the unwanted view within six years. This requirement will account for the size of materials planted and their typical growth rate; and

(viii) No plants included in the King County noxious weed list.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.35.030a. Type I landscaping standards.

(2) Type II Landscaping Screen.

(a) Type II landscaping is a “filtered screen” that functions as a visual separator. This landscaping is typically found between differing types of residential development, and to screen unwanted views from the pedestrian environment;

(b) Type II landscaping shall minimally consist of:

(i) A mix of evergreen and deciduous trees, shrubs, perennials, and groundcover generally interspersed throughout the landscape strip spaced to create a filtered screen;

(ii) At least 50 percent deciduous trees and at least 30 percent evergreen trees (use of Leyland Cedars is discouraged);

(iii) Trees provided at the rate of one per 200 square feet or one per 20 linear feet, whichever is greater, of landscape strip;

(iv) Shrubs and perennials provided at the rate of one per 20 square feet of landscape strip and spaced no more than eight feet apart on center;

(v) Perennials;

(vi) Groundcover pursuant to SMC 21B.35.070;

(vii) Applicants shall demonstrate to the director’s satisfaction that the selected plant materials and configuration will meet the intent of the standards within three years of planting. This requirement will account for the size of materials and the growth rate;

(viii) No plants included in the King County noxious weed list.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.35.030b. Type II landscaping standards.

(c) Curb cuts shall be provided where wheel stops or other structural barriers are present to allow surface water to drain to landscaped areas from adjacent impervious surfaces.

(3) Type III Landscaping Screen.

(a) Type III landscaping is a “see-through screen” that functions as a partial visual separator to soften the appearance of parking areas and building elevations. This landscaping is typically found along street frontage or between multifamily developments;

(b) Type III landscaping shall minimally consist of:

(i) A mix of deciduous and evergreen trees generally interspersed throughout the landscape strip and spaced to create a continuous canopy;

(ii) At least 70 percent deciduous trees;

(iii) Trees provided at the rate of one per 250 square feet or one per 25 linear feet, whichever is greater, of landscape strip and spaced no more than 30 feet apart on center;

(iv) Shrubs provided at the rate of one per 20 square feet of landscape strip and spaced no more than eight feet apart on center;

(v) Perennials;

(vi) Groundcover pursuant to SMC 21B.35.070;

(vii) Applicants shall demonstrate to the director’s satisfaction that the selected plant materials and configuration will meet the intent of the standards within three years of planting. This requirement will account for the size of materials and the growth rate; and

(viii) No plants included in the King County noxious weed list.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.35.030c. Type III landscaping standards.

(4) Type IV Landscaping.

(a) Type IV landscaping refers to enhanced woodland that functions as a buffer between different intensities of uses. These areas feature existing trees and vegetation, but often need supplemental planting to effectively function as an attractive buffer.

(b) Type IV landscaping shall minimally consist of:

(i) Trees, shrubs, perennials and groundcovers that are native to the Puget Sound and are appropriate to the conditions of the site.

(ii) Arrangement of plants shall be asymmetrical and plant material shall be sufficient in quantity to cover the soil in three growing seasons;

(iii) Minimum 20 feet in width if used as a screen;

(vi) Applicants shall demonstrate to the director’s satisfaction that the selected plant materials and configuration will meet the intent of the standards within three years of planting. This requirement will account for the size of materials and the growth rate; and

(vii) No plants included in the King County noxious weed list.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.35.030d. Type IV landscaping standards.

(5) Type V Landscaping.

(a) Type V landscaping refers to all other landscaped areas that do not qualify as Type I through VII landscaping. While native and low maintenance trees and shrubs are encouraged in these areas, lawn areas may be used for recreational or design purposes. These areas also could include flower beds and perennial beds.

(b) Type V landscaping may include any combination of plant materials provided the area complies with SMC 21B.35.060 and 21B.35.070.

(c) No plants included in the King County noxious weed list.

(6) Type VI Landscaping – Bioretention.

(a) Type VI landscaping refers to vegetated areas that function as bioretention for the treatment of stormwater runoff from hard surfaces. These areas feature vegetation and subsurface drainage features that treat, retain, and infiltrate stormwater runoff.

(b) Type VI landscaping shall be constructed, planted and maintained in general accordance with the 2005 Puget Sound Action Team Low Impact Development Technical Guidance Manual for Puget Sound, or equivalent. (Reference Figure 6.1.2 from 2005 PSAT Manual.)

(c) Type VI landscaping shall minimally consist of:

(i) Trees, shrubs, perennials and groundcovers tolerant of summer drought, ponding fluctuations and saturated soil conditions for prolonged lengths of time anticipated by the facility design and hydrologic conditions.

(ii) Plants should be tolerant of typical pollutants from surrounding surfaces, such as petroleum hydrocarbons, dissolved metals, and fertilizers.

(iii) Plantings should consist of native plant types; at least 15 percent of the plant palette shall be evergreen. Planting and grading for drainage features should be designed to be integrated aesthetically with the surrounding landscape and urban design elements.

(iv) Visual buffering, sight distances and setbacks should be considered for landscaping adjacent to roadways.

(v) The planting and bioretention soil media shall consist of a bioretention soil mix in accordance with the January 2009 WSU Pierce County Extension “Bioretention Soil Mix Review and Recommendations for Western Washington,” or equivalent.

(vi) No plants included in the King County noxious weed list.

(7) Type VII Landscaping – Green Roofs.

(a) Type VII landscaping refers to vegetated roofs, living roofs, eco-roofs and rooftop gardens. These roofs feature vegetation on top of a growing medium with drainage, water storage and root barrier on top of a roofing membrane and structural support.

(b) Type VII landscaping shall be constructed, planted and maintained in general accordance with the 2005 Puget Sound Action Team Low Impact Development Technical Guidance Manual for Puget Sound, the adopted Sammamish Stormwater Code, or equivalent.

(c) Type VII landscaping shall minimally consist of:

(i) Trees (in the case of rooftop gardens only), shrubs, and groundcovers adapted to harsh conditions, including seasonal drought, high winds and strong sun exposure. Plants should be adapted or native to the installation area.

(ii) With the exception of rooftop gardens, plants should have compact forms and require very little maintenance and pruning. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.35.040 Landscaping – Drainage.

Detention facilities shall be designed and landscaped as a visual amenity and environmental restoration. (See Figure 21B.30.100a.)

(1) Revisions to plans or additional landscaping requirements may be required to ensure that the proposed landscaping provides a visual amenity and environmental restoration.

(2) Trails or walkways may be incorporated into the landscaping plan.

(3) Landscaped areas should be topographically lower than surrounding areas, where possible, in order to facilitate surface water drainage to these areas. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A §  21B.35.055))


21B.35.050 Landscaping – Surface parking areas.

Parking area landscaping shall be provided within surface parking areas with 10 or more parking stalls for the purpose of providing shade, diminishing the visual impacts of large paved areas, and providing stormwater management. Island and planter strips shall be designed to work as rain gardens, sloped grading and curb cuts. Surface parking areas shall be as follows:

(1) Residential developments with common parking areas shall provide planting areas at the rate of 20 square feet per parking stall;

(2) Commercial, industrial, or institutional developments shall provide landscaping at a rate of:

(a) Twenty square feet per parking stall when 10 to 30 parking stalls are provided; and

(b) Twenty-five square feet per parking stall when 31 or more parking stalls are provided;

(3) Trees shall be provided and distributed throughout the parking area at a rate of:

(a) One tree for every five parking stalls for a commercial or industrial development; and

(b) One tree for every 10 parking stalls for residential or institutional development;

(4) The maximum distance between any parking stall and landscaping shall be no more than 100 feet;

(5) Pavers shall provide pedestrian access adjacent to planters;

(6) Permanent curbs or structural barriers shall be provided to protect the plantings from vehicle overhang and curb cuts shall be provided in these barriers to allow surface water to flow into landscaped areas;

(7) Parking area landscaping shall consist of:

(a) Canopy-type deciduous trees, evergreen trees, evergreen shrubs, perennials, and groundcovers planted in islands or strips;

(b) Shrubs planted at a rate of one per 20 square feet of landscaped area and maintained at a height of no more than 42 inches;

(c) Plantings contained in planting islands or strips having an area of at least 100 square feet and with a narrow dimension of no less than five feet;

(d) Groundcover pursuant to SMC 21B.35.070; and

(e) At least 70 percent of trees are deciduous; and

(8) Landscaped areas serve as stormwater treatment facilities. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A §  21B.35.060))


21B.35.060 Landscaping – General standards for all landscape areas.

All new landscape areas proposed for a development shall be subject to the following provisions:

(1) Berms shall not exceed a slope of two horizontal feet to one vertical foot (2:1).

(2) All new turf areas, except all-weather, sand-based athletic fields, shall:

(a) Be augmented with a two-inch layer of stabilized compost material or a four-inch layer of organic material with a minimum of eight percent organic material cultivated a minimum of eight inches deep; or

(b) Have an existing organic content of eight percent or more to a depth of six inches as shown in a soil sample analysis. The soil analysis shall include:

(i) Determination of soil texture, indicating percentage of organic matter;

(ii) An approximated soil infiltration rate (either measured or derived from soil/texture/infiltration rate tables). A range of infiltration rates shall be noted where appropriate; and

(iii) Measure pH value.

(3) Landscape areas, except turf or areas of established groundcover, shall be covered with at least two inches of stabilized compost to minimize evaporation.

(4) Plants having similar water use characteristics shall be grouped together in distinct hydro zones.

(5) Plant selection shall consider adaptability to climatic, geologic, and topographical conditions of the site. Preservation of existing vegetation is encouraged.

(6) Green roof landscaping standards pursuant to SMC 21B.35.030 (Type VII). (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A §  21B.35.070))


21B.35.070 Landscaping – Additional standards for required landscape areas.

In addition to the general standards of SMC 21B.35.060, landscape areas required pursuant to SMC 21B.35.030 through 21B.35.050 shall conform to the following standards:

(1) No plants included in the King County noxious weed list.

(2) All plants shall conform to American Association of Nurserymen (AAN) grades and standards as published in the “American Standard for Nursery Stock” manual; provided, that existing healthy vegetation used to augment new plantings shall not be required to meet the standards of this manual.

(3) Single-stemmed trees required pursuant to this chapter shall at the time of planting conform to the following standards:

(a) In parking area landscaping and in street rights-of-way:

(i) Deciduous trees shall have a minimum caliper of one and three-fourths inches and a height of 10 feet; and

(ii) Coniferous and broadleaf evergreens shall be at least five feet in height;

(b) In all other required landscape areas:

(i) Deciduous trees shall have a minimum caliper of one and one-half inches and a height of 10 feet; and

(ii) Native coniferous and broadleaf evergreen trees shall be at least five feet in height or taller if used as a screen (see SMC 21B.35.030(1) and (2)).

(4) Multiple-stemmed trees shall be permitted as an option to single-stemmed trees; provided, that such multiple-stemmed trees are:

(a) At least six feet in height; and

(b) Not allowed within street rights-of-way.

(5) When the width of any landscape strip is 20 feet or greater, the required trees shall be staggered in two or more rows.

(6) Shrubs shall be dwarf varieties unless demonstrated that other varieties can thrive if maintained at 42 inches. Shrubs shall also be as follows:

(a) At least an AAN container Class No. 2 size at time of planting in Type II, III and parking area landscaping;

(b) At least 24 inches in height at the time of planting for Type I landscaping; and

(c) In order to maintain a height not exceeding 42 inches when located in Type III or parking area landscaping.

(7) Perennials.

(8) Groundcovers shall be planted and spaced to result in total coverage of the majority of the required landscape area within three years.

(9) All fences shall be placed on the inward side of any required perimeter landscaping along the street frontage.

(10) Required street landscaping may be placed within City of Sammamish street rights-of-way subject to the City of Sammamish public works standards, provided adequate space is maintained along the street line to replant the required landscaping should subsequent street improvements require the removal of landscaping within the rights-of-way.

(11) Required street landscaping may be placed within Washington State rights-of-way subject to permission of the Washington State Department of Transportation.

(12) New landscape material provided for vegetation restoration or mitigation requirements and within areas of undisturbed vegetation or within the protected area of significant trees shall give preference to utilizing western Washington native plant species. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A §  21B.35.080))


21B.35.080 Landscaping – Advisory tree list.

The department shall, pursuant to Chapter 2.55 SMC, develop and maintain an advisory listing of trees recommended for new plantings. Such list shall describe their general characteristics and suitability, and provide guidelines for their inclusion within required landscape areas. The department shall maintain an advisory list of trees not to be used. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A §  21B.35.090))


21B.35.090 Landscaping – Plan design, design review, and installation.

(1) The landscape plan submitted to the department shall be drawn on the same base map as the development plans and shall identify the following:

(a) Total landscape area and separate hydro-zones;

(b) Landscape materials’ botanical/common name and applicable size;

(c) Property lines;

(d) Impervious surfaces;

(e) Natural or manmade water features or bodies;

(f) Existing or proposed structures, fences, and retaining walls;

(g) Natural features or vegetation left in natural state;

(h) Designated recreational open space areas;

(i) Irrigation plan; and

(j) Maintenance plan outlining the general activities and schedules for maintaining landscaping, including litter removal, mulching, weeding, pruning, watering, and lawn care (not required for single-family and townhouse development), including replacement schedule.

(2) The proposed landscape plan shall be certified by a Washington State registered landscape architect, Washington State certified nurseryman, Washington State certified landscaper, naturalized areas by a qualified ecologist, or other qualified professional as approved by the director.

(3) An affidavit signed by an individual specified in subsection (2) of this section, certifying that the landscaping has been installed consistent with the approved landscaping plan, shall be submitted to the department within 30 days of installation completion, unless the installed landscaping has been inspected and accepted by the department.

(4) The required landscaping shall be installed no later than three months after issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the project or project phase. However, the time limit for compliance may be extended to allow installation of such required landscaping during the next appropriate planting season. A financial guarantee shall be required prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy, if landscaping is not installed and inspected prior to occupancy.

(5) A tree retention plan (demonstrating compliance with SMC 21B.35.200) shall be prepared and submitted separately from the proposed landscape plan; provided, that retained trees counted towards site landscaping may be identified on the landscape plan. The tree retention plan shall:

(a) Be reviewed by a certified professional to ensure selection of healthy trees pursuant to SMC 21B.35.200(5) (tree retention requirements); and

(b) Identify trees scheduled for future removal and/or removed within the past year, to the maximum extent feasible. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A §  21B.35.100))


21B.35.100 Maintenance.

(1) All landscaping shall be maintained for the life of the project, including water conservation practices for turf grass such as annual aeration and dethatching, top dressing and overseeding;

(2) All landscape materials shall be properly pruned by a trained specialist and trimmed as necessary to maintain a healthy growing condition or to prevent primary limb failure;

(3) With the exception of dead, diseased or damaged trees specifically retained to provide wildlife habitat, other dead, diseased, damaged or stolen plantings shall be replaced within three months or during the next planting season if the loss does not occur in a planting season; and

(4) Landscape areas shall be kept free of trash, mulched, and weeded according to a vegetation maintenance plan submitted to the director. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A §  21B.35.110))


21B.35.110 Financial guarantees.

Financial guarantees shall be required consistent with the provisions of SMC Title 27A. This time period may be extended to one year by the director, if necessary to cover a planting and growing season. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A §  21B.35.120))


21B.35.120 Water use – Applicability of water budget for landscape areas.

Irrigation systems of any type are optional components of a landscape area. However, a water budget for irrigation purposes shall be established for all new development, except for:

(1) Individually platted single dwelling (attached or detached) residential lots; provided, that developer-installed landscaping in common areas of residential projects is not exempt; and

(2) Any project with a total landscaped area less than 500 square feet. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A §  21B.35.130))


21B.35.130 Water use – Irrigation water budget calculated.

(1) The water budget (WB) allocation shall be calculated using the following formula:

	WB = (ETO) x (AF) x (LA) x (CF)

ETO:    Referenced evapotranspiration rate (net seasonal irrigation requirement in inches; see table below)

AF:    Adjustment factor value of 0.8 (i.e., 0.5 x (ETO)/0.625 irrigation efficiency coefficient)

LA:    Landscape area (square feet)

CF:    Conversion factor value of 0.62 (ETO inches to gallons per square foot)

	 	Monthly Net Irrigation Requirement (inches)

	January	.00

	February	.00

	March	.00

	April	.00

	May	1.59

	June	3.13

	July	4.46

	August	3.51

	September	1.77

	October	.03

	November	.00

	December	.00

	Season Total	14.49

*These figures are based on a 30-year average of National Weather Service Data and represent the amount of additional irrigation required for turf grass. The figures are adjusted for turf typically used in commercial landscaping.

Figure 21B.35.130a. Reference ETO table: Historical data.

(2) The City shall periodically undertake an evaluation of the WB calculation formula outlined in subsection (1) of this section. The evaluation shall include a recommendation to retain or modify the adjustment factor or components thereof, and shall be made in consultation with groups including landscape professionals and water purveyors.

(3) The water budget will be calculated upon the total area of the site in landscape areas and in landscape water features (such as decorative ponds, pools or fountains) that are fed by irrigation water. For the purpose of calculating the water budget, “landscape area” shall mean the entire parcel, less:

(a) Sensitive areas and their buffers;

(b) The building footprint;

(c) Driveways;

(d) Paved portions of parking lots; and

(e) Hardscapes (e.g., decks, patios, sidewalks, and other nonporous areas).

(4) Areas such as playgrounds, sport fields, golf courses, school yards, or other recreational spaces where the turf provides a playing surface or serves other recreational purposes may be allowed additional water beyond the calculated water budget. In order to receive additional water for such turf areas, the applicant shall submit a statement designating such turf areas for recreational purposes and specifying additional water needs above the water budget. This additional water need will be based upon the ETO information for the turf grass species or species mix used in such turf areas.

(5) Landscape water features shall not use potable water unless the water feature recirculates water used in its operation.

(6) The irrigation water use may be monitored by the water purveyor after the date of release of the performance bond.

(7) Alternative water sources such as recycled wastewater or rainwater are encouraged as permitted by the Department of Ecology. Such water sources shall not be subject to the limits of the water budget. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A §  21B.35.140))


21B.35.140 Water use – Estimated water use calculated.

The estimated water use shall be calculated using the following provisions.

(1) Estimated water use (EWU) shall be calculated for each hydro zone by using the following formula:

	EWU	=	(ETO) x (PF) x (HA) x (CF)

	 	 	IE

ETO:    Referenced evapotranspiration rate (net seasonal irrigation requirement in inches. See table in SMC 21B.35.130)

PF:    Plant factor value (see subsection (2) of this section)

HA:    Hydro zone area (square feet)

CF:    Conversion factor value of 0.62 (ETO inches to gallons per square foot)

IE:    Irrigation efficiency value

(2) Plant factor values shall be as follows, but may be adjusted pursuant to subsection (3) of this section:

	0 to 0.3 for low water use plants

	0.4 to 0.6 for average water use plants

	0.7 to 1.0 for high water use plants

(3) For each hydro zone, plant factor values may be determined and adjusted by the designer (based on professional judgment and applicable reference materials) considering the relevant factors such as:

(a) Water requirements of the various plant species proposed;

(b) Density of the plantings;

(c) Microclimate of the site; and

(d) Soil conditions. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A §  21B.35.150))


21B.35.150 Water use – Irrigation efficiency goals and system design standards.

For purposes of this section, irrigation shall include any means of applying water to landscaped areas. All irrigation is at the applicant’s option. Manually applied irrigation methods shall comply with subsections (1) and (2) of this section. Irrigation applied through installed irrigation systems shall comply with subsections (1) through (3) of this section:

(1) Irrigation water shall be applied with goals of avoiding runoff, low head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where water flows onto adjacent property, nonirrigated areas, and impervious surfaces by:

(a) Considering soil type and infiltration rates;

(b) Using proper irrigation equipment and schedules, including features such as repeat cycles, to closely match application rates with infiltration rates; and

(c) Considering special problems posed by irrigation on slopes and in median strips.

(2) All irrigation water outlets, except those using alternative water sources, shall be downstream of the meter used to measure irrigation water use.

(3) Irrigation systems shall be subject to the following additional provisions:

(a) Systems shall not be located on any:

(i) Turfgrass slopes exceeding a slope of three horizontal feet to one vertical foot (3:1); and

(ii) Turfgrass portions of median strips less than eight feet width.

(b) Systems in landscape strips less than five feet in width shall be designed to ensure that overspray and/or runoff does not occur by use of system design options such as low volume emitters or microspray systems.

(c) Systems shall be designed to be consistent with the requirements of the hydro zone in which they are located.

(d) Systems shall be designed with the minimum average irrigation efficiency of 0.625 for spray type and 0.925 for low volume, low pressure emitter type systems.

(e) The use of automatic shutoff or override capabilities using rain shutoffs or moisture sensors is required.

(f) Systems shall utilize a master control valve connected to an automatic controller.

(g) Systems shall make provisions for winterization either by providing:

(i) Manual drains (automatic drain valves are not permitted at all low points); or

(ii) Means to blow out lines with pressurized air.

(h) Separate valves shall be used to irrigate plants with differing water needs.

(i) Sprinkler heads with consistent application rates shall be selected for proper area coverage, operating pressure, and adjustment capability.

(j) Backflow preventers are required and maintained. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A §  21B.35.160))


21B.35.160 Water use – Irrigation system design, design review and audit at installation.

(1) Irrigation plan design shall be certified by an Irrigation Association (IA) certified designer or a registered landscape architect or professional engineer with irrigation design experience.

(2) The irrigation system must be audited and accepted at installation by an IA-certified irrigation auditor. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A §  21B.35.170))


21B.35.170 Water use – Irrigation design plan contents.

Proposed irrigation system design plans shall be drawn on the same base project map as the landscape plan and shall identify:

(1) Location and size of any proposed separate water meters for the landscape serving commercial, multifamily, school, church, or recreation land uses only;

(2) Location, type, and size of all components of the irrigation system;

(3) Static water pressure at the point of connection to the water supply;

(4) Flow rate (gallons per minute), application rates (inches per hour), and design operating pressure (PSI) for each station; and

(5) Cross connection prevention and/or back-flow prevention device in accordance with state standards. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A §  21B.35.180))


21B.35.180 Water use – Irrigation schedules.

Irrigation schedules consistent with the following shall be submitted:

(1) A recommended irrigation program with monthly irrigation schedules based, at a minimum, on average monthly ETO shall be required for before and after establishment.

(2) The irrigation schedule shall:

(a) Include for each station the run time (in minutes per cycle) and cycles per week;

(b) Indicate the amount of applied water (in the applicable billing unit used by a purveyor);

(c) Incorporate use of evapotranspiration data reflecting local microclimates;

(d) Be adjusted for additional water need in recreational areas;

(e) Incorporate additional operating criteria such as avoiding irrigation at times of high temperatures or winds. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A §  21B.35.190))


21B.35.190 Water use – Irrigation system maintenance.

Irrigation systems shall be maintained and inspected annually to assure proper functioning and in compliance with the calculated water budget for the system. Replacement of components shall be of originally specified parts or materials, or their equivalents. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A §  21B.35.200))


21B.35.200 Tree retention requirements.

The following tree retention requirements shall be applied in addition to the applicable requirements of Chapters 16.15 and 21A.50 SMC:

(1) Emergency tree removal to prevent imminent danger or hazard to persons or property shall not be limited by this section or SMC 21B.35.210, Tree protection standards.

(2) All new development in the TC-B, TC-C, TC-D, and TC-E zones shall retain significant trees subject to the following standards:

(a) Within areas unconstrained by environmentally sensitive areas and associated buffers, a minimum of 25 percent of significant trees shall be retained.

(b) Within environmentally sensitive areas and associated buffers, significant trees and other vegetation shall be retained subject to the requirements of Chapter 21A.50 SMC; provided, that trees retained within environmentally sensitive areas and associated buffers may be counted for up to 50 percent of the tree retention requirement in subsection (2)(a) of this section.

(3) Within environmentally sensitive areas and associated buffers in TC-A zones, significant trees and other vegetation shall be retained subject to the requirements of Chapter 21A.50 SMC.

(4) All clearing and grading of existing undeveloped properties shall retain significant trees until a tree retention plan is approved through a unified zone development plan (Chapter 21B.95 SMC).

(5) Trees identified for retention shall be selected, to the extent feasible, subject to the following criteria:

(a) Trees located within healthy, vegetated groups and stands rather than as isolated trees scattered throughout the site;

(b) Trees that have a reasonable chance of survival once the site is developed;

(c) Trees that will not pose a threat to persons or property;

(d) Trees that can be incorporated into required landscaping or can be used to screen the site from adjacent properties;

(e) Trees adjacent to open space, sensitive area buffers or sensitive area tracts;

(f) Trees having a significant land stability function; or

(g) Trees that meet the definition of “heritage tree.”

(6) Subject to review and approval by the director, up to 50 percent of trees identified for retention may be removed, provided replacement trees shall be required pursuant to SMC 21B.35.220, Tree replacement and enforcement.

(7) Exceptions to the tree retention standards may be requested and approved by the City subject to the satisfying all of the following criteria:

(a) Strict compliance with the provisions of this code would prevent reasonable use of the property;

(b) Proposed tree removal and proposed replacement is consistent with this section and SMC 21B.35.210, Tree protection standards, and Chapters 16.15 and 21A.50 SMC; and

(c) Proposed tree replacement is consistent with the requirements of SMC 21B.35.220, Tree replacement and enforcement. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A §  21B.35.210))


21B.35.210 Tree protection standards.

The following tree protection standards shall apply to trees retained pursuant to SMC 21B.35.200, Tree retention requirements:

(1) All trees identified for retention shall be identified on project site plans, and shall include a summary of the project specific tree protection measures.

(2) Trees identified for retention shall be identified on the project site by use of one or more of the following methods:

(a) Tree protection barriers shall be installed along the outer edge and completely encompass the dripline of trees identified for retention. Protection barriers shall consist of fencing at least four feet high, constructed of chain link or polyethylene laminar safety fencing or similar material; or

(b) Tree protection flagging shall be installed along the outer edge and completely encompass the dripline of trees identified for retention. Flagging should include signs reading “Tree Save Area.”

(3) All construction activities shall be located outside of the dripline of trees identified for retention.

(4) Site plans shall be designed to provide long-term protection of trees identified for retention. Site design shall incorporate one of the following to provide protection of retained trees:

(a) Curbing or other physical barrier in areas used by vehicular traffic;

(b) Fencing around areas adjacent to areas not used by vehicular traffic; or

(c) Other protection means subject to approval by the director.

(5) All trees identified for retention may be pruned and otherwise maintained at the property owner’s discretion; provided, that no topping of retained trees is permitted and removal of more than 25 percent of existing limbs shall only be permitted under the direction of a certified arborist. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A §  21B.35.230))


21B.35.220 Tree replacement and enforcement.

This section shall apply in addition to the provisions of SMC Title 23, Code Enforcement.

(1) Any tree removed in violation of SMC 21B.35.200, Tree retention requirements, or any tree removed pursuant to the exception process of SMC 21B.35.200(7) shall be subject to the following replacement requirements:

(a) Coniferous trees shall be replaced by coniferous trees native to Washington. Deciduous trees shall be replaced with a mixture of native coniferous trees and deciduous trees at a ratio of two coniferous trees to every one deciduous tree per the replacement ratios below;

(b) Replacement coniferous trees shall be at least eight feet in height. Replacement deciduous trees shall be at least one and one-half inches in diameter (DBH); and

(c) Trees shall be replaced subject to the following replacement ratios:

(i) Removed trees with a DBH greater than nine inches up to 12 inches shall be replaced by four trees;

(ii) Removed trees with a DBH greater than 12 inches up to 16 inches shall be replaced by six trees; and

(iii) Removed trees with a DBH of 16 inches or more shall be replaced by eight trees.

(2) Financial guarantees for replacement trees may be required consistent with the provisions of SMC Title 27A.

(3) At the discretion of the director, each tree removed in violation of this chapter may be considered a separate code enforcement case for the purposes of SMC Title 23, Code Enforcement. (Ord. O2016-429 § 11 (Att. K); Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A §  21B.35.240))


Chapter 21B.40 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS – PARKING AND CIRCULATION

Sections:

21B.40.010    Purpose.

21B.40.020    Authority and application.

21B.40.030    Computation of required off-street parking spaces.

21B.40.040    Shared parking requirements.

21B.40.050    Exceptions for community residential facilities (CRF) and senior citizen assisted housing.

21B.40.060    Parking for the disabled.

21B.40.070    Loading space requirements.

21B.40.080    Stacking spaces for drive-through facilities.

21B.40.090    Transit and rideshare provisions.

21B.40.100    Pedestrian and bicycle circulation and access.

21B.40.110    Off-street parking plan design standards.

21B.40.120    Off-street parking construction standards.

21B.40.130    Compact car allowance requirements.

21B.40.140    Internal circulation street standards.

21B.40.150    Structured parking requirements.


21B.40.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide adequate parking for all uses allowed in this title, to reduce demand for parking by encouraging alternative means of transportation including public transit, rideshare and bicycles, and to increase pedestrian mobility in urban areas by:

(1) Setting minimum off-street parking standards for different land uses that assure safe, convenient and adequately sized parking facilities within activity centers;

(2) Providing incentives to rideshare through preferred parking arrangements;

(3) Providing for parking and storage of bicycles; and

(4) Requiring uses that attract large numbers of employees or customers to provide transit stops. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.40.020 Authority and application.

(1) Before an occupancy permit may be granted for any new or enlarged building or for a change of use in any existing building, the use shall be required to meet the provisions of this chapter.

(2) If this chapter does not specify a parking requirement for a land use, the director shall establish the minimum requirement based on a study of anticipated parking demand. Transportation demand management actions taken at the site shall be considered in determining anticipated demand. If the site is located in an activity center or community business center, the minimum requirement shall be set at a level less than the anticipated demand, but at no less than 75 percent of the anticipated demand. In the study the applicant shall provide sufficient information to demonstrate that the parking demand for a specific land use will be satisfied. Parking studies shall be prepared by a professional engineer with expertise in traffic and parking analyses, or an equally qualified individual as authorized by the director.

(3) If the required amount of off-street parking has been proposed to be provided off-site, the applicant shall provide written contracts with affected landowners showing that required off-street parking shall be provided in a manner consistent with the provisions of this chapter. The contracts shall be reviewed by the director for compliance with this chapter, and if approved, the contracts shall be recorded with the King County records and elections division as a deed restriction on the title to all applicable properties. These deed restrictions may not be revoked or modified without authorization by the director. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.40.030 Computation of required off-street parking spaces.

(1) Except as modified in SMC 21B.40.070(2) through (4), off-street parking areas shall contain at a minimum the number of parking spaces as stipulated in the following table. Off-street parking ratios expressed as number of spaces per square feet means the usable or net square footage of floor area, exclusive of nonpublic areas. Nonpublic areas include but are not limited to building maintenance areas, storage areas, closets or restrooms. If the formula for determining the number of off-street parking spaces results in a fraction, the number of off-street parking spaces shall be rounded to the nearest whole number with fractions of 0.50 or greater rounding up and fractions below 0.50 rounding down.

	Land Use	Minimum Parking Spaces Required

	Residential (SMC 21B.20.040(1)):

	Single detached/duplex/townhouse	2.0 per dwelling unit

	Apartment:	 

	Studio units	1.2 per dwelling unit

	One bedroom units	1.5 per dwelling unit

	Two bedroom units	1.7 per dwelling unit

	Three bedroom units or larger	2.0 per dwelling unit

	Senior citizen assisted	1 per 2 dwelling or sleeping units

	Community residential facilities	1 per 2 bedrooms

	Dormitory, including religious	1 per 2 bedrooms

	Hotel/motel including organizational hotel/lodging	1 per bedroom

	Bed and breakfast guesthouse	1 per guest room, plus 2 per facility

	Recreation/Cultural (SMC 21B.20.050(1)):

	Recreation/culture uses:	1 per 300 square feet

	Exceptions:	 

	Park/playfield	(Director)

	Theater	1 per 3 fixed seats

	Conference center	1 per 3 fixed seats, plus 1 per 50 square feet used for assembly purposes without fixed seats, or 1 per bedroom, whichever results in the greater number of spaces

	General Services (SMC 21B.20.060(1)):

	General service uses:	1 per 300 square feet

	Exceptions:	 

	Daycare I	2 per facility

	Daycare II	2 per facility, plus 1 space for each 20 children

	Churches, synagogues, temples	1 per 5 fixed seats, plus 1 per 50 square feet of gross floor area without fixed seats used for assembly purposes

	Outpatient clinic offices	1 per 300 square feet of office, labs and examination rooms

	Nursing and personal care facilities	1 per 4 beds

	Hospital	1 per bed

	Elementary schools	1 per classroom, plus 1 per 50 students

	Secondary schools:	 

	Middle/junior high schools	1 per classroom, plus 1 per 50 students

	High schools	1 per classroom, plus 1 per 10 students

	High schools with stadiums	Greater of 1 per classroom plus 1 per 10 students, or 1 per 3 fixed seats in stadium

	Vocational schools	1 per classroom, plus 1 per 5 students

	Specialized instruction schools	1 per classroom, plus 1 per 2 students

	Artist studios	0.9 per 1,000 square feet of area used for studios

	Government/Business Services (SMC 21B.20.070(1)):

	Government/business services uses:	1 per 300 square feet

	Exceptions:	 

	Public agency yard	1 per 300 square feet of offices, plus 0.9 per 1,000 square feet of indoor storage or repair areas

	Public agency archives	0.9 per 1,000 square feet of storage area, plus 1 per 50 square feet of waiting/reviewing areas

	Courts	3 per courtroom, plus 1 per 50 square feet of fixed seat or assembly areas

	Police facility	(Director)

	Fire facility	(Director)

	Office	1 per 300 square feet

	Retail/Wholesale (SMC 21B.20.080(1)):

	Retail trade uses:	1 per 300 square feet

	Exceptions:	 

	Food stores, less than 15,000 square feet	3 plus 1 per 350 square feet

	Restaurants	1 per 100 square feet in dining or lounge areas

	Regional (SMC 21B.20.100(1)):

	Regional uses	(Director)

(2) It is the City’s intent to provide property owners in the Town Center a wide variety of options for meeting parking requirements, including joint-use parking, off-site parking, on-street parking, parking management/transportation demand management measures, and other techniques that provide adequate access to Town Center uses but minimize the amount of space occupied by parking. An applicant may request a modification of the minimum required number of parking spaces by providing a parking study that demonstrates that parking demand can be met with a reduced parking requirement. In such cases, the director may approve a reduction of up to 100 percent of the minimum required number of spaces subject to: TOD, TDM or other like strategies. SMC 21B.40.040 includes standards for parking reduction related to joint-use facilities. Other parking reductions may apply as determined by the director.

(3) When the City has received a shell building permit application, off-street parking requirements shall be based on the possible tenant improvements or uses authorized by the zone designation and compatible with the limitations of the shell permit. When the range of possible uses results in different parking requirements, the director shall establish the amount of parking based on a likely range of uses.

(4) Where other provisions of this code stipulate reduced minimum parking requirements, those provisions shall apply.

(5) In any development required to provide six or more parking spaces, bicycle parking shall be provided. Bicycle parking shall be bike rack or locker-type parking facilities unless otherwise specified.

(a) Off-street parking areas shall contain at least one bicycle parking space for every 12 spaces required for motor vehicles except as follows:

(i) The director may reduce bike rack parking facilities for patrons when it is demonstrated that bicycle activity will not occur at that location.

(ii) The director may require additional spaces when it is determined that the use or its location will generate a high volume of bicycle activity. Such a determination shall include but not be limited to the following uses:

(A) Park/playfield;

(B) Library/museum/arboretum;

(C) Elementary/secondary school;

(D) Sports club; or

(E) Retail business (when located along a developed bicycle trail or designated bicycle route).

(b) Bicycle facilities for patrons shall be located within 100 feet of the building entrance and shall be designed to allow either a bicycle frame or wheels to be locked to a structure attached to the pavement.

(c) All bicycle parking and storage shall be located in safe, visible areas that do not impede pedestrian or vehicle traffic flow, and shall be well lit for nighttime use.

(d) When more than 10 people are employed on site, enclosed locker-type parking facilities for employees shall be provided. The director shall allocate the required number of parking spaces between bike rack parking and enclosed locker-type parking facilities.

(e) One indoor bicycle storage space shall be provided for every two dwelling units in townhouse and apartment residential uses, unless individual garages are provided for every unit. The director may reduce the number of bike rack parking spaces if indoor storage facilities are available to all residents.

(6) On-street parking immediately adjacent to the property may be counted towards the parking requirement. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.40.040 Shared parking requirements.

The amount of off-street parking required by SMC 21B.40.030 may be reduced by an amount determined by the director when shared parking facilities for two or more uses are proposed, provided:

(1) The total parking area exceeds 5,000 square feet;

(2) The parking facilities are designed and developed as a single on-site common parking facility, or as a system of on-site and off-site facilities, if all facilities are connected with improved pedestrian facilities and no building or use involved is more than 800 feet from the most remote shared facility;

(3) The amount of the reduction shall not exceed 20 percent for each use, unless:

(a) The normal hours of operation for each use are separated by at least one hour; or

(b) A parking demand study is prepared by a professional traffic engineer and submitted by the applicant documenting that the hours of actual parking demand for the proposed uses will not conflict and those uses will be served by adequate parking if shared parking reductions are authorized;

(c) The director shall determine the amount of reduction subject to subsection (4) of this section;

(4) The total number of parking spaces in the common parking facility is not less than the minimum required spaces for any single use;

(5) A covenant or other contract for shared parking between the cooperating property owners is approved by the director. This covenant or contract must be recorded with the King County records and elections division as a deed restriction on both properties and cannot be modified or revoked without the consent of the director; and

(6) If any requirements for shared parking are violated, the affected property owners must provide a remedy satisfactory to the director or provide the full amount of required off-street parking for each use, in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, unless a satisfactory alternative remedy is approved by the director. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.40.050 Exceptions for community residential facilities (CRF) and senior citizen assisted housing.

(1) The minimum requirement of one off-street parking space per two bedrooms for CRFs and one off-street parking space per two senior citizen assisted housing units may be reduced by up to 50 percent, as determined by the director based on the following considerations:

(a) Availability of private, convenient transportation services to meet the needs of the CRF residents;

(b) Accessibility to and frequency of public transportation; and

(c) Pedestrian access to health, medical, and shopping facilities.

(2) If a CRF facility or senior citizen assisted housing is no longer used for such purposes, additional off-street parking spaces shall be required in compliance with this chapter prior to the issuance of a new certificate of occupancy. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.40.060 Parking for the disabled.

Off-street parking and access for physically disabled persons shall be provided in accordance with the regulations adopted pursuant to Chapter 19.27 RCW, State Building Code, and Chapter 70.92 RCW, Public Buildings – Provisions for Aged and Disabled. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.40.070 Loading space requirements.

(1) Every nonresidential building engaged in retail, wholesale, manufacturing, or storage activities, excluding self-service storage facilities, shall provide loading spaces in accordance with the standards listed below:

	Gross Floor Area	Required Number of Loading Spaces

	10,000 to 40,000 square feet	1

	40,001 to 96,000 square feet	2

	96,001 to 160,000 square feet	3

	160,001 to 196,000 square feet	4

	For each additional 70,000 square feet	1 additional

(2) Every building engaged in hotel, office building, restaurant, hospital, auditorium, convention hall, exhibition hall, sports arena/stadium or other similar use shall provide loading spaces in accordance with the standards listed below:

	Gross Floor Area	Required Number of Loading Spaces

	40,000 to 120,000 square feet	1

	120,001 to 264,000 square feet	2

	264,001 to 520,000 square feet	3

	520,001 to 784,000 square feet	4

	784,001 to 920,000 square feet	5

	For each additional 200,000 square feet	1 additional

(3) For buildings without individual businesses over 20,000 square feet, loading space may be provided by on-street designated loading zones upon approval of the director.

(4) Each loading space required by this section shall be a minimum of 10 feet wide, 30 feet long, and have an unobstructed vertical clearance of 14 feet six inches, and shall be surfaced, improved and maintained as required by this chapter. Loading spaces shall be located so that trucks shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicle traffic movement or project into any public right-of-way. All loading space areas shall be separated from parking areas and shall be designated as truck loading spaces.

(5) Any loading space located within 100 feet of areas zoned for residential use shall be screened and operated as necessary to reduce noise and visual impacts. Noise mitigation measures may include architectural or structural barriers, beams, walls, or restrictions on the hours of operation.

(6) Multi-story self-service storage facilities shall provide two loading spaces, and single story facilities one loading space, adjacent to each building entrance that provides common access to interior storage units. Each loading berth shall measure not less than 25 feet by 12 feet with an unobstructed vertical clearance of 14 feet six inches, and shall be surfaced, improved and maintained as required by this chapter. Any floor area additions or structural alterations to a building shall be required to provide loading space or spaces as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.40.080 Stacking spaces for drive-through facilities.

Drive-through facilities are not permitted in the Town Center. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.40.090 Transit and rideshare provisions.

(1) All land uses listed in SMC 21B.20.070(1) (government/business services), and in SMC 21B.20.090(1) (manufacturing), hospitals, high schools, vocational schools, universities, and specialized instruction schools shall be required to reserve one parking space of every 20 required spaces for rideshare parking as follows:

(a) The parking spaces shall be located closer to the primary employee entrance than any other employee parking except disabled;

(b) Reserved areas shall have markings and signs indicating that the space is reserved; and

(c) Parking in reserved areas shall be limited to vanpools and carpools established through rideshare programs by public agencies and to vehicles meeting minimum rideshare qualifications set by the employer.

(2) The director may reduce the number of required off-street parking spaces when one or more scheduled transit routes provide service within 660 feet of the site. The amount of reduction shall be based on the number of scheduled transit runs between 7:00 to 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 to 6:00 p.m. each business day up to a maximum reduction as follows:

(a) Four percent for each run serving land uses in SMC 21B.20.070(1) (government/business services) and 21B.20.090(1) (manufacturing) up to a maximum of 40 percent;

(b) Two percent for each run serving land uses in SMC 21B.20.050(1) (recreation/culture), 21B.20.060(1) (general services) and 21B.20.080(1) (retail/wholesale) up to a maximum of 20 percent; and

(3) All uses that are located on an existing transit route and are required under the computation for required off-street parking spaces in SMC 21B.40.030(1) to provide more than 200 parking spaces may be required to provide transit shelters, bus turnout lanes or other transit improvements as a condition of permit approval. Uses that reduce required parking under subsection (2) of this section shall provide transit shelters if transit routes adjoin the site. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.40.100 Pedestrian and bicycle circulation and access.

(See Chapter 21B.30 SMC.) (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.40.110 Off-street parking plan design standards.

(1) Off-street parking areas shall not be located more than 1,000 feet from the building they are required to serve for all uses except those specified below; where the off-street parking areas do not abut the buildings they serve, the required maximum distance shall be measured from the nearest building entrance that the parking area serves:

(a) For all other residential dwellings at least a portion of parking areas shall be located within 150 feet from the building(s) they are required to serve;

(b) Parking lots shall be so arranged as to permit the internal circulation of vehicles between parking aisles without re-entering adjoining public streets; and

(c) Parking for the disabled shall be provided in accordance with SMC 21B.40.060.

(2) The minimum parking space and aisle dimensions for the most common parking angles are shown on the chart below. For parking angles other than those shown on the chart, the minimum parking space and aisle dimensions shall be determined by the director. Regardless of the parking angle, one-way aisles shall be at least 10 feet wide, and two-way aisles shall be at least 20 feet wide. If dead-end aisles are used in the parking layout, they shall be constructed as two-way aisles. Parking plans for angle parking shall use space widths no less than eight feet six inches for a standard parking space design and eight feet for a compact car parking space design.

MINIMUM PARKING STALL AND AISLE DIMENSIONS  

	A	B	C	D	E	F

	Parking Angle	Stall Width	Curb Length	Stall Depth	Aisle Width	Unit Depth

	One-Way	Two-Way	One-Way	Two-Way

	0	 

Min. Desired	8.0*

8.5

9.0	20.0*

22.5

22.5	8.0

8.5

9.0	12.0

12.0

12.0	20.0

20.0

20.0	**

29.0

30.0	**

37.0

38.0

	30	 

Min. Desired	8.0*

8.5

9.0	16.0*

17.0

18.0	15.0

16.5

17.0	10.0

10.0

10.0	20.0

20.0

20.0	**

42.0

44.0	**

53.0

54.0

	45	 

Min. Desired	8.0*

8.5

9.0	11.5*

12.0

12.5	17.0*	12.0

12.0

12.0	20.0

20.0

20.0	**

50.0

51.0	**

58.0

59.0

	60	 

Min. Desired	8.0*

8.5

9.0	9.6*

10.0

10.5	18.0

20.0

21.0	18.0

18.0

18.0	20.0

20.0

20.0	**

58.0

60.0	**

60.0

62.0

	90	 

Min. Desired	8.0*

8.5

9.0	8.0*

8.5

9.0	16.0*

18.0

18.0	24.0

24.0

24.0	24.0

24.0

24.0	**

60.0

60.0	**

60.0

60.0

*For compact stalls only.

**Variable with compact and standard combinations.


[IMAGE]


(3) Any parking spaces abutting a required landscaped area on the driver or passenger side of the vehicle shall provide an additional 18 inches above the minimum space width requirement to provide a place to step other than in the landscaped area. The additional width shall be separated from the adjacent parking space by a parking space division stripe.

(4) The parking space depth may be reduced when vehicles overhang a walkway or landscaping under the following conditions:

(a) Wheelstops or curbs are installed;

(b) The remaining walkway provides a minimum of 48 inches of unimpeded passageway for pedestrians;

(c) The amount of space depth reduction is limited to a maximum of 18 inches; and

(d) Landscaping is designed in accordance with SMC 21B.35.050(7).

(5) Driveways providing ingress and egress between off-street parking areas and abutting streets shall be designed, located and constructed in accordance with the provisions of the City of Sammamish public works standards as adopted by Chapter 14A.01 SMC. Driveways for single detached dwellings, no more than 20 feet in width, may cross required setbacks or landscaped areas in order to provide access between the off-street parking areas and the street, provided no more than 15 percent of the required landscaping or setback area is eliminated by the driveway. Joint-use driveways may be located within required landscaping or setback areas. Driveways for all other developments may cross or be located within required setbacks or landscaped areas in order to provide access between the off-street parking areas and the street, provided no more than 10 percent of the required landscaping is displaced by the driveway and the driveway is located no closer than five feet from any property line except where intersecting the street.

(6) Parking spaces required per this title shall be located as follows:

(a) For single detached dwelling units and duplexes, see SMC 21B.30.270 for requirements;

(b) For cottage housing, see SMC 21B.30.280 for requirements; and

(c) For all other development, see SMC 21B.30.030 for requirements.

(7) Lighting shall be provided for safety of traffic and pedestrian circulation on the site. It shall be designed to minimize direct illumination of abutting properties and adjacent streets. The director shall have the authority to waive the requirement to provide lighting.

(8) Tandem or end-to-end parking is allowed in residential developments. Apartment/townhouse developments may have tandem parking areas for each dwelling unit but shall not combine parking for separate dwelling units in tandem parking areas.

(9) All vehicle parking and storage for single detached dwellings must be in a garage, carport or on an approved surface.

(10) The total number of vehicles parked or stored outside of a building on a single-family lot in the TC-A or TC-B zones, excluding recreational vehicles and trailers, shall not exceed two vehicles on lots 12,500 square feet or less and three vehicles on lots greater than 12,500 square feet.

(11) Vanpool/carpool parking areas shall meet the following minimum design standards:

(a) A minimum vertical clearance of seven feet three inches shall be provided to accommodate van vehicles if designated vanpool/carpool parking spaces are located in a parking structure; and

(b) A minimum turning radius of 26 feet four inches with a minimum turning diameter (curb to curb) of 52 feet five inches shall be provided from parking aisles to adjacent carpool/vanpool parking spaces.

(12) Direct access from the street right-of-way to off-street parking areas shall be subject to the requirements of SMC 21A.60.070.

(13) No dead-end alley may provide access to more than eight off-street parking spaces.

(14) Any parking stalls located in enclosed buildings shall be totally within the enclosed building. (Ord. O2018-466 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.40.120 Off-street parking construction standards.

(1) Off-street parking areas shall have dust-free, all-weather surfacing.

(2) If the director determines that permeable pavements will provide a significant water quality or surface water management benefit, then all paved surfaces shall be permeable according to the current City standards.

(3) Barrier wheel stops that are not integral with a curb, walkway, or other structure are not permitted.

(4) Grading work for parking areas shall meet the requirements of Chapter 16.15 SMC. Drainage and erosion/sedimentation control facilities shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 9.04 KCC as adopted by SMC Title 13.

(5) Asphalt or concrete surfaced parking areas shall have parking spaces marked by surface paint lines or suitable substitute traffic marking material in accordance with the Washington State Department of Transportation Standards. Wheel stops integral with a curb or other structure are required where a parked vehicle would encroach on adjacent property, pedestrian access or circulation areas, right-of-way or landscaped areas. Typically approved markings and wheel stop locations are illustrated below.


[IMAGE]


(Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.40.130 Compact car allowance requirements.

In any development containing more than 20 parking spaces, up to 50 percent of the total number of spaces may be sized to accommodate compact cars, subject to the following:

(1) Each space shall be clearly identified as a compact car space by painting the word “COMPACT” in capital letters, a minimum of eight inches high, on the pavement at the base of the parking space and centered between the striping;

(2) Aisle widths shall conform to the standards set for standard size cars; and

(3) Apartment developments with less than 20 parking spaces may designate up to 40 percent of the required parking spaces as compact spaces. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.40.140 Internal circulation street standards.

Internal access streets to off-street parking areas shall conform with the surfacing and design requirements for private commercial streets set forth in the City of Sammamish public works standards as adopted by Chapter 14A.01 SMC unless the director determines an alternate design is appropriate. (Ord. O2018-466 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.40.150 Structured parking requirements.

(1) Intent. It is the City’s intent that surface parking in the Town Center be minimized in order to:

(a) Reduce the amount of land occupied by parking;

(b) Reduce negative impacts to visual quality and pedestrian access; and

(c) Reduce costs and impacts associated with surface water run-off facilities.

To that end the City will encourage appropriate reductions in parking requirements and take steps to provide transportation to and within the Town Center that reduce automobile trips and subsequent need for parking. At the same time the City shall encourage that structured parking be constructed in lieu of surface parking accessory to a development. Structured parking is pursued not only to reduce the surface parking footprint, but also as a means to reduce the cost and impacts of stormwater treatment facilities through green roofs and water collection and re-use, provide the potential for electric plug-in parking and to take advantage of sloped topography on many sites.

The long-term goal is that 80 percent of parking for off-street residential and commercial uses be structured, reflecting the envisioned compact and intensive (but smaller scale) land uses in the Town Center. The City recognizes that achieving this goal will require a strategic, incremental approach over time to avoid short-term disincentives to development. In addition to the requirements in subsection (2) of this section, the City may consider partnering with private entities to create a system of parking garages located strategically throughout the mixed-use zones in the Town Center. Appropriate actions may include providing grant funds, public financing mechanisms and planning and design services, and coordinating various parties in public parking projects.

(2) At least 80 percent of all required off-street parking for residential uses (except for cottage housing) and for commercial uses or development requiring more than 90 off-street stalls shall be structured (either above, at, or below grade) as opposed to surface parking (on pavement at grade without other uses constructed above the parking level). The City may waive or reduce this requirement for one or more of the following conditions:

(a) The proponent can demonstrate to the director’s satisfaction that such a parking structure prevents the project from being economically “feasible,” as defined in Chapter 21B.15 SMC. To do that the proponent must show through a pro forma that the costs associated with parking increase overall project costs above that which can be supported by market rate rents or sales.

(b) The parking configuration is such that it can be converted into structured parking at a later date to provide additional parking for development. The City may require that the proponent agree to make the land on which the parking is situated available to the City for garage construction under mutually agreeable terms.

(c) The parcel configuration or dimensions do not allow structured parking.

(d) There is an agreement with the City that the proponent will construct structured parking to accommodate any subsequent development or redevelopment. The proponent must show how this will be achieved within a specified time frame.

(e) Other conditions deemed acceptable to the City that are consistent with the intent stated in (1) above.

(3) Single use structured parking shall be required to utilize multiple stormwater mitigation techniques consistent with the Town Center Stormwater Master Plan. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


Chapter 21B.45 SIGNAGE

Sections:

21B.45.010    Purpose and intent.

21B.45.020    Applicability.

21B.45.030    Permit required.

21B.45.040    Application information.

21B.45.050    Prohibited signs.

21B.45.060    Exempt signs.

21B.45.070    Interpretation of tables and design standards.

21B.45.080    Table of allowed sign types and design review.

21B.45.090    Review and modifications to standards.

21B.45.100    Sign area calculation.

21B.45.110    General sign design standards.

21B.45.120    Design standards for specific sign types.

21B.45.130    Design and compatibility review.

21B.45.140    Temporary signs.

21B.45.150    Legal nonconforming signs.

21B.45.160    Variance.

21B.45.170    Enforcement.


21B.45.010 Purpose and intent.

The purpose of this chapter is to enhance and protect the economic vitality and visual environment of the Town Center, allow for the expression of free speech, and promote general safety and welfare by: 

(1) Regulating the type, number, location, size, and illumination of signs; and

(2) Recognizing the purpose of signs for identification and economic well-being of businesses in the Town Center by supporting a full range of signs necessary for commercial services in the Town Center; and

(3) Ensuring a safe driving environment; and

(4) Recognizing and protecting the use of the public right-of-way as a forum for noncommercial speech; and

(5) Facilitating fair and consistent content-neutral enforcement; and

(6) Safeguarding and enhancing property values, attracting new residents, and encouraging orderly development; and

(7) Allowing for limited temporary commercial signage in the public right-of-way to provide commercial information to consumers to enable them to make vital decisions of purchasing a home, and to further the critical public goal of providing for equal access to housing; and

(8) Upholding the goals and policies of the Sammamish Comprehensive Plan and the Town Center Subarea Plan; and

(9) Promoting signs within the Town Center that contribute to the character of the Town Center, are integrated with natural surroundings and landscaping, and exhibit an intimate human scale; and

(10) Providing necessary signage to support central gathering places, increase social interaction, and encourage walkability; and

(11) Regulating signs in a manner that is timely, flexible, predictable, fair to all and that results in superior development; and

(12) Creating a vibrant and inviting commercial node that is reflected in the character and design of Town Center signage. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.45.020 Applicability.

Except as provided for in SMC 21B.45.060, Exempt signs, all signs shall be subject to the design provisions of this chapter; provided, that specific sign standards and design requirements may be further established through a unified zone development or building permit review and shall be determined during the applicable review process. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.45.030 Permit required.

(1) Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no sign shall be erected, altered, or relocated within the Town Center without a permit issued by the City.

(2) No permit shall be required for repainting in like colors, cleaning, or other normal maintenance and repair of a permitted sign, or of sign face and copy changes that do not alter the size or structure of the sign or compliance with the design standards. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.45.040 Application information.

The applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating that a proposed sign(s) complies with this chapter as follows:

(1) All new signs requiring a permit or approval pursuant to SMC 21B.45.030 shall provide, in a form established by the City, at a minimum an accurate plan with complete dimensions, location, size, color, shape, materials, type of illumination, size and style of lettering, copy design and the proposed manner of installation. Additional information may be required as reasonably necessary for approval by the director.

(2) The size and location of every existing sign on the premises shall be noted.

(3) If a unified zone development plan was previously approved by the City and included sign approvals, an applicant whose sign conforms to that plan may refer to it in the application and may omit detailed drawings unless specifically requested to provide them.

(4) If design and compatibility review is required pursuant to SMC 21B.45.080, the applicant shall submit a compatibility analysis addressing the design criteria enumerated in SMC 21B.45.130, Design and compatibility review. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.45.050 Prohibited signs.

Except as indicated by this chapter, the following signs or displays are prohibited:

(1) Any sign that is otherwise allowed, but does not comply with the provisions of this chapter;

(2) Signs attached to a fence;

(3) Signs which, by reason of their size, location, movement, content, coloring, or manner of illumination, may be confused with traffic control signs or signals;

(4) Temporary signs except as specifically allowed in SMC 21B.45.140;

(5) Except as specifically allowed, signs located in the public right-of-way, or within travel lanes or sidewalks, or attached to traffic control signs, utility or signal poles;

(6) Changing message center signs or signs containing moving graphics, text, or video, or that are flashing, moving, rotating, animated, or inflated;

(7) A sign that extends higher than the peak of the roof, ridge line, or parapet of a building to which it is attached;

(8) Visible ballast boxes or other sign equipment;

(9) Posters, pennants, strings of lights, moving/flashing/blinking lights, balloons, searchlights, exposed electrical conduits, and other displays of a carnival nature, except on a limited basis as provided for in SMC 21B.45.140 as temporary business displays;

(10) Box or cabinet signs;

(11) Pole-mounted freestanding signs;

(12) Roof-mounted signs; and

(13) Billboards. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.45.060 Exempt signs.

The following signs or displays are exempted from the regulations under this chapter:

(1) Historic plaques not exceeding three square feet in area, and address numbers;

(2) Official or legal notices issued and posted by any public agency or court;

(3) Traffic control signs established by the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) or authorized by City of Sammamish department of public works;

(4) Plaques, tablets, or inscriptions, which are attached flat to the face of the building, which are nonilluminated, and which do not exceed four square feet in surface area;

(5) Incidental signs, which shall not exceed two square feet in surface area; provided, that said size limitation shall not apply to signs providing directions, warnings, or information when established and maintained by a public agency;

(6) Government flags; and

(7) Nonverbal religious symbols attached to a place of worship. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.45.070 Interpretation of tables and design standards.

(1) SMC 21B.45.080 determines whether a specific sign type is allowed in a zone district. The zone district and the public right-of-way are identified in the vertical column and the specific sign type is located on the horizontal row of these tables.

(2) If no symbol appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the sign type is not allowed in that district, except for certain signs allowed pursuant to SMC 21B.45.140, Temporary signs.

(3) The review of all sign permit applications is administrative, and shall be conducted by the director of community development, subject to the review requirements identified below.

(4) If the number “1” appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the sign type is allowed in that district subject to the sign design standards specified in SMC 21B.45.110, 21B.45.120, and the general requirements of the code.

(5) If the number “2” appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the sign type is allowed subject to the sign design standards, general requirements, and the compatibility and design review specified in SMC 21B.45.130. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.45.080 Table of allowed sign types and design review.

(1) Table of Allowed Sign Types and Design Review for Town Center Zones.

	 	TOWN CENTER ZONES

	Sign Types	ROW	TC-A	TC-B	TC-C	TC-D	TC-E

	Building-Mounted Signs:

	Blade	2(1)	1	2	2	2	2

	Opaque/Painted	 	2	2	2	2	2

	Channel Letter/Shadow	 	2	2	 	 	 

	Hanging	 	1	2	 	 	 

	Marquee/Awning	 	2	2	 	 	 

	Window	 	1	2	 	 	 

	Freestanding Signs:

	Community Banner	1	 	 	 	 	 

	Directional (Pedestrian)	2	1	1	1	1	1

	Directional (Vehicle)	2	1	1	1	1	1

	Monument	 	2(2)	2	2	2	2

	Changing Message Center	 	 	 	 	2	 

Development Conditions.

(1) Only allowed as part of a unified zone development plan application approved pursuant to Chapter 21B.95 SMC; and provided, that no sign shall extend into the vehicle travel lanes.

(2) Only allowed in the TC-A-4 and in the TC-A-5 zones. 

(Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.45.090 Review and modifications to standards.

(1) All sign permits shall be approved administratively, subject to the permit review requirements of Chapter 20.05 SMC; provided, that:

(a) Signs subject to the Level 1 sign review shall be reviewed for compliance with this chapter but shall not be subject to the provisions of SMC 21B.45.130, Design and compatibility review;

(b) Signs subject to the Level 2 design and compatibility review requirements shall be reviewed for compliance with this chapter, including the provisions of SMC 21B.45.130, Design and compatibility review.

(2) Sign design may be reviewed and approved as part of a unified zone development plan review consistent with Chapter 21B.95 SMC, provided:

(a) Specific sign designs approved as part of a unified zone development plan will require a sign permit, but will not require additional design review at the time of permit application when in accordance with the approved unified zone development plan; or

(b) Additional design standards and guidelines may be adopted through the review process, subject to specific design review of signs at the time of building permit application. Additional design standards and guidelines adopted through the review process shall govern all subsequent sign design reviews including replacement signs.

(3) The director may approve applicant-proposed modifications of up to 25 percent of the sign area, height, width, and other dimensional standards as part of the Level 2 design and compatibility review process, pursuant to SMC 21B.45.130; provided, that any such approval shall be based upon an overall sign concept that is integrated with the building and is consistent with the goals of SMC 21B.45.130, Design and compatibility review. Applicant-proposed modifications to the number of signs allowed, illumination standards, the types of signs allowed, or sign modifications that would result in a sign that is not designed consistent with this purpose of this chapter shall not be considered.

(4) Applicants proposing a sign that is subject to the Level 1 basic sign review may choose to request a Level 2 design and compatibility review in order to take advantage of the director’s ability to modify sign standards, pursuant to subsection (3) of this section. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.45.100 Sign area calculation.

(1) Sign area shall be calculated as follows:

(a) Sign area for nonmonument freestanding signs shall be calculated by determining the total surface area of the sign as viewed from any single vantage point, excluding support structures.

(b) Sign area for pole signs shall be calculated by determining the total surface area of the sign as viewed from any single vantage point, excluding support structures.

(c) Sign area for letters or symbols painted or mounted directly on walls or monument signs or on the sloping portion of a roof shall be calculated by measuring the smallest single rectangle that will enclose the combined letters and symbols.

(d) Sign area for signs contained entirely within a cabinet and mounted on a wall, roof, or monument shall be calculated by measuring the front surface area of the cabinet.

(2) Maximum Sign Height.

(a) For a freestanding sign, the vertical distance measured from the surface of the ground to the highest point of the sign or sign structure; and

(b) For a building-mounted sign, the vertical distance measured from the building grade to the highest point of the sign or structure designed to support a sign.

(3) Sign clearance is measured from the surface of the ground to the lowest portion of the sign structure.

(4) Area of building facade is calculated by multiplying the width of the building or tenant space associated with the commercial use by the height of the building or tenant space.

(5) The lineal feet of building facade is calculated by measuring the width of the building or tenant space associated with the commercial use. Building modulation(s) are not included in the lineal feet of building facade. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.45.110 General sign design standards.

(1) General Requirements.

(a) All signs shall be constructed primarily of nonreflective materials;

(b) Building-mounted sign frames and other support structures shall be concealed or integrated into the building’s architectural character in terms of form, color, and materials such that they are not easily visible;

(c) Building-mounted signs must be in proportion to the size and design of the architectural features of the building facade;

(d) All signs, except directional signs and community banners, shall be on-premises signs;

(e) Maximum height for building-mounted signs shall not extend above the highest exterior wall upon which the sign is located; provided, that blade signs shall not exceed the roofline of the building along the facade that the blade sign is attached to;

(f) Total sign area for primary and secondary wall signs associated with uses occupying the ground level of a building shall not exceed 10 percent of the ground-level building facade associated with the sign; provided, that there is a minimum allowed sign area of 10 square feet and a maximum allowed sign area of 320 square feet;

(g) Total sign area for primary and secondary wall signs associated with uses that do not occupy the ground level of a building (e.g., the use is on the second or third story) shall not exceed five percent of the building facade associated with the use;

(h) Tenants are allowed one primary sign regulated by this chapter per building facade that contains a public entry (open during all business hours), up to a maximum of two facades;

(i) Tenants are allowed three secondary signs regulated by this chapter per building facade that contains a public entry (open during all business hours);

(j) Wall sign width shall not exceed a width of two-thirds of the lineal width of the building facade associated with the sign;

(k) Signs shall not cover windows, building trim, or architectural ornamentation.

(2) Illumination. Signs may be illuminated as follows:

(a) Illumination shall be limited to indirect lighting unless otherwise specifically allowed by the specific sign type design standards; provided, that no sign may be both internally and indirectly illuminated;

(b) Indirect sign illumination shall be no further away from the sign than the height of the sign;

(c) Indirectly illuminated signs shall be arranged so that no direct rays of light are projected from such artificial source into residences or any street right-of-way;

(d) Indirect sign light fixtures shall complement the design of the sign and building facades or structures associated with the sign;

(e) Indirect sign lighting shall be “full cutoff” and shall not result in direct illumination of the sky and adjacent properties and structures, and shall be designed to minimize reflected glare to adjacent properties and structures;

(f) Sign illumination shall automatically turn off within one hour of the close of the business, use, or activity; and

(g) Additional illumination standards may be contained in SMC 21B.45.120, Design standards for specific sign types, or adopted through the approval of a unified zone development plan application pursuant to Chapter 21B.95 SMC.

(3) Location. All signs shall be located as follows:

(a) Building-Mounted Signs.

(i) Shall be attached to the building facade of the business or commercial enterprise they are advertising;

(ii) Shall be located on the same floor as the business or commercial enterprise they are advertising; provided, that businesses that occupy more than one floor shall place the sign on the lowest floor occupied by the business;

(iii) Shall not exceed a height of 15 feet above grade if associated with a business located on the bottom floor of a building;

(iv) Shall not conflict with the ability to view any other sign associated with the building to which the sign is attached;

(v) Shall not conflict with vehicle travel lanes if blade or hanging signs extend into the street right-of-way as otherwise allowed by the City; and

(vi) May extend over the sidewalk if they are hanging or blade signs otherwise approved by the City.

(b) Freestanding Signs.

(i) May be located on private property with the consent of the private property owner, unless otherwise allowed in this chapter;

(ii) May be located in the public right-of-way pursuant to SMC 21B.45.080(1) and with the written approval by the City of Sammamish;

(iii) Located on private property shall be no further than five feet from the street; and

(iv) Shall not obstruct sight distances as prescribed by Chapter 14A.01 SMC, Public Works Standards Adopted, or by SMC 21B.25.200, Sight distance requirements.

(4) Sign Standards along 228th Avenue SE.

(a) The only signs visible from 228th Avenue SE shall be either monument signs no taller than six feet above grade or wall signs less than 30 square feet or 18 inches multiplied by the length of the front facade measured parallel to 228th Avenue SE (whichever is smaller);

(b) Except for wall signs on pedestrian-oriented facades built up to the sidewalk, all signs visible from 228th Avenue SE are limited to signs that advertise a commercial node or group of businesses rather than a single business; and

(c) For other design standards, see Chapter 21B.30 SMC. (Ord. O2018-466 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.45.120 Design standards for specific sign types.

(1) Blade and Hanging Signs. Blade signs may be allowed pursuant to SMC 21B.45.080(1); provided, that blade signs:

(a) Shall provide a minimum clearance of eight feet;

(b) With horizontally oriented text or graphics shall not project or be located more than five feet from the building facade;

(c) With vertically oriented text or graphics shall not project more than three feet from the building facade;

(d) Shall be limited to two square feet of sign area per each 10 lineal feet of applicable building frontage;

(e) Buildings that contain multiple tenants shall use a similar shape and mounting technique for hanging or blade signs;

(f) Sign text and graphics may use neon lettering, subject to provisions of SMC 21B.45.110(2); and further provided, that neon signs shall not be visible from 228th Avenue; and

(g) May be opaque signs containing internal illumination consistent with SMC 21B.45.110.

(2) Channel Letter, Opaque, Painted, and Shadow Signs. Channel letter, opaque, painted, and shadow signs may be allowed pursuant to SMC 21B.45.080(1); provided, that:

(a) Channel letter, opaque, painted, or shadow signs that are also wall signs shall be attached directly to the building facade, such that there is a maximum protrusion of one foot unless the sign incorporates sculptural elements or architectural devices. The sign frame shall be concealed or integrated into the building’s architectural character in terms of form, color, and materials;

(b) Channel letter and shadow signs shall only be wall signs. Opaque and painted signs may be wall signs, hanging, or blade signs;

(c) Lettering on opaque signs may be internally illuminated where the light only shines through the letters;

(d) Buildings that contain multiple tenants shall use a consistent sign design in terms of lettering, size, color, and style;

(e) Shadow signs may be illuminated by reflected lighting against the building facade located behind the sign letters or graphics;

(f) Channel letter signs shall be open, such that internal neon lighting is visible;

(g) Painted signs may be illuminated by indirect fully cutoff lighting;

(h) Wall sign lettering and graphics shall not exceed a maximum height of two feet.

(3) Marquee/Awning Signs. Marquee/awning signs may be allowed pursuant to SMC 21B.45.080(1); provided, that:

(a) The sign shall provide a minimum clearance of eight feet;

(b) The face of the sign (lettering and graphics) on a marquee or awning shall be on a parallel plane to the building facade;

(c) The awning or marquee supporting the sign shall extend at least three feet from the face of the building, shall be located over a pedestrian walkway or sidewalk, and shall be designed to provide protection from the weather, in addition to supporting the sign;

(d) Sign may be comprised of channel lettering, opaque, or shadow signs;

(e) Sign lettering and graphics shall not exceed two feet in height;

(f) Sign width shall be limited to no more than two-thirds of the width of the awning;

(g) Marquee signs may be placed on the front, above, or below the marquee associated with the sign; and

(h) Marquee and awning signs may be externally illuminated pursuant to SMC 21B.45.110(2).

(4) Window Signs. Window signs may be allowed pursuant to SMC 21B.45.080(1); provided, that:

(a) Permanent and temporary window signs are limited to a maximum of 25 percent of the window area in addition to the size limitations of SMC 21B.45.110(1);

(b) Signs shall be constructed of neon, stained glass, gold leaf, cut vinyl, or etched glass;

(c) Signs shall not be illuminated, except that a single internally lit neon or stained glass window sign is allowed.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21B.45.120a. Window sign example.

(5) Monument Signs. Monument signs may be allowed pursuant to SMC 21B.45.080(1); provided, that:

(a) One monument sign is allowed per commercial, institutional, or mixed-use building subject to the following:

(i) The sign may be up to six feet tall;

(ii) Monument signs for individual businesses should include the street address number with six-inch minimum lettering that is clearly readable from the street;

(iii) Lettering style, form, size, dimension, and color shall be consistent on signs identifying multiple tenants;

(b) One monument sign is allowed associated with a single-family subdivision or multifamily residential development, provided the sign shall not exceed a height of 48 inches;

(c) Monument signs may only be indirectly illuminated;

(d) Monument signs shall be designed incorporating natural materials (e.g., granite or basalt stone facing, wood, landscaping), muted colors, and design styles characteristic to the Northwest;

(e) The total sign area contained within a monument sign shall not exceed 48 square feet.

(6) Directional Signs. Directional signs may be allowed pursuant to SMC 21B.45.080(1); provided, that:

(a) Pedestrian-Oriented Directional Signs.

(i) Signs shall be located within 10 feet of the intersection of two or more pedestrian sidewalks or paths;

(ii) Signs shall not exceed a height of eight feet;

(iii) Sign lettering and graphics shall not exceed a height of six inches.

(b) Vehicle-Oriented Directional Signs.

(i) Signs shall be located within 20 feet of one of the following intersections:

(A) SE 4th Street and 228th Avenue SE;

(B) SE 8th and 228th Avenue SE; and

(C) As otherwise identified through a unified zone development plan application;

(ii) Signs shall not exceed a height of eight feet;

(iii) Sign lettering and graphics shall not exceed a height of 10 inches; and

(iv) All signs located on a street corner or driveway shall conform with Chapter 14A.01 SMC, Public Works Standards Adopted, and SMC 21B.25.200, Sight distance requirements. (Ord. O2018-466 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.45.130 Design and compatibility review.

(1) The goal of the Level 2 design and compatibility review is:

(a) To encourage interesting, creative, and unique sign design that is consistent with the character of the Town Center;

(b) To encourage signs that are timeless, create an intimate pedestrian environment, and incorporate natural materials (e.g., granite or basalt stone, wood, landscaping) or colors (muted earthen tones) associated with the Northwest; and

(c) To ensure that signs are part of, and consistent with, the overall design approach of a project.

(2) The following criteria are the parameters that will be used for reviewing signs for compatibility and design to achieve the goals listed above and the purpose of this chapter; these criteria are in addition to the sign design standards contained within SMC 21B.45.110 and 21B.45.120:

(a) Architectural Compatibility. The signs shall be compatible in size, proportion, shape, character, and quality of design with the exterior architecture of the premises and other structures in the immediate area.

(b) Simplicity. To the extent feasible, the sign should be graphic and with limited use of words, with the design emphasis on simplicity of style. A simple design or abstract graphic design is preferred. Similarly, a simple sign frame and supporting structure are preferred.

(c) Target Audience. Only one sign per building facade should be designed for vehicle and pedestrian use. Signs that are targeted primarily to serve pedestrians are generally preferred over signs targeted for both pedestrian and vehicle audiences.

(d) Identification. A commercial sign should be designed for the primary purpose of identifying a business or office.

(e) Fewer Signs. In the use of the total sign allowance at a particular premises, the use of a minimum number of signs is preferred to the use of many signs, so that a cluttered effect is avoided.

(f) Shape, Size, and Orientation. The shape of a sign should not conflict with the architectural lines of its setting. Signs should be directed toward the passing motorist or pedestrian. No sign should be designed to be readable or to attract motorists from a great distance.

(g) Illumination and Colors. A sign must not overpower its surroundings through hue, saturation, or brilliance or close combination of incompatible colors. Sources of illumination shall be screened from public view and shall be designed to avoid glare onto a street or adjacent property.

(h) Landscaping. Signs shall be placed with consideration for existing and future growth of trees and other landscaping. A monument sign reviewed under this section must be placed in a landscaped area or planter, with landscaping maintained.

(i) Compatibility with Adjacent Uses. The design, illumination, and location of a sign shall not impair the visibility or the design quality of existing, conforming signs, adjacent buildings, or adjacent uses. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.45.140 Temporary signs.

The following temporary signs or displays are permitted and, except as required by the International Building Code; Chapter 16.20 SMC, Construction Administrative Code; or as otherwise required in this chapter, do not require a sign permit, subject to the requirements set out in this chapter. All temporary signs shall not obstruct sight distances and shall follow the regulations prescribed by Chapter 14A.01 SMC, Public Works Standards Adopted, and by SMC 21B.25.200, Sight distance requirements. No temporary signs shall be located within center medians or within roundabouts and the amenity zone along the outside turning edge of a roundabout, traffic circles, or islands. Temporary signs shall not be illuminated.

(1) Noncommercial Temporary Signs. No sign permit is required to post a noncommercial temporary sign in the public right-of-way or on private property if it meets the requirements in this section and in the following table. Noncommercial temporary signs not conforming to the regulations of this section may be approved through a right-of-way permit.

(a) On roads that only have a shoulder and do not have a sidewalk, noncommercial temporary signs must be placed beyond the edge of the asphalt, and may not be placed so that any part of the sign extends over the asphalt. 

(b) Noncommercial temporary signs shall not be placed in a manner that negatively affects the health of trees, shrubs, or other landscaping.

	 	Noncommercial Temporary Sign Type I Public Right-of-Way (Non-A-Frame)	Noncommercial Temporary Sign Type II Public Right-of-Way (A-Frame)	Noncommercial Temporary Sign Type III – Private Property (All Sign Types)(1)

	Size Limit	4 square feet	6 square feet	32 square feet 

	Height Limit	3 feet above grade	3.5 feet	8 feet

	Duration	180 consecutive days per calendar year	5 consecutive days	180 consecutive days per calendar year

Development Conditions

(1) Placement of off-premises temporary signs on private property is subject to the landowner’s authorization.

(2) Commercial Temporary Signs.

(a) Temporary Commercial Displays. On-premises signs, posters, pennants, strings of lights, blinking lights, balloons, and searchlights are permitted for a period of up to 30 consecutive days once each calendar year for businesses located in Sammamish Town Center. Temporary commercial displays shall meet the placement and dimensional standards for the sign type utilized.

(b) Signs Located on Property with Active Construction.

(i) One nonilluminated, double-faced sign is permitted for each public street upon which the project fronts;

(ii) No sign shall exceed 32 square feet in surface area or 10 feet in height, or be located closer than 30 feet from the property line of the adjoining property; and

(iii) Signs must be removed by the date of first occupancy of the premises or one year after placement of the sign, whichever occurs first.

(3) Signs Associated with Properties for Sale or Rent. 

	 	Signs Located on Property with Individual Unit for Sale or Rent

	Sign Quantity	One per public or private street frontage

	Permitted Location	Public or private street frontage

	Permitted Duration	Signs shall be removed within five days after closing of the sale, lease or rental of the property

	Maximum Sign Area	8 square feet

	Maximum Height	6 feet

	 	Signs Located Off-Site of Property with Individual Unit for Sale or Rent (1)

	Sign Quantity	One (2)

	Permitted Location	Public right-of-way adjacent to the intersection of the primary vehicle entrance to the property and closest public street

	Permitted Duration	Signs shall be removed within five days after closing of the sale, lease or rental of the property

	Maximum Sign Area	6 square feet

	 	Portable Off-Premises Residential Directional Signs for Active Open Houses for Sale or Rent (3)

	Maximum Sign Area	6 square feet

	Maximum Height	42 inches

	 	Signs on Property with Commercial or Industrial Property for Sale or Rent

	Sign Quantity	One 

	Permitted Location	Public or private street frontage

	Maximum Sign Area	32 square feet

	Maximum Height	12 feet

	 	Signs on Newly Constructed Residential Developments for Sale

	Sign Quantity	One 

	Permitted Location	Public or private street frontage

	Maximum Sign Area	32 square feet

	Maximum Height	12 feet

	 	Directional Signs Located Off-Site of Newly Constructed Residential Developments for Sale

	Sign Quantity	Two 

	Permitted Location	Private property (with permission); public right-of-way

	Maximum Sign Area	16 square feet

	Maximum Height	6 feet

Development Conditions.

(1)    Only allowed for properties with a unit for sale or rent that is not located adjacent to a public street.

(2)    When more than three off-site real estate signs are proposed for a location, the fourth proposed sign owner shall install and make available to other licensed real estate agents a frame, designed to allow for a minimum of six signs to be hung in a stacked fashion, to accommodate multiple signs; frames installed to hold multiple real estate signs shall not exceed a height of six feet; off-site signs located on a frame shall individually not exceed a height of one and one-half feet, a width of two feet, and an area of three square feet.

(3)    Such signs shall be permitted only when the agent or seller is in attendance at the property for sale or rent.

(4) Community Banner Signs. 

(a) Community banner signs shall only be located on public banner poles erected by the City for that use;

(b) Letters on such signs shall not be less than 12 inches in height except for lettering associated with sponsor logos;

(c) Community banner signs shall not be illuminated or have any attention-getting lights; and

(d) Sponsor logos shall be limited to the name and corporate symbol of the sponsor.

(5) Pedestal Signs. Temporary pedestal signs are allowed in the TC-A and TC-B zones, subject to the following provisions:

(a) The sign shall be placed such that there is a minimum of a six-foot-wide pedestrian access around the sign;

(b) The sign shall not exceed a height of six feet;

(c) The sign face shall not exceed an area of three square feet;

(d) Sign lettering and graphics shall not exceed a height of four inches;

(e) The frames and other support structures shall be consistent with the building’s architectural character in terms of form, color, and materials such that there is a consistent design theme. (Ord. O2018-466 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.45.150 Legal nonconforming signs.

(1) Any sign located within the City limits on the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this title, or located in an area annexed to the City thereafter, which does not conform with the provisions of this code, shall be considered a legal nonconforming sign and is permitted, provided it also meets the following requirements: 

(a) The sign was covered by a permit on the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this title if one was required under applicable law; or

(b) If no permit was required under applicable law for the sign in question, the sign was in all respects compliant with applicable law on the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this title. 

(2) Loss of Legal Nonconforming Status. Nonconforming signs shall not be altered in size, shape, height, location, or structural components without being brought to compliance with the requirements of this code. Repair and maintenance are allowable, but may require a permit if structural components require repair or replacement. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.45.160 Variance.

(1) A sign variance is categorized as a Type 1 land use application and shall be subject to the requirements of SMC 21A.110.030. Variances from the terms of this chapter may be granted by director of community development upon complete application. Variances may be granted when, because of unique circumstances applicable to the property, including size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings, the strict interpretation of the regulations of this chapter deprives such property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and under identical zoning classifications.

(2) The variance shall not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with a limitation upon uses of other properties in the vicinity and zone in which such property is situated. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.45.170 Enforcement.

(1) Compliance with Other Applicable Codes. All signs erected or altered under this chapter must comply with all applicable federal, state and local regulations relating to signs, including without limitation the provisions of the International Building Code as adopted in SMC 16.05.070 by the City. If any provision of this code is found to be in conflict with any provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance or code of the City, the provision which establishes the higher standard shall prevail.

(2) Sign Maintenance. All permanent and temporary signs must be kept in good repair and in a safe manner at all times. The sign owner must repair damaged or deteriorated signs within 30 days of notification by the City. The area surrounding freestanding signs must be kept free of litter and debris at all times.

(3) Inspection. Code enforcement officers are authorized to inspect any sign covered by this chapter for the purpose of inspection of the sign, its structural and electrical connections, and to ensure compliance with the provisions of this code. Such inspections shall be carried out during business hours, unless an emergency exists.

(4) Abatement. In addition to the abatement authority provided by proceedings under SMC 21A.115.030, the City or its agents may summarily remove any sign placed on a right-of-way or public property in violation of the terms of this chapter under the following circumstances:

(a) When a sign is determined by the City engineer or director of community development to present an immediate threat to the safety, health, and welfare of the public;

(b) When a sign is illegally placed within the public right-of-way, within a landscape median, landscape island, traffic circle, attached to a utility pole or City traffic sign, upon public sidewalks or roadway, or on any public building or structure when such facilities are located on public property or within public right-of-way;

(c) When a sign is determined by the City to be abandoned; provided, that the City must first provide 14 days’ notice to the underlying property owner or business owner that the sign is deemed abandoned;

(d) Disposal of Signs. When a sign has been removed by the City as authorized by this section, the City shall take the following actions:

(i) The City shall hold a sign for at least seven days. After seven days the City may dispose of the sign without prior notice to the sign owner. The City shall not be responsible for damage or loss during removal or storage of any signs in violation of this code. Sign owners wishing to reacquire possession of removed signs prior to their disposal shall pay an impoundment fee pursuant to SMC 23.100.010.

(ii) For signs with a fair market value exceeding $500.00, the City shall provide notice by mail to the following:

(A) Sign owner. If the mailing address can be determined by the City after reasonable efforts in investigation. “Reasonable efforts” shall include investigation efforts that take no longer than one-half hour of staff time.

(B) Underlying property owner. If the address of the sign owner cannot be reasonably ascertained, the City shall mail the notice to the underlying real property owner, as identified in the records of the King County assessor’s office. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2017-436 § 1 (Att. A))


Chapter 21B.75 AFFORDABLE HOUSING

Sections:

21B.75.010    Purpose and intent.

21B.75.020    Basic density provisions.

21B.75.030    Modifications to dimensional standards.

21B.75.040    Alternative compliance.

21B.75.050    Implementation provisions.

21B.75.060    Definitions.


21B.75.010 Purpose and intent.

The incentives and regulations offered in this chapter are used by the City as one means of meeting its commitment to encourage housing affordable to all economic groups, and to meet its regional share of affordable housing requirements. The purpose of this section is to: (1) implement through regulations the responsibility of the City under state law to provide for housing opportunities for all economic segments of the community, (2) help address the shortage of housing in the City for persons of low- and moderate-income, (3) preserve land for affordable housing as the City continues to grow, (4) promote development of housing that would not otherwise be built in the City, (5) create affordable housing opportunities as a result of increased development capacity in the Town Center planning area, (6) offer additional incentives to encourage construction of affordable housing units in Town Center; and (7) encourage developments that include affordable housing and that combine local incentives provided by the City with resources available from other public and private sources. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.75.020 Basic density provisions.

(1) Baseline Affordable Housing. In any residential development (e.g., multiple-family developments (rental or ownership), single-family subdivisions, mixed-use developments) not less than 10 percent of the allocated residential density dwelling units pursuant to SMC 21B.25.030 must be affordable housing units. The affordable housing units will have occupancy requirements and affordability levels as defined in SMC 21B.75.060. For any site, this requirement applies to the residential units provided up to the base number of allowed units. No additional residential or commercial density beyond the base number of allowed units will be provided to meet this 10 percent affordable unit requirement. Those projects providing additional affordable units may receive additional density as provided in subsection (3) of this section, Residential Bonus Units/Additional Affordable Housing, and as provided for in SMC 21B.25.040. (Note that in some cases, applicants may receive additional residential unit allocations based on TDR purchases and/or site amenities.) This program is intended to increase the actual supply of affordable housing, so the primary objective is to obtain housing units within the development in preference to an alternative approach, except as otherwise provided for in SMC 21B.75.040.

(2) Affordable Housing Units and Allocated Residential Density. Required affordable housing units pursuant to subsection (1) of this section shall be counted as one-half a dwelling unit for the purpose of calculating allocated residential density pursuant to SMC 21B.25.030. For example, a residential development that requires six affordable housing units would calculate the affordable housing units to be equivalent to three dwelling units for the purpose of calculating allocated residential density pursuant to SMC 21B.25.030. Affordable housing units built for the purposes of increasing site density above the allocated residential density shall be counted as one dwelling unit for the purposes of calculating maximum residential density pursuant to SMC 21B.25.030.

(3) Residential Bonus Units/Additional Affordable Housing. The Town Center Plan includes the allocation of 344 residential bonus units (427 total units once the discounted affordable housing units are added per subsection (2) of this section) specified in SMC 21B.25.040. Allocation of residential bonus units is based on the following criteria:

An individual project can receive three residential bonus units for each affordable housing unit provided above the minimum 10 percent required pursuant to this section. The affordable housing units will have occupancy requirements and affordability levels as defined in SMC 21B.25.040.

Example: If a property has a base density of 50 units, and an applicant requested nine residential bonus units, three of the bonus residential units would have to be affordable units. The development would have a total of 59 units of which eight would be affordable units (five affordable units of the base 50 units, plus three of the nine bonus residential units).

(4) Alternative Calculation of Affordability. An applicant may propose alternative affordability levels for the affordable housing units. The percentage of required affordable units and the ratio of bonus units (or bonus floor area) per affordable housing unit for alternative affordability levels will be as follows:

	Affordability Level	Percent Affordable Units for Baseline Requirement	Residential Bonus Units to Affordable Units Ratio

	50% of median income	4%	3.3 to 1

	60% of median income	5%	3.2 to 1

	70% of median income	6.5%	3.1 to 1

	80% of median income	10%	3 to 1

Note: Depending on the level of affordability provided, the affordable housing units may not be eligible for the impact fee waivers described in SMC Title 14A.

(5) Rounding. For developments with more than 10 residential units, the number of required affordable housing units is determined by rounding fractional numbers up to the nearest whole number from one-half.

(6) Minimum Threshold. For any residential development consisting of less than 10 units, the affordability requirements may be satisfied through the payment to the City of an in-lieu fee.

(a) Amount. The in-lieu fee to be paid for each affordable dwelling unit shall be determined by the director and shall equal an amount sufficient to create an amount of affordable housing equal to or greater than what would have otherwise been provided if the affordable housing had been provided on site.

(b) Timing of Payment. In lieu-fees shall be paid at the time a building permit is issued for the development.

(c) Alternative to Cash. At the discretion of the City council (or director), where a developer is authorized to pay a fee in lieu of development, an irrevocable dedication of land or other nonmonetary contribution of a value not less than the sum of the otherwise required in-lieu fee may be accepted as an alternative to paying the in-lieu fee if it is determined that the nonmonetary contribution will be effectual in furthering the goals and policies of the housing element and this chapter. The valuation of any land offered in lieu shall be determined by an (MAI) appraisal made by an agent agreed upon by the City. Costs associated with the appraisal shall be borne by the developer.

(d) Deposit of Fees. All in-lieu fees collected hereunder shall be deposited in a housing trust fund. The fund shall be administered by the City and shall be used only for the purpose of providing funding assistance for the provision of affordable housing and reasonable costs of administration consistent with the policies and programs contained in the housing element of the general plan.

(e) Use of Fees. The location of affordable housing funded wholly or in part with cash payments shall be prioritized in the following order: (i) within the Sammamish Town Center; (ii) in the City within one-half mile of transit service; and (iii) if no local project, resources may be redirected to ARCH Housing Trust Fund. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.75.030 Modifications to dimensional standards.

The following requirements of the Town Center development code may be modified to accommodate residential bonus units. These modifications may not be used to accommodate the units resulting from the base density:

(1) Parking Requirement. An applicant may request a modification of the minimum required number of parking spaces by providing a study that substantiates parking demand can be met with a reduced parking requirement in a manner consistent with the goals and policies of the applicable regional transportation plan. Said study shall be prepared by a qualified professional transportation planner or engineer approved by the director.

(2) Structure Height. Maximum height for structures containing affordable housing units may be increased by one story in the TC-A and TC-B zones consistent with setback requirements in Chapter 21B.30 SMC. Maximum structure height may not be modified through this provision for any portion of a structure that is adjoining a TC-C, D or E zone. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.75.040 Alternative compliance.

(1) General. The director may approve a request for satisfying all or part of the affordable housing requirements with alternative compliance methods if they meet the following requirements.

(a) The project proponent may propose an off-site alternative, and must demonstrate that any alternative compliance method achieves a result equal to or better than providing affordable housing on site.

(b) Affordable housing units provided through the alternative compliance method must be based on providing the same type of units as the units in the project which give rise to the requirement.

(c) Off-site affordable housing units may be provided off site if the location chosen does not lead to undue concentration of affordable housing in any particular area of the Town Center.

(d) Priority is for the project to be located within the Town Center Plan Area. However, the director may approve a project located outside the Town Center Plan Area if it can demonstrate the location has access to commercial uses, transit, and does not result in an undue concentration of affordable housing.

(2) Alternative Compliance Requirements.

(a) The proposal by the project proponent must demonstrate that the affordable units provided off site will be completed before or within the same time period as the development generating the affordable housing requirement, or such other assurances as approved by the director.

(b) Alternative compliance is not allowed for affordable housing associated with residential bonus units.

(c) Any single-family development containing between 10 and 14 units may meet their affordable housing requirement through the alternative compliance provisions of this section, so long as their proposal meets all the other provisions of this section.

(d) Applications for alternative compliance shall be submitted at the time of application, and must be approved prior to issuance of any building permit. The proposal must describe a specific location, type, and amount of affordable housing and how and when it will be developed. Any proposal for providing off-site affordable housing must also address the timing for providing the off-site housing, which, unless otherwise approved by the City, shall be built simultaneously with or prior to the construction of housing for the subject property. For projects approved for off-site affordable housing, there will be a recorded agreement on both the “sending” property and the “receiving” property. The covenant on the sending site will be released once the affordable housing is completed on the receiving property. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.75.050 Implementation provisions.

(1) Applicability. These requirements and incentives in this chapter are applicable in the Town Center zones.

(2) Affordable Unit Requirements. The following requirements shall be met for all affordable units:

(a) Duration. Housing shall serve only income-eligible households for a minimum period of 50 years from the later of the date when the affordability agreement between the housing owner and the City, as referenced in this section, is recorded, or the date when the affordable housing becomes available for occupancy as determined by the City.

(b) Designation of Affordable Housing Units. Prior to the issuance of any permit(s), the City shall review and approve the location and unit mix of the affordable housing units consistent with the following standards:

(i) Location. The location of the affordable housing units shall be approved by the City, with the intent that they generally be intermingled with all other dwelling units in the development.

(ii) Tenure. The tenure of the affordable housing units (ownership or rental) shall be the same as the tenure for the rest of the housing units in the development.

(iii) Size (Bedroom). The affordable housing units shall consist of a range of number of bedrooms that is comparable to units in the overall development.

(iv) Size (Square Footage). The size of the affordable housing units, if smaller than the other units with the same number of bedrooms in the development, must be approved by the director. If there is a proposal that the affordable units be smaller than the market rate units, in no case shall the affordable housing units be less than 500 square feet for a studio unit, 600 square feet for a one bedroom unit, 800 square feet for a two bedroom unit, or 1,000 square feet for a three bedroom unit.

(c) Design. The exterior design of the affordable housing units must be compatible and comparable with the rest of the dwelling units in the development and must comply with design standards specified in Chapter 21B.30 SMC. The interior finish and quality of construction of the affordable housing units shall at a minimum be comparable to entry level rental or ownership housing in the City.

(d) Timing/Phasing. The affordable housing units shall be available for occupancy in a time frame comparable to the availability of the rest of the dwelling units in the development.

(3) Affordability Agreement. Prior to issuing any building permit, an agreement in a form approved by the director that addresses price restrictions, homebuyer or tenant qualifications, phasing of construction, monitoring of affordability, duration of affordability, and any other applicable topics of the affordable housing units shall be recorded with the King County department of records and elections. This agreement shall be a covenant running with the land and shall be binding on the assigns, heirs and successors of the applicant. The City may agree, at its sole discretion, to subordinate any affordable housing regulatory agreement for the purpose of enabling the owner to obtain financing for development of the property.

(4) Monitoring and Fee. The City reserves the right to establish in the affordability agreement referred to in this section monitoring fees for the affordable housing unit, which can be adjusted over time to account for inflation. The purpose of any monitoring fee is for the review and processing of documents to maintain compliance with income and affordability restrictions of the affordability agreement.

(5) Administrative Official. The director shall be responsible for administration of this section. The director may adopt administrative procedures for implementation of this section. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.75.060 Definitions.

(1) “Affordable housing unit” means housing reserved for occupancy by eligible households and affordable to moderate-income households, adjusted for household size, and no more than 30 percent of the monthly household income is paid for monthly housing expenses.

Pursuant to the authority of RCW 36.70A.540, the City finds that the higher income levels specified in the definition of “affordable housing” in this section, rather than those stated in the definition of “low-income households” in RCW 36.70A.540, are needed to address local housing market conditions in the City.

(2) “Moderate-income household” means a household whose gross income of all permanent household members over the age of 18 is equal to or less than 80 percent of the King County median income, adjusted for household size.

(3) “Low-income household” means a household whose gross income of all permanent household members over the age of 18 is equal to or less than 50 percent of the King County median income, adjusted for household size.

(4) “Median income” means the median income for the Seattle MSA as most recently determined by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development under Section 8(f)(3) of the United States Housing Act of 1937, as amended, or if programs under said Section 8(f)(3) are terminated, median income determined under the method used by the Secretary prior to such termination. (ARCH) In the event that HUD no longer publishes median income figures for the Seattle MSA or King County, the City may use any other method for determining the King County median income, adjusted for household size. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


Chapter 21B.85 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS – INTERIM STORMWATER STANDARDS

Sections:

21B.85.010    Purpose and intent.

21B.85.020    Applicability.

21B.85.030    Town Center interim stormwater standards adopted.

21B.85.040    Review and appeal.


21B.85.010 Purpose and intent.

Low impact development (LID) is an approach to land use planning and project design that seeks to:

(1) Increase the ability of a developed site to effectively emulate predevelopment hydrologic conditions, including, without limitation, stormwater retention, water quality treatment, and infiltration functions;

(2) Minimize overland stormwater runoff from a developed site;

(3) Maximize the retention of trees, native vegetation, understory plants, and native soils;

(4) Minimize soil disturbance;

(5) Minimize the conversion of site surfaces from vegetated to nonvegetated surfaces; and

(6) Maximize the quantity and use of appropriate native plants on site.

The purpose of this chapter is to require that development proposals within the Town Center sub-area fully incorporate the interim stormwater standards and low impact development into all aspects of project design. (Ord. O2016-429 § 12 (Att. L); Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.85.020 Applicability.

(1) The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all land uses in the City of Sammamish Town Center zones, and all persons within the Town Center shall comply with the requirements of this chapter.

(2) The City shall not approve any permit or otherwise issue any authorization to alter the condition of any land, water or vegetation or to construct or alter any structure or improvement without first assuring compliance with the requirements of this chapter.

(3) Approval of a development proposal pursuant to the provisions of this chapter does not discharge the obligation of the applicant to comply with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. O2016-429 § 12 (Att. L); Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.85.030 Town Center interim stormwater standards adopted.

(1) Stormwater standards in the Town Center shall be in accordance with the adopted Surface Water Design Manual and Sammamish Addendum.

(2) The City is hereby authorized, subject to the review provisions of SMC 21B.85.040, to modify the stormwater requirements, standards, and specifications. (Ord. O2016-429 § 12 (Att. L); Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.85.040 Review and appeal.

(1) Process. The use of the stormwater standards and specifications, along with applicable low impact development design, shall be reviewed concurrently with a primary proposal to consider the proposed site plan and methods used to earn the incentives as follows:

(a) For the purpose of this section, a “primary proposal” is defined as a proposed unified zone development plan, subdivision, binding site plan, conditional use permit, or commercial site development permit;

(b) The applicant shall identify the primary proposal’s low impact development improvements at the time of application;

(c) When the primary proposal requires a public hearing under this title or SMC Title 19A or 20, the public hearing on the primary proposal shall serve as the hearing on the stormwater standards and specifications and applicable low impact development improvements proposed, and the reviewing authority shall make a consolidated decision on the proposed development;

(d) When the primary proposal does not require a public hearing under this title or SMC Title 19A or 20, the stormwater standards and specifications, and applicable low impact development improvements, shall be subject to the decision criteria for conditional use permits outlined in Chapter 21A.100 SMC and to the procedures set forth in SMC Title 20;

(2) Review. In evaluating a primary proposal and associated stormwater standards and specifications, and applicable low impact development improvements, the City shall have the authority to request additional technical information prepared by a certified professional to:

(a) Determine whether the development proposal is consistent with this chapter;

(b) Determine if a proposed approach is consistent with the standards of the King County Surface Water Design Manual, City of Sammamish Stormwater Comprehensive Plan, or the Low Impact Development Technical Guidance Manual for Puget Sound, or other suitable reference, as determined by the director;

(c) Determine whether the proposed combination of techniques adequately work together toward meeting the goals of this chapter;

(d) Determine if the monitoring plans and bonding measures proposed by the applicant are sufficient to protect the public benefit, health, safety, and welfare, consistent with this chapter; and

(e) Determine that the proposed LID approaches shall function as intended.

(3) Health and Safety. Approval of all proposed stormwater design and required low impact development improvements shall be subject to the review of the City to determine that the proposed development does not pose an unreasonable threat to the public health, safety, or welfare on or off the development proposal site and is consistent with the general purposes of this chapter and the public interest.

(4) Adjustments.

(a) Minor. Minor changes to proposed stormwater standards and specifications or low impact development improvements may be authorized by the City following approval of the primary proposal. Minor changes include, but are not limited to, changes related to improvement sizing, location, and components.

(b) Major. Major changes to proposed stormwater standards or specifications, or low impact development improvements, may not be authorized by the City following approval of the primary proposal. Major changes shall require re-submittal of the land use applications associated with the primary proposal. Major changes include, but are not limited to, elimination of proposed low impact development improvements and changes to site layout that preclude the success of approved low impact development improvements.

(5) Appeals. Any person or agency aggrieved by an act or decision of the City pursuant to this title may appeal said act or decision to the City of Sammamish pursuant to the appeal provisions for the underlying development permit application as contained in Chapter 20.05 SMC. (Ord. O2016-429 § 12 (Att. L); Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


Chapter 21B.95 UNIFIED ZONE DEVELOPMENT PLANS

Sections:

21B.95.010    Purpose.

21B.95.020    Applicability.

21B.95.030    Application process.

21B.95.040    Plan application requirements.

21B.95.050    Unified zone development principles.

21B.95.060    Criteria for approval.

21B.95.070    UZD plan outcome.

21B.95.080    Financial guarantees.

21B.95.090    Limitation of plan approval.

21B.95.100    Modification to an approved plan.

21B.95.110    Administrative rules.


21B.95.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish a review process for a unified zone development plan (UZDP) approval process under which a property owner, or group of property owners, may pursue development in the Town Center-A zones. The purpose of this process is to ensure that development in these zones proceeds in an orderly fashion with coordinated infrastructure and open space, appropriate intensities of uses and mutually compatible development in accordance with the adopted Sammamish Town Center Plan. Upon City approval of a UZDP a property owner, or group of property owners, may proceed with obtaining the required permits for individual parcel development. A second purpose is to provide both the City and property owners more certainty regarding the requirements, conditions and means to support new development. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.95.020 Applicability.

(1) An approved UZDP is required for all development in Town Center-A zones and as otherwise required in Chapter 21B.20 SMC in order to:

(a) Establish the level and intensity of new commercial and residential development;

(b) Provide for coordinated infrastructure such as roads and utilities and public open space;

(c) Define street types and orientation to street of new development; and

(d) General location of buildings and site improvements and provision of open space, parking, environmental restoration and nonmotorized circulation.

(2) An application for UZDP may be submitted for:

(a) The first UZDP application in each TC-A zone, a property or collection of properties that comprises at least 40 percent of the applicable TC-A zone;

(b) A property for which the proposed development can be achieved without compromising options for circulation, infrastructure and open space improvements on surrounding properties. The proposal must comply with the City’s adopted Town Center Infrastructure Plan and must accommodate a portion of the zone’s infrastructure, as determined by the director; or

(c) Properties directly adjacent to the applicable TC-A zone may be included in the UZDP area provided they are part of a plan that includes properties in the TC-A zone. A TC-B property may include up to 10 percent of a UZDP’s commercial development application for contiguous TC-A zone development. The director may place special constraints and/or increase the percentage of commercial development allowed on an applicable TC-B property to 20 percent in order to meet the intent of the Town Center Plan and this title. All residential uses in a TC-B zone remain subject to the defined density and dimensions for a TC-B zone (set forth in Chapter 21B.25 SMC).

Specifically, in all cases, the applicant will need to demonstrate that infrastructure and circulation systems can be constructed to serve other properties in the area in a manner consistent with the City’s plans and standards and the adopted Town Center Infrastructure Plan. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.95.030 Application process.

Pursuant to related standards in Chapter 20.05 SMC.

(1) Preapplication meeting for City staff to determine applicability of SMC 21B.95.020.

(2) Application submittal per Chapter 20.05 SMC and SMC 21B.95.040.

(3) Staff will review, send out the notice of application, provide comments, and the City will conduct an open house per Chapter 20.05 SMC.

(4) Staff will continue review as needed to ensure the UZDP meets the applicable standards.

(5) Director will render decision based on SMC 21B.95.060.

(6) Appeal process will be per Chapter 20.05 SMC Type 2 land use decision type. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.95.040 Plan application requirements.

(1) The applicant must submit to the City for approval documents and a plan or plans with the following information.

(a) Infrastructure plans indicating:

(i) Location, configuration and type of streets as classified by the City’s street design standards;

(ii) Location, configuration and relevant performance criteria for utilities including water, waste management, water treatment and electrical power. The director may require that the applicant explore alternate infrastructure options;

(iii) Methods for managing stormwater in accordance with the City’s standards and sub-basin planning;

(iv) Provision of public and private open space including that required for SMC 21B.30.090;

(v) Location and configuration of nonmotorized circulation network, including connections to adjacent properties and public rights-of-way;

(vi) Location and configuration of parking, including structured and surface parking;

(vii) Retention and enhancement of natural areas and extent of grading;

(viii) The streetfront orientation requirements for each street as described in SMC 21B.30.030; and

(ix) Location, size, height and orientation of buildings and other structures;

(b) Proposed quantities and general location of land uses, including residential dwelling units, affordable housing units/provisions, and commercial floor areas. Additional allocation of development capacity and mechanism for achieving additional development (e.g.: affordable housing incentives, TDR credits, and additional site improvements) will be identified during the UZDP process;

(c) A proposed phasing plan identifying the general order of development parcels or improvements but not necessarily specific dates or time frame;

(d) A three dimensional visualization of proposal for public information suitable for public display and web sites.

(e) Other conditions and proposal description as requested by the director.

(2) The documents and plans must be in sufficient detail for the City to determine that the UZDP planning principles in SMC 21B.95.050 are met and that future permit applications are consistent with the approved UZDP.

(3) Applications in the TC-A-1 zone must comply with the Town Center Infrastructure Plan requirements. (See plan attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter.)

Unified zone development application will be processed pursuant to Chapter 20.05 SMC. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.95.050 Unified zone development principles.

The City of Sammamish will use the following principles and criteria in the review of UZDPs for applicable Town Center-A zones as noted in SMC 21B.95.060. The principles address fundamental site planning objectives from the Town Center Plan.

The principles employ the word “should” as a directive for specific elements and characteristics. The term “should” is taken to mean “is required unless the City determines that there is a compelling reason to the contrary, based on the objectives and policies of the adopted Town Center Plan.” The intent of this language is to allow the City and proponent the flexibility to achieve the Town Center Plan’s and these principles’ objectives through other means than those specified below. The UZDP proponent shall be required to demonstrate that the following are met to the City’s satisfaction.

(1) Pedestrian Circulation.

(a) Town Center mixed-use nodes should incorporate a network of pedestrian and bicycle connections including sidewalks, trails, pathways and open spaces that link all public open spaces, commercial businesses, residential areas and near-by Centerwide or Citywide trails;

(b) The pedestrian and bicycle network should conform to the adopted Town Center Infrastructure Plan (for the TC-A-1 zone) and the intent of the Town Center Open Space Strategy – Parks, Open Spaces and Trails concept illustrated in Figure 35 and the Conceptual Sammamish Town Center Street Layout, Figures 32 and 33 of the Town Center Plan, although the actual configuration of trails and connections may vary;

(c) The pedestrian and bicycle network should feature pedestrian amenities and landscaping; and

(d) The pedestrian and bicycle network must conform to Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) standards and should incorporate crime prevention through environmental design (CPTED) guidelines.

(2) Vehicle Circulation.

(a) Town Center mixed-use nodes should feature a network of vehicle access roads and drives that conforms to the intent of the Town Center Transportation section and the Conceptual Sammamish Town Center Street Layout, Figures 32 and 33 of the Town Center Plan, although the actual street and vehicular access may vary from those shown in the figures. For the TC-A-1 zone, the adopted Town Center Infrastructure plan takes precedence over the specific sections and visualizations shown in the Town Center Plan;

(b) The proponent must demonstrate how the vehicular access network can potentially connect to adjacent areas in the Town Center so that access is provided to those properties;

(c) The vehicular access network should provide more than one route in or out of a site within the mixed-use node to provide improved emergency vehicle access and ease local congestion;

(d) The vehicular access network should include street trees, landscaping and streetscape elements. Primary circulation routes for through traffic should be routed around high pedestrian areas and not impact central open spaces; and

(e) The use of innovative street and access configurations (such as “woonerfs” which mix low speed local vehicular traffic with pedestrians) is encouraged where it furthers the objectives of the Town Center Plan and is consistent with the Town Center Infrastructure Plan.

(3) Parking and Access.

(a) Fulfill the intent of parking standards in this title, especially Chapter 21B.40 SMC;

(b) Locate parking, especially nonstructured parking, at the periphery of the mixed-use nodes; and

(c) Exploit joint-use parking opportunities wherever possible.

(4) Open Spaces.

(a) TC-A-1, A-2, and A-3 zones should have at least one central open space that acts as a public gathering space and that also includes a significant landscaping element. The central open space may be in the form of a “town square,” “village green,” central plaza or other form but should be ringed with “active edges” (pedestrian-oriented buildings, uses or features that encourage human activity). The central open spaces should encourage a variety of activities such as picnicking, informal and organized gathering, performances, and passive and active recreation (e.g.: small sports court or children’s play area). The open space must be universally accessible (meet or exceed ADA standards) and should incorporate CPTED guidelines. The central open spaces should also feature:

(i) Site furniture, special paving and amenities;

(ii) Lighting to encourage evening activities and provide security;

(iii) Art or other features to provide a distinct design identity;

(iv) As a general rule, one linear foot of seating per 30 square feet of plaza area (not including green space or landscaping); and

(v) Areas that are in full sunlight during most of the day;

(b) Public open spaces should not be adjacent to parking, blank walls or spaces or uses without human activity or amenity;

(c) The central open space for TC-A-1 zone should connect directly to the Sammamish Commons, incorporate low impact development/stormwater management elements based on the watershed sub-basin plan recommendations and take the form of a “green spine” or other configuration that accomplishes similar objectives. See Figure 38 in the Town Center Plan;

(d) The central open space for TC-A-2 zone should connect directly to the wetland/stream corridor in that area;

(e) The central open space for TC-A-3 zone should be configured so that it focuses land development and human activity in that area;

(f) Each mixed-use node should feature a hierarchy of other open spaces connected by the pedestrian network. Open spaces can be in the form of landscaped linear corridors, natural areas, gardens, residential courts and small parks or play areas. See Town Center Plan Open Space Policy OS-1; and

(g) Open space in the TC-A-1 zone must meet the intent of the adopted Town Center Infrastructure Plan.

(5) Natural Systems and Environmental Quality.

(a) Mixed-use node UZDPs should incorporate and implement stormwater management recommendations from sub-basin plans. Where called for, a regional stormwater management system should be implemented;

(b) The project proponent should indicate how low impact development techniques are incorporated into the UZDP (see Town Center Plan Goal NS-1 and supporting policies); and

(c) The mixed-use node development should incorporate natural areas such as wetlands, stream corridors, wildlife corridors and stands of mature trees as amenities into the mixed-use nodes where possible. Opportunities for natural system restoration should be exploited. (See Figure 54 of the Town Center Plan.)

(6) Building Scale and Compatibility.

(a) Building location, orientation, scale and massing should be configured to minimize impacts to surrounding residential areas and public facilities; and

(b) Mixed-use node UZDPs should include some building organization or unifying design concept to unify the node and provide a distinctive development character. This might be accomplished, for example, through orientation of buildings around open space or other feature, use of axial symmetry, vistas, topography, etc., or a hierarchy of building massing (such as a stepped up “wedding cake” formation).

(7) Affordable Housing. Consistent with Chapter 21B.75 SMC that provides regulatory guidance for compliance with affordable housing requirements, the director may review innovative and creative approaches to affordable housing that fulfill the requirements of Chapter 21B.75.

(8) Incorporation of Efficient Infrastructure Systems. Incorporate, where it can be demonstrated to be effective, innovative infrastructure systems such as water capture and re-use, solid waste management systems, waste water treatment, etc. If applicable, the applicant may be required to demonstrate that alternate infrastructure systems have been explored. The director may require that the applicant consult with utilities providers to identify possible solutions to the provision of infrastructure services. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.95.060 Criteria for approval.

The City will evaluate UZDP applications and approve them only if they meet the following criteria.

(1) The applicable procedural and technical requirements of this title and SMC Title 21A;

(2) Adherence to unified zone development planning principles, SMC 21B.95.050;

(3) The City’s roadway standards: infrastructure plans (including the adopted Town Center Infrastructure Plan for the TC-A-1 zone), stormwater management plans, the City’s parks, open space and trails plans and other public plans and requirements; and

(4) The goals and policies of the Town Center Plan. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.95.070 UZD plan outcome.

(1) Outcomes. The approved UZDP will result in an agreement between the applicant and the City describing the terms under which permits will be reviewed. Development permit applications will also be reviewed for conformance to other provisions of the Sammamish Municipal Code. The requirements stated in the UZDP must address the parameters and conditions stated in SMC 21B.95.040. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.95.080 Financial guarantees.

Performance guarantees consistent with the provisions of SMC Title 27A may be required to assure that development occurs according to the approved plan. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.95.090 Limitation of plan approval.

(1) A UZDP approved without a phasing plan shall be null and void if the applicant fails to file a complete building permit application(s) for all buildings within three years of the approval date, or by a date specified by the director, and fails to have all valid building permits issued within four years of the UZDP approval date; or

(2) A UZDP approved with a phasing plan shall be null and void if the applicant fails to meet the conditions and time schedules specified in the approved phasing plan. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.95.100 Modification to an approved plan.

(1) The director will determine whether a subsequent development permit is in compliance with the applicable UZDP by determining if the application deviates from the UDZP. If the application proposal meets or exceeds the UZDP’s conformance to the criteria of SMC 21B.95.060 and supports coordinated infrastructure construction and compatible development, the application will be considered to be in conformance with the UZDP;

(2) In addition, the director will review the application to ensure that the application proposal does not:

(a) Increase the building floor area by more than 10 percent or exceed planning thresholds set by the Town Center Plan, as amended by the City council;

(b) Increase the number of dwelling units or the amount of commercial floor area;

(c) Increase the total impervious surface area identified in the UZDP;

(d) Result in an insufficient amount of parking and/or loading;

(e) Result in incompatible uses locating in close proximity;

(f) Significantly increase the traffic impacts of a.m. or p.m. peak-hour trips to and from the site; and

(g) Significantly increase the quantity of imported or exported materials or increase the area of site disturbance; and

(3) Modifications that exceed the conditions of approval as stated in this section and require a new review as determined by the director shall only be accomplished by applying for a new UZDP for the entire site. The new application shall be reviewed according to the laws and rules in effect at the time of application. (Ord. O2018-466 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.95.110 Administrative rules.

The director may promulgate administrative rules and regulations, pursuant to Chapter 2.55 SMC, to implement the provisions and requirements of this chapter. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


Chapter 21B.96 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS – INTERIM STREET DESIGN STANDARDS

Sections:

21B.96.010    Purpose – Interim Town Center Street Design Standards (July 7, 2010) adopted.

21B.96.020    Resolution of conflicts.


21B.96.010 Purpose – Interim Town Center Street Design Standards (July 7, 2010) adopted.

(1) The City hereby adopts by reference the street design standards and specifications set forth in the document entitled “Interim City of Sammamish Town Center Street Design Standards, (dated July 7, 2010),” as the interim development standards for the Town Center, which includes but is not limited to transportation standards and street standards.

(2) These design standards supplant those adopted under Ordinance O2018-466 under Chapter 14A.01 SMC.

(3) The director of public works is authorized to adopt policies and procedures to: (a) assist in the implementation of these standards; and (b) take into account new modes of street design and construction technology. (Ord. O2018-466 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


21B.96.020 Resolution of conflicts.

In case of inconsistency or conflict between the standards adopted herein and other provisions of the Sammamish Municipal Code and the City of Sammamish public works standards, the most restrictive provision shall apply. (Ord. O2010-293 § 1 (Att. A))


Title 22 CRIMES AND INFRACTIONS – OTHER

Chapters:

22.05    Miscellaneous Crimes

22.10    Repealed

22.15    Vehicle Impoundment Upon Arrest of Driver for Driving While License Suspended or Revoked


Chapter 22.05 MISCELLANEOUS CRIMES*

Sections:

22.05.010    Animals – Injury to.

22.05.015    Use of weapons within the City limits.

22.05.020    Controlled substances – Nuisance.

22.05.030    Disorderly conduct.

22.05.040    Disruption of school activities.

22.05.060    Shooting within the City limits.

22.05.070    Throwing objects at moving vehicles.

22.05.080    Unlawful use of air guns – Penalty.

22.05.090    Urinating in public.

22.05.100    Vehicles resembling police or fire vehicles.

22.05.110    Pedestrian interference.

22.05.120    Crimes not specifically referenced.

*For penalty and other related provisions, see SMC 9.05.010 through 9.05.070.


22.05.010 Animals – Injury to.

Any person who willfully and without authority in law kills, maims or disfigures an animal belonging to another, or exposes any poisons or noxious substance with intent that it should be taken by such animal, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. O2000-52 § 16)


22.05.015 Use of weapons within the City limits.

(1) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect humans, domestic animals and property from the likelihood of jeopardy resulting from the use of weapons and traps to kill, catch or injure wild animals or birds within the corporate limits of the City. It is the further intent of this section to provide for habitat for wild animals and wild birds on publicly owned property within the City.

(2) Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning hereafter set forth:

(a) “Use a weapon” shall mean any effort to kill, injure, or harass a wild animal or wild bird by means of firearms, bow and arrow, and any other object or device designed or intended to inflict injury, bodily harm, or death.

(b) “Trap” (and its derivatives) shall mean a method of using an object or device to capture wild animals or birds.

(c) “Wild animal” shall mean any of those species of the class Mammilla whose members exist in Washington in a wild state. The term “wild animal” shall not include feral domestic animals, moles, mice or rats.

(d) Wild bird” shall mean any of those species whose members exist in Washington in a wild state.

(3) Prohibited Activities.

(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully use a weapon against any wild animal or wild bird, or to trap, capture or disturb any wild animal or wild bird, or to take the eggs or nests of any such bird in the City, subject to the provisions of subsections (3)(b), (c) and (d) of this section.

(b) The City council may by resolution from time to time designate areas, times and conditions for hunting within the City.

(c) The provisions of this section shall not apply to law enforcement officers or personnel of the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife while engaged in the performance of their official duties.

(d) The provisions of this section shall not affect or apply to the following:

(i) The use of bow and arrows with due consideration for the safety of people, property and animals:

(A) At a City-licensed or permitted archery range or meet;

(B) Upon and within the private property of the user;

(C) Upon and within the private property of another with the property owner’s express permission; or

(ii) Live trapping of a wild animal or wild bird for purposes of transferring it for release in a suitable habitat; or

(iii) The human destruction of a dangerous animal or an animal or bird suffering from serious injury or disease.

(4) Penalties.

(a) Each person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor upon first conviction, and upon a second or subsequent conviction shall be guilty of a gross misdemeanor.

(b) Each individual animal or bird unlawfully hunted, taken or possessed in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. O2005-168 § 1; Ord. O2004-166 § 1)


22.05.020 Controlled substances – Nuisance.

The distribution or possession for the purpose of sale, exhibition or display, in any place of business from which minors are not excluded as set forth in this code, of devices, contrivances, instruments or paraphernalia which are primarily designed for or intended to be used for the smoking, ingestion or consumption of marijuana, hashish, PCP or any controlled substance, other than prescription drugs and devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs, is declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated by the City. This remedy shall be in addition to any other remedy provided by the law including the penalty provision applicable for violation of the terms and provisions of this code. (Ord. O2000-52 § 20)


22.05.030 Disorderly conduct.

Any person who engages in disorderly conduct is guilty of a misdemeanor. A person engages in disorderly conduct when that person:

(1) Uses abusive language and thereby intentionally creates a risk of assault;

(2) Intentionally disrupts any lawful assembly or meeting of persons without lawful authority;

(3) Intentionally obstructs vehicular or pedestrian traffic without lawful authority;

(4) Intentionally and without lawful authority makes noise which unreasonably disturbs another;

(5) Intentionally engages in any conduct which tends to or does disturb the public peace, provides disorder, or endangers the safety of others; or

(6) Fights by agreement, except as part of an organized athletic event. (Ord. O2000-52 § 23)


22.05.040 Disruption of school activities.

(1) Any person who enters or remains in any school building, classroom or upon any school ground, street, sidewalk or public way adjacent thereto, and intentionally causes disruption of the activities of the school is guilty of a gross misdemeanor.

(2) As used in this section, “school” has its ordinary meaning and also includes universities, colleges, community colleges and institutions of higher education. (Ord. O2000-52 § 24)


22.05.060 Shooting within the City limits.

Any person who knowingly discharges a firearm within the City is guilty of a misdemeanor; provided, however, that the provisions of this section do not apply to a person acting in self defense; engaged in military activities sponsored by the federal or state governments, while engaged in official duties; law enforcement personnel; security personnel while engaged in official duties; or a person utilizing a properly licensed institutional, membership, and/or commercial shooting range. (Ord. O2000-52 § 31)


22.05.070 Throwing objects at moving vehicles.

Any person who throws, pushes, rolls, drops, swings or otherwise propels or projects any object, thing, or substance in such a manner as to strike or be likely to strike any moving vehicle on the public highways or streets is guilty of a gross misdemeanor. (Ord. O2000-52 § 51)


22.05.080 Unlawful use of air guns – Penalty.

(1) Any person who points or shoots an air gun at any person or at the property of another, or who aims or discharges such weapon in the direction of the person or residence of another, while within such range as to cause or inflict injury to the person or damage the property of another, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, in addition to any other punishment imposed, the court shall order the weapon to be confiscated and disposed of in accordance with statutes or ordinances governing the disposal of confiscated or found weapons.

(2) “Air gun” shall mean any air gun, air pistol, air rifle, BB gun and toy or other guns designed or modified and used to propel, by compressed air or spring-loaded plunger, any pellet, dart, hard-tipped arrow, bean, pea, BB, rock or other hard substances, a distance of more than 25 feet with sufficient force to break windows or inflict injury upon persons or animals. (Ord. O2000-52 § 54)


22.05.090 Urinating in public. 

Any person who intentionally urinates or defecates in a public place, other than a washroom or toilet room, or at a place and under circumstances where such act could be observed by any member of the public, shall be subject to a civil fine not to exceed $250.00 for a first offense. For second and subsequent charges, the person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. O2000-52 § 55)


22.05.100 Vehicles resembling police or fire vehicles.

Any person who operates a motor vehicle painted and exhibiting decals, numbers, name, insignia, or other objects which simulate a City or county police or fire department vehicle, or City vehicle, without prior authorization from the police chief, fire chief, City manager, or their designees is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. O2000-52 § 56)


22.05.110 Pedestrian interference.

(1) As used in this section, the following definitions apply:

(a) “Aggressively beg” means to beg with the intent to intimidate another person into giving money or goods.

(b) “Intimidate” means to engage in conduct that would make a reasonable person fearful or feel compelled.

(c) “Beg” means to ask for money or goods as a charity, whether by words, bodily gestures, signs, or other means.

(d) “Obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic” means to walk, stand, sit, lie, or place an object in such a manner as to block passage by another person or a vehicle, or to require another person or a driver of a vehicle to take evasive action to avoid physical contract. Acts authorized as an exercise of one’s constitutional right to picket or to legally protest, and acts authorized by a permit issued by the City, shall not constitute obstruction of pedestrian or vehicular traffic.

(e) “Public place” means an area generally visible to public view and includes alleys, bridges, buildings, driveways, parking lots, parks, plazas, sidewalks and streets open to the general public, including those that serve food or drink or provide entertainment, and the doorways and entrances to buildings or dwellings and the grounds enclosing them.

(2) A person is guilty of pedestrian interference if, in a public place, he or she intentionally obstructs pedestrian or vehicular traffic or aggressively begs. Pedestrian interference is a misdemeanor. (Ord. O2000-52 § 61)


22.05.120 Crimes not specifically referenced.

Any act or omission defined as a misdemeanor or gross misdemeanor in state law and not specifically identified in this chapter is also adopted by reference. (Ord. O2000-52 § 66)


Chapter 22.10 TRAFFIC OFFENSES*

(Repealed by Ord. O2012-323)

*For traffic offenses, see Chapter 46.40 SMC.


Chapter 22.15 VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT UPON ARREST OF DRIVER FOR DRIVING WHILE LICENSE SUSPENDED OR REVOKED

Sections:

22.15.010    Appointment of King County as agent for the City.

22.15.020    Impoundment authorized.

22.15.030    Administrative fee.

22.15.040    Owner of impounded vehicle to be notified.

22.15.050    Redemption of impounded vehicles.

22.15.060    Post-impoundment hearing procedure.

22.15.070    Contracts for towing and storage.


22.15.010 Appointment of King County as agent for the City.

King County and the King County sheriff’s office and/or its designees are appointed and authorized to act as agent of the City in regard to all impoundments and actions permitted by this chapter. (Ord. O2001-82 § 1; Ord. O2000-52 § 62(1))


22.15.020 Impoundment authorized.

(1) If a driver is arrested for a violation of driving while license suspended (“DWLS”) in the third degree, as defined in RCW 46.20.342, or if the driver is arrested for driving with a license suspended in another state, the vehicle is subject to impoundment.

(2) If the driver is arrested for a violation of DWLS second degree, as defined in RCW 46.20.342, the vehicle is subject to impoundment for 30 days.

(3) If the driver is arrested for a violation of DWLS first degree, as defined in RCW 46.20.342, the vehicle is subject to impoundment for 30 days.

(4) If a driver is arrested for a violation of RCW 46.61.502, Driving under the influence, or RCW 46.61.504, Physical control of vehicle under the influence, the vehicle is subject to impoundment. (Ord. O2013-344 § 1; Ord. O2003-123 § 1; Ord. O2001-82 § 1; Ord. O2000-52 § 62(2))


22.15.030 Administrative fee.

If a vehicle is impounded pursuant to the provisions of this section, an administrative fee as set forth by resolution shall be paid to the City of Sammamish finance department, prior to redemption of the vehicle as provided by this section. The administrative fee shall be for the purpose of offsetting, to the extent practicable, the cost to the City of implementing, enforcing, and administering this section and must be deposited in an appropriate account. (Ord. O2001-82 § 1; Ord. O2000-52 § 62(3))


22.15.040 Owner of impounded vehicle to be notified.

(1) Not more than 24 hours after impoundment of any vehicle, the tow truck operator shall mail a notice by first class mail to the last known address of the legal and registered owner(s) of the vehicle, as may be disclosed by the vehicle identification number, and as provided by the Washington State Department of Licensing. The notice shall include the name of the impounding tow firm, its address, and telephone number. The notice shall include the location and time of the impound, and by whose authority the vehicle was impounded. The notice also shall include written notice of the right of redemption and opportunity for a hearing to contest the validity of the impound or the amount of towing and storage charges pursuant to this chapter, as set forth on a form provided by the King County sheriff’s office. The notice shall state the mandatory length of the impound. The notice shall state that a person who desires to redeem an impounded vehicle at the end of the mandatory period must, within five days of the impound, at the request of the tow truck operator, pay a security deposit to the tow truck operator of not more than one-half of the applicable impound storage rate for each day of the proposed suspended license impound to ensure payment of the costs of the removal, towing, and storage of the vehicle pursuant to RCW 46.55.120 (1)(b). The notification shall state that if the security deposit is not posted within five days of the impound, the vehicle will be processed and sold at auction as an abandoned vehicle pursuant to RCW 46.55.130. The notice shall set forth the requirements of SMC 22.15.050 regarding the payment of the costs of removal, towing, and storage as well as providing proof of payment of the administrative fee and proof of satisfaction of any penalties, fines, or forfeitures before redemption. The notice must also state that the registered owner is ineligible to purchase the vehicle at the abandoned vehicle auction, if held. 

(2) Notwithstanding subsection (1) of this section, a rental car business may immediately redeem a rented vehicle it owns by payment of the costs of removal, towing, and storage, whereupon the vehicle will not be held for impound. The officer directing the impound shall notify the rental car business as soon as practicable of the impound.

(3) If the date on which a notice required by subsection (1) of this section is to be mailed falls upon a Saturday, Sunday, or postal holiday, the notice may be mailed on the next day that is neither a Saturday, Sunday, nor a postal holiday.

(4) Similar notice shall be given to each person who seeks to redeem an impounded vehicle, except that if a vehicle is redeemed prior to the mailing of notice, then notice need not be mailed. The tow truck operator shall maintain a record evidenced by the redeeming person’s signature that the notification was provided. (Ord. O2003-123 § 2; Ord. O2001-82 § 1; Ord. O2000-52 § 62(4))


22.15.050 Redemption of impounded vehicles.

Vehicles impounded pursuant to this chapter shall be redeemed only under the following circumstances, and pursuant to agreement between the City and the King County sheriff’s office: 

(1) A person redeeming an impounded vehicle must, prior to redemption, establish that he or she has a valid driver’s license and insurance. An impounded vehicle may be redeemed only by the following persons:

(a) The registered owner;

(b) A person authorized in writing by the registered owner; or

(c) A person who has purchased the vehicle from the registered owner and who produces ownership or written authorization and signs a receipt therefor. 

(2) The impounded vehicle shall be released upon payment of the administrative fee to the City and the costs of impoundment to the tow truck operator. An impounded vehicle can be released only pursuant to a written order from the King County sheriff’s office or a court. 

(a) Costs of impoundment shall include the costs of towing, storage, or other services rendered during the course of towing, removing, impounding, or storing any such vehicle. 

(b) The tow truck operator shall accept payment as provided in RCW 46.55.120(1)(f), as now or hereafter amended. 

(c) In addition, if an impounded vehicle was operated by the registered owner when it was impounded, the vehicle must not be released to any person until the registered owner establishes with the King County sheriff’s office that any penalties, fines, or forfeitures owed by him or her have been satisfied, or a time payment agreement (in a form approved by the court) has been entered into providing for the satisfaction of all said penalties, fines or forfeitures. Washington State Department of Licensing license reinstatement fees shall not be treated as penalties, fines, or forfeitures for purposes of this section. 

(3)  Any person seeking to redeem an impounded vehicle has a right to a hearing before an administrative hearings officer to contest the validity of an impoundment or the amount of removal, towing, and storage charges or administrative fee.

(a) Any request for a hearing shall be made in writing, on a form provided by the King County sheriff’s office and signed by such person.

(b) Any request for a hearing shall be received by the King County sheriff’s office within 10 days (including Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays) of the latter of:

(i) The date the notice of right of redemption and opportunity for hearing was mailed to the person; or

(ii) The date the notice was given to the person by the tow truck operator.

(c) Upon receiving a valid request for a hearing, the King County sheriff’s office shall assign one or more administrative hearing officers to conduct post-impoundment hearings.

(d) Such hearing shall be provided as follows:

(i) If all of the requirements to redeem the vehicle, including expiration of any period of impoundment under SMC 22.15.020, have been satisfied, then the impounded vehicle shall be released immediately and a hearing shall be held within 90 days of the written request for hearing.

(ii) If all of the requirements to redeem the vehicle, including expiration of any period of impoundment under SMC 22.15.020, have not been satisfied, then the impounded vehicle shall not be released until after a hearing that shall be held within 10 business days (excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays), but no later than the next available court date, of the written request for hearing.

(iii) Any person seeking a hearing who has failed to request such hearing within the time specified in this section may petition the King County sheriff’s office for an extension to file a request for hearing. Such extension shall only be granted upon the demonstration of good cause as to the reason(s) the request for hearing was not timely filed. For the purpose of this chapter, “good cause” shall be defined as circumstances beyond the control of the person seeking the hearing that prevented such person from filing a timely request for hearing. In the event such extension is granted, the person receiving such extension shall be granted a hearing in accordance with this chapter.

(iv) If a person fails to file a timely request for hearing and no extension to file such a request has been granted, the right to a hearing is waived, the impoundment and the associated costs of impoundment are deemed to be proper, and neither the City nor county shall be liable for removal, towing, and storage charges arising from the impoundment.

(4) The Sammamish police chief or designee is authorized to release an impounded vehicle prior to the expiration of any period of impoundment upon petition of the spouse or domestic partner of the registered owner of the vehicle. The petition must be based on economic or personal hardship to such spouse or domestic partner resulting from the unavailability of the vehicle. 

(a) In determining whether to grant such release, the Sammamish police chief or designee shall consider the threat to public safety that may result from the release of the vehicle, including, but not limited to, the driver’s criminal history, driving record, license status, and access to the vehicle. 

(b) If such release is authorized, the person redeeming the vehicle must satisfy the requirements of subsections (1) and (2) of this section with the exception of payment of the penalties, fines, or forfeitures owed by the driver, and with the exception of the administrative fee. 

(5) The Sammamish police chief, or designee, is authorized to release an impounded vehicle prior to the expiration of any period of impoundment upon the petition of the registered owner, provided the registered owner was not the operator of the vehicle at the time of the impound. The petition must be based on economic or personal hardship or equity. If such release is authorized, the registered owner must satisfy the requirements of subsections (1) and (2) of this section in order to redeem the vehicle. (Ord. O2017-444 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2006-195 § 1; Ord. O2001-82 § 1; Ord. O2000-52 § 62(5))


22.15.060 Post-impoundment hearing procedure.

Hearings requested pursuant to SMC 22.15.050 shall be held by an administrative hearings officer who shall determine whether the impoundment was proper and whether the associated towing and storage and administrative fees charged were proper.

(1) At the hearing, the King County sheriff’s office may produce any relevant evidence to show that either the impound or fees, or both, were proper. An abstract of the driver’s driving record is admissible without further evidentiary foundation and is prima facie evidence of the status of the driver’s license, permit or privilege to drive and that the driver was convicted of each offense shown on the abstract. In addition, a certified vehicle registration of the impounded vehicle is admissible without further evidentiary foundation and is prima facie evidence of the identity of the registered owner of the vehicle.

(2) At the hearing, the person who requested the hearing may produce any relevant evidence to show that either the impound or fees or both were not proper.

(3) If the impoundment is found to be proper, the administrative hearings officer shall enter an order so stating. In the event that the costs of impoundment (removal, towing, storage, and administrative fees) have not been paid or any other applicable requirements of SMC 22.15.050, subsections (1) and (2) of this section not satisfied, or any period of impoundment has not expired, the administrative hearings officer’s order shall also provide that the impounded vehicle shall be released only after payment of any fines imposed on any underlying traffic violations. 

(4) If the impoundment is found to be improper, the administrative hearings officer shall enter an order so stating and order the immediate release of the vehicle. If the costs of impoundment have already been paid, the administrative hearings officer shall enter judgment against the county and in favor of the person who has paid the costs of impoundment in the amount of the costs of the impoundment, which are removal, towing, storage, and administrative fees, plus interest at the rate of 12 percent per year from the date that person paid the costs, and the county shall comply with the order. If the costs of impoundment, which are removal, towing, and storage, have not been paid, the hearings officer shall enter an order directing the county to pay the costs to the tow truck operator, and the county shall comply with the order. The county and City are not liable for damages if the police officer who ordered the impound relied in good faith and without gross negligence, on the records of the Department of Licensing in ascertaining whether the operator of the vehicle had a suspended or revoked driver’s license. 

(5) In the event that the administrative hearings officer finds that the impound was proper, but that the removal, towing or storage fees charged for the impoundment were improper, the administrative hearings officer shall determine the correct fees to be charged. If the costs of impoundment have been paid, the administrative hearings officer shall enter a judgment against the county and in favor of the person who has paid the costs of impoundment for the amount of the overpayment plus interest at the rate of 12 percent per year on the overpayment from the date that person paid the costs, and the county shall comply with the order. The tow truck operator is liable to the county for the amount of the overpayment and interest at the rate of 12 percent per year. The tow truck operator shall make the payment to the county no later than 60 days after the tow truck operator receives notice of the requirement to pay. The county may bring an action in the King County district court against the tow truck operator to recover the overpayment plus interest at the rate of 12 percent per year.

(6) No determination of facts made at a hearing under this chapter shall have any collateral estoppel effect on a subsequent criminal prosecution and shall not preclude litigation of those same facts in a subsequent criminal prosecution.

(7) An appeal of the administrative hearings officer’s decision shall be conducted according to, and is subject to the procedures of this chapter. In accordance with RCW 46.55.240(1)(d), a decision made by an administrative hearings officer may be appealed to the King County district court for final judgment. The hearing on the appeal under this section shall be de novo. A person appealing such a decision must file a request for an appeal in district court within 15 days after the decision of the administrative hearings officer and must pay a filing fee in the same amount required for the filing of a suit in district court. If a person fails to file a request for an appeal within the time specified by this section or does not pay the filing fee, the right to an appeal is waived and the administrative hearings officer’s decision is final. (Ord. O2001-82 § 1; Ord. O2000-52 § 62(6))


22.15.070 Contracts for towing and storage.

The King County sheriff’s office and the City manager and/or designees are authorized and directed to enter into appropriate agreements and to promulgate rules and regulations to provide for the fair and efficient administration of any contract(s) awarded to registered tow truck operators pursuant to this chapter. Such contracts shall be at no cost to the county and the City and shall provide that the tow truck operator may recover the costs of towing and storage only from the person seeking to redeem the impounded vehicle, or from the proceeds of sale of an unclaimed vehicle pursuant to RCW 46.55.130, and that the county and City shall not be responsible for payment of such costs except upon order of the administrative hearings officer pursuant to SMC 22.15.060. (Ord. O2001-82 § 1; Ord. O2000-52 § 62(7))


Title 23 CIVIL CODE COMPLIANCE

Chapters:

23.10    Purpose and Scope

23.20    Response Categories

23.30    Declaration of Public Nuisance

23.40    Right of Entry

23.50    Voluntary Compliance Agreements

23.60    Notice and Orders

23.70    Stop Work Orders

23.80    Infractions

23.90    Service of Written Notice

23.100    Civil Penalties

23.110    Appeal to Hearing Examiner

23.120    Abatement by the City

23.130    Unfit Dwellings, Buildings and Structures

23.140    General Provisions

23.150    Definitions


Chapter 23.10 PURPOSE AND SCOPE

Sections:

23.10.010    Purpose.

23.10.020    Scope.


23.10.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this title is to establish an effective and efficient system to ensure compliance with the City’s adopted building, land development, land use, and related codes. These regulations establish procedures and mechanisms to resolve violations, establish penalties for violations, provide an opportunity for a prompt hearing, decision and appeal as to alleged code violations, provide for abatement when necessary, and provide a mechanism to recover the City’s costs. (Ord. O2011-302 § 2 (Att. A))


23.10.020 Scope.

This chapter shall be applied for the purposes of enforcing SMC Titles 13, 14A, 15, 16, 21A, 21B, 25 and other codes, ordinances, resolutions, or public rules that promote or protect the public health, safety, or welfare and the environment. The provisions of this title are not exclusive and may be used in addition to other applicable provisions of the Sammamish Municipal Code or other applicable law or regulation. (Ord. O2018-462 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2011-302 § 2 (Att. A))


Chapter 23.20 RESPONSE CATEGORIES

Sections:

23.20.010    Categories of response.

23.20.020    Incremental approach.


23.20.010 Categories of response.

Responses to complaints or evidence of a civil code violation shall be prioritized based on significance and severity. The categories set forth in this section are not jurisdictional and failure to meet them in any particular case shall not affect the City’s authority to enforce City code provisions with regard to that case. The following categories serve as guidelines for administering this title:

(1) High risk situations need an urgent response. These include an imminent likelihood of/or actual bodily harm or detrimental public health exposure, damage to public resources or facilities, damage to real or personal property, or significant environmental damage or contamination.

(2) Moderate risk situations need a prompt response. These include a risk of bodily harm, damage to public resources or facilities, damage to real or personal property, environmental damage or contamination.

(3) Low risk situations need response as time permits. These are nonemergent, do not fit within the high risk or moderate risk categories and have only minor public impacts. (Ord. O2011-302 §2 (Att. A))


23.20.020 Incremental approach.

The director should follow an incremental approach to securing compliance with City codes. This means starting by contacting the person responsible, explaining the violation and requesting voluntary correction. As needed, the director should secure compliance by proceeding incrementally to higher penalty levels by using the techniques and options in this title. The director may also determine no violation exists and take no further action, or for low risk, “de minimus” violations, decide not to take further action. (Ord. O2011-302 §2 (Att. A))


Chapter 23.30 DECLARATION OF PUBLIC NUISANCE

Sections:

23.30.010    Declaration of public nuisance.


23.30.010 Declaration of public nuisance.

All code violations are determined to be detrimental to the public health, safety, welfare and environment, and are declared to be public nuisances. All conditions determined to be code violations shall be subject to and enforced pursuant to the provisions of this title, except where specifically excluded by law or regulation. (Ord. O2011-302 §2 (Att. A))


Chapter 23.40 RIGHT OF ENTRY

Sections:

23.40.010    Right of entry.


23.40.010 Right of entry.

The director is authorized to enter upon any property or premises at any reasonable time to determine whether a civil violation has occurred or is occurring, or to enforce any provision of the Sammamish Municipal Code or any City regulation, violation of which is a civil violation under this title. The director may make examinations, surveys, and studies as may be necessary in the performance of his or her duties. These may include the taking of photographs, digital images, videotapes, video images, audio recordings, samples, or other physical evidence. If the premises is occupied, the director shall first present credentials and request entry. If an owner, occupant, or agent refuses entry, the City may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for a search warrant authorizing access. (Ord. O2011-302 §2 (Att. A))


Chapter 23.50 VOLUNTARY COMPLIANCE AGREEMENTS

Sections:

23.50.010    Timing.

23.50.020    Contents.

23.50.030    Waiver of appeal.

23.50.040    Amendment.


23.50.010 Timing.

A voluntary compliance agreement (VCA) is a preferred mechanism to resolve most code compliance cases, and may be entered into at any time before an administrative appeal is decided. (Ord. O2011-302 §2 (Att. A))


23.50.020 Contents.

A VCA is a written contract between the person responsible for the violation and the City, where such person agrees to abate the violation within a specified time and according to specified conditions. The VCA shall be completed on a form approved by the director and the City attorney and shall, at minimum, include the following:

(1) The name and address of the person responsible;

(2) The street address or other description sufficient for identification of the building, structure, premises, or land upon which the violation has occurred or is occurring;

(3) A description of the violation(s) and a reference to the code(s) which has been violated;

(4) The necessary corrective action to be taken, and the date by which the correction must be completed;

(5) An agreement by the person responsible that the City may inspect the premises as may be necessary to determine compliance with the VCA;

(6) The amount of the civil penalty that will be imposed pursuant to this title if the person responsible does not meet his or her obligations under the VCA;

(7) A statement that the person responsible waives the right to an administrative or judicial hearing for appeal purposes; and

(8) An agreement by the person responsible that if the City determines that such person does not meet his or her obligations specified in the VCA, the City may impose any remedy authorized by this title, including, but not limited to:

(a) Assessment of civil penalties as established by resolution or otherwise identified in the VCA;

(b) Abatement of the violation;

(c) Assessment of all costs and expenses incurred by the City to pursue code enforcement and to abate the violation, including legal and incidental expenses; and

(d) Suspension, revocation, or limitation of a permit. (Ord. O2011-302 §2 (Att. A))


23.50.030 Waiver of appeal.

In consideration of the City’s agreement to enter into a VCA, the person responsible shall completely surrender and have no right to an administrative or judicial hearing, under this title or otherwise, regarding the matter of the violation and/or the required corrective action. The VCA is a final, binding agreement, it is not a settlement agreement, and its contents are not subject to appeal. (Ord. O2011-302 §2 (Att. A))


23.50.040 Amendment.

The director may grant an extension of the time limit for compliance, or a modification of the required corrective action may be granted, if the person responsible has shown due diligence and/or substantial progress in correcting the violation but unforeseen circumstances or circumstances beyond the control of the person responsible, render full and timely compliance under the original conditions unattainable. Such request shall be made in writing by the person responsible and clearly establish the need for such an extension. (Ord. O2011-302 §2 (Att. A))


Chapter 23.60 NOTICE AND ORDERS

Sections:

23.60.010    Authority.

23.60.020    Contents.

23.60.030    Supplementation, revocation or modification.

23.60.040    Recording.

23.60.050    Time limits.


23.60.010 Authority.

Whenever the director has reason to determine that a civil code violation occurred or is occurring, or that the civil code violations cited in an infraction have not been corrected, or that the terms of a VCA have not been met, or the person responsible has decided not to enter into a VCA, the director is authorized to issue a notice and order to any person responsible for the code violation. Subsequent violations shall be treated as new violations for purposes of this section. (Ord. O2011-302 §2 (Att. A))


23.60.020 Contents.

A notice and order shall be completed in a form approved by the director and the City attorney, and shall be served consistent with Chapter 23.90 SMC and shall, at minimum, include the following:

(1) The tax parcel number(s), address, when available, or description sufficient for identification of the building, structure, premises or land upon which or within which the violation has occurred or is occurring;

(2) A statement of each ordinance, regulation, code provision or permit requirement violated;

(3) The name of the City official issuing the notice and order;

(4) The required corrective action that is necessary to achieve compliance and a date by which the correction must be completed;

(5) An explanation of the appeal process and the specific information required to file an appeal;

(6) A statement that if the violation is not corrected and the notice and order is not appealed, the determination is final and a monetary penalty shall be assessed according to this title; and

(7) A statement advising that, if any of the work is not commenced or completed within the time specified for compliance, the City may proceed to abate the violation, cause work to be done, and assess the costs and expenses of abatement incurred by the City against the person responsible, and that the City may take any other legal action. (Ord. O2011-302 §2 (Att. A))


23.60.030 Supplementation, revocation or modification.

(1) Whenever there is new information or a change in circumstances, a director may add to, rescind in whole or in part or otherwise modify a notice and order by issuing a supplemental notice and order. The supplemental notice and order shall be governed by the same procedures applicable to all notice and orders contained in this title.

(2) The director may revoke or modify a notice and order issued under this title if the original notice and order was issued in error or if a party to an order was incorrectly named. The revocation or modification shall identify the reason and underlying facts for revocation and may be recorded with the King County recorder’s office, or its successor agency, if the underlying notice and order was recorded. (Ord. O2011-302 §2 (Att. A))


23.60.040 Recording.

(1) Whenever a notice and order is served on a person responsible for the code violation, the City may record a copy of the notice and order with the King County recorder’s office, or its successor agency.

(2) When all violations specified in the notice and order have been corrected or abated, the director shall record a release of notice and order with the King County recorder’s office, or its successor agency, if the underlying notice and order was recorded. The release shall include a legal description of the property where the violation occurred and shall state, if applicable, that any unpaid civil penalties for which liens have been recorded are still outstanding and continue as liens on the property. (Ord. O2011-302 §2 (Att. A))


23.60.050 Time limits.

(1) Persons receiving a notice and order shall rectify the code violations identified within the time period specified by the director in the notice and order issued pursuant to this title.

(2) Unless an appeal is filed with the director for a hearing before the hearing examiner in accordance with this title and Chapter 20.10 SMC, the notice and order shall become the final administrative order of the director, and the civil penalties assessed shall be immediately due and subject to collection. (Ord. O2011-302 §2 (Att. A))


Chapter 23.70 STOP WORK ORDERS

Sections:

23.70.010    Stop work orders.


23.70.010 Stop work orders.

(1) Authorization. Whenever a violation of this title threatens the health or safety of the public or materially impairs the director’s ability to secure compliance with the Sammamish Municipal Code, the director may issue a stop work order specifying the violation and prohibiting any work or other activity at the site. A stop work order shall be served consistent with Chapter 23.90 SMC. Issuance of a notice and order is not a condition precedent to the issuance of a stop work order.

(2) Effect. Work or activity may not resume unless specifically authorized in advance by the director. Any violation of a stop work order is hereby declared to be a nuisance and the director is authorized to enjoin or abate such nuisance by any legal or equitable means available. The costs, specifically including reasonable attorney and expert witness fees, for the injunction or abatement, shall be recovered by the City from the person responsible for the code violation in the manner provided by law. Failure to comply with the terms of a stop work order subjects the person responsible for the code violation to civil penalties and costs as set forth in this title.

(3) Appeal. A stop work order may be appealed according to the procedures prescribed by this title and Chapter 20.10 SMC. Failure to appeal the stop work order within the applicable time limits renders the stop work order a final determination that the civil code violation occurred and that work was properly ordered to cease. (Ord. O2011-302 §2 (Att. A))


Chapter 23.80 INFRACTIONS

Sections:

23.80.010    Infractions.


23.80.010 Infractions.

Whenever the director has reason to determine that a civil code violation occurred or is occurring, the director is authorized to issue an infraction in accordance with Chapter 7.80 RCW, which is incorporated herein by this reference, upon the person responsible for the condition. Issuance of an infraction constitutes a civil infraction. The district court shall have jurisdiction over all infractions issued under this title. (Ord. O2011-302 §2 (Att. A))


Chapter 23.90 SERVICE OF WRITTEN NOTICE

Sections:

23.90.010    Service of written notice.


23.90.010 Service of written notice.

(1) Service of a notice and order, stop work order, infraction or other official written notice of violation issued by the director shall be made by one or more of the following methods:

(a) By personal service to the person responsible for the code violation or by leaving a copy of the written notice at such person’s place of residence with a person of suitable age and discretion who resides there.

(b) By posting the written notice in a conspicuous place on the property where the violation occurred and concurrently mailing notice as provided for in this subsection.

(c) By mailing two copies of the written notice, postage prepaid, one by ordinary first class mail and the other by certified mail, to the person responsible for the code violation at his, her or its last known address, at the address of the violation, or at the address of the place of business of the person responsible for the code violation. The taxpayer’s address as shown on the tax records of the county shall be deemed to be the proper address for the purpose of mailing such notice to the landowner of the property where the violation occurred. Service by mail shall be presumed effective upon the third business day following the day upon which the official written notice of violation was placed in the mail.

(d) For notice and orders only, when the address of the person responsible for the code violation cannot reasonably be determined, service may be made by publication once in the City’s official newspaper.

(2) The failure of the director to make or attempt service of written notice shall not invalidate any proceedings as to any other person duly served. (Ord. O2011-302 §2 (Att. A))


Chapter 23.100 CIVIL PENALTIES

Sections:

23.100.010    Assessment schedule.

23.100.015    Mitigation for unlawful tree removal.

23.100.020    Waivers.


23.100.010 Assessment schedule.

	Code Enforcement Penalties:

	Infraction	up to $500

	Stop Work Order	up to $500

	Noncompliance:

	1 – 15 days	$100 up to $250 per day

	16 – 31 days	$250 up to $500 per day

	31+ days	$500 up to $1,000 per day (up to $50,000 maximum)

	Environmental Damage/Critical Areas Violations:

	Up to $25,000 plus the cost of restoration

	Unlawful Tree Removal or Damage:

	$1,500 per inch of diameter at breast height of tree removed or damaged

	$25 fee per sign illegally placed on public property or in the City’s right-of-way.

(1) Civil fines and civil penalties for civil code violations shall be imposed for remedial purposes and shall be assessed for each type of violation identified in a notice and order, VCA, stop work order, or infraction pursuant to this chapter.

(2) The penalties assessed pursuant to this chapter for failure to comply with the terms of a VCA are based on the number of days of noncompliance, dating back to the date of the initial violation.

(3) Penalties based on violation of a stop work order shall be assessed, according to this chapter, for each day the director determines that work or activity was done in violation of the stop work order.

(4) Infractions shall be subject to a one-time civil penalty as set forth in this chapter.

(5) Payment of a monetary penalty does not relieve the person responsible to whom the notice was issued of the duty to correct the violation.

(6) In addition to the other penalties provided for in this chapter, any person responsible for a violation of Chapter 21A.50 SMC may be jointly and severally liable for site restoration for the redress of ecological, recreation, and economic values lost or damaged and shall pay a civil penalty up to $25,000 plus restoration, based upon the severity of the violation as documented in the City’s file.

For the purposes of this subsection, a violation of the critical areas ordinance means: the violation of any provision of Chapter 21A.50 SMC; or the failure to obtain a permit required for work in a critical area; or the failure to comply with the conditions of any permit, approval, terms, and conditions of any critical area tract or setback area, easement or other covenant, plat restriction, or binding assurance or any notice and order, stop work order, mitigation plan, contract or other agreement.

(7) Any person responsible for damage to or removal of a tree in violation of Chapter 21A.37 SMC shall be jointly and severally liable for mitigation as described in SMC 23.100.015 and shall pay a civil penalty of $1,500 per inch of diameter at breast height of tree removed or damaged.

(8) The civil penalties in this chapter are in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other penalties, sanctions, restitution, or fines provided for in any other provisions of law. (Ord. O2017-436 (Att. A); Ord. O2016-408 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2015-395 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-302 §2 (Att. A))


23.100.015 Mitigation for unlawful tree removal.

(1) In addition to the monetary penalty outlined in SMC 23.100.010, any tree damaged or removed in violation of Chapter 21A.37 SMC shall be subject to replacement. For the purpose of code enforcement, if a tree has been removed and only the stump remains, the size of the tree shall be the diameter of the top of the stump. Mitigation measures must comply with the standards specified in SMC 21A.37.280, Tree replacement standards, except that the number of replacement trees for significant trees removed or damaged shall be as follows:

(a) Removed or damaged coniferous trees with a DBH equal to or greater than eight inches up to 12 inches shall be replaced by four trees;

(b) Removed or damaged trees with a DBH equal to or greater than 12 inches up to 16 inches shall be replaced by six trees; and

(c) Removed or damaged trees with a DBH of 16 inches or more shall be replaced by eight trees. (Ord. O2015-395 § 4 (Att. B))


23.100.020 Waivers.

(1) Civil fines and civil penalties, in whole or in part, may be waived or reimbursed to the payer by the director, with the concurrence of the finance director, under the following circumstances:

(a) The notice and order, stop work order, or infraction was issued in error;

(b) The civil fines or civil penalties were assessed in error;

(c) Notice failed to reach the person responsible due to unusual circumstances;

(d) The code violations have been corrected under a VCA;

(e) The code violations which formed the basis for the civil penalties have been corrected, and the director finds that compelling reasons justify waiver of all or part of the outstanding civil penalties; or

(f) Other extraordinary information warranting waiver has been presented to the director since the notice and order, stop work order or infraction was issued.

(2) The director shall document the circumstances under which a decision was made to waive penalties. (Ord. O2015-395 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. O2011-302 §2 (Att. A))


Chapter 23.110 APPEAL TO HEARING EXAMINER

Sections:

23.110.010    Appeals.


23.110.010 Appeals.

(1) Any person found in violation pursuant to this title may file an appeal within 10 calendar days after receiving or otherwise being served with a written notice of a violation. When the last day of the period so computed is a Saturday, Sunday, or a federal or City holiday, the period shall run until 4:30 p.m. on the next business day. The request shall be in writing clearly explaining the basis for the appeal and shall include the applicable appeal fee as established in a fee schedule adopted by the Sammamish City council.

(2) Upon receipt of the appeal, the City shall schedule an appeal hearing before the hearing examiner. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 20.10 SMC and the rules of procedure of the hearing examiner.

(3) At the conclusion of the appeal hearing, the hearing examiner shall issue an order to the person responsible for the violation which includes the following information:

(a) The decision regarding the alleged violation including findings of fact and conclusions based thereon in support of the decision;

(b) The required corrective action;

(c) The date by which the correction must be completed;

(d) The civil penalties assessed based on the provisions of this title and the fee resolution; and

(e) The date after which the City may proceed with abatement of the unlawful condition if the required correction is not completed.

(4) Judicial Review. The decision of the hearing examiner shall be final unless appealed. To appeal the decision of the hearing examiner, a person with standing to appeal must file a land use petition, as provided in Chapter 36.70C RCW, Land Use Petition Act, within 21 calendar days of issuance of the hearing examiner’s decision. The cost for transcription of all records ordered certified by the superior court for such review shall be borne by the appellant and is nonrefundable.

(5) Effect of Decision. If judicial review is not obtained, the decision of the hearing examiner shall constitute the final decision of the City, and the failure to comply with the decision of the hearing examiner shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 or up to 90 days’ imprisonment, or both. In addition to criminal punishment pursuant to this subsection, the City may pursue collection and abatement as provided in this title. (Ord. O2011-302 §2 (Att. A))


Chapter 23.120 ABATEMENT BY THE CITY

Sections:

23.120.010    Abatement.


23.120.010 Abatement.

(1) Upon prior approval by the City manager, the City may abate a condition which was caused by or continues to be a civil violation or civil infraction when:

(a) The terms of the VCA pursuant to this title have not been met; or

(b) A notice and order or stop work order has been issued, the period for filing an appeal with the hearing examiner has expired, and the required correction has not been completed; or

(c) A notice and order or stop work order has been issued, a timely appeal was filed, the appellant failed to appear at the scheduled hearing or a hearing was held as provided in this title and the required correction has not been completed by the date specified by an order of the hearing examiner; or

(d) The condition is subject to summary abatement as provided for in this chapter or other provisions of City or state law.

(2) Summary Abatement. When a code violation causes a condition, the continued existence of which constitutes an immediate and emergent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare or to the environment, the City may summarily, and without prior notice to the person responsible, abate the condition. Notice of such abatement, including the reason for it, shall be given to the person responsible for the violation as soon as reasonably possible after the abatement.

(3) Authorized Action by the City. Using any lawful means, the City may enter upon the subject property and may remove or correct the condition which is subject to abatement. The City may seek judicial process as it deems necessary to effect the removal or correction of such condition.

(4) No Cause of Action against City. No cause of action shall lie against the City or its agents, officers, or employees for actions reasonably taken, or not taken, to prevent or cure any immediate threats.

(5) Recovery of Expenses. All expenses incurred by the City in correcting the violation shall be billed to the person responsible for the violation and shall become due and payable to the City within 10 calendar days. Such costs may include, but are not limited to, the following:

(a) “Legal expenses,” which shall include, but are not limited to:

(i) Personnel costs, both direct and indirect, including attorney’s fees and all costs incurred by the City attorney’s office or its designee;

(ii) Actual and incidental expenses and costs incurred by the City in preparing notices, contracts, court pleadings, and all other necessary documents; and

(iii) All costs associated with retention and use of expert witnesses or consultants.

(b) “Abatement expenses,” which shall include, but are not limited to:

(i) Costs incurred by the City for preparation of notices, contracts, and related documents;

(ii) All costs associated with inspection of the abated property and monitoring of said property consistent with orders of compliance issued by the City’s hearing examiner or a court of competent jurisdiction;

(iii) All costs incurred by the City for hauling, storage, disposal, or removal of vegetation, trash, debris, dangerous structures or structures unfit for occupancy, potential vermin habitat or fire hazards, junk vehicles, obstructions to public rights-of-way, and setback obstructions;

(iv) All costs incurred by law enforcement or related enforcement agencies;

(v) All costs incurred by the City during abatement of nuisance and code violations may include interest in an amount as prescribed by law; and

(vi) The City shall have a lien for any monetary penalty imposed, the cost of any abatement proceedings under this chapter, and all other related costs including attorney and expert witness fees, against the real property on which the monetary penalty was imposed or any of the work of abatement was performed. The lien shall be subordinate to all previously existing special assessment liens imposed on the same property and shall be superior to all other liens, except for state and county taxes, with which it shall be on parity. (Ord. O2011-302 §2 (Att. A))


Chapter 23.130 UNFIT DWELLINGS, BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES

Sections:

23.130.005    Intention.

23.130.010    Additional enforcement mechanism.

23.130.020    Chapter 35.80 RCW adopted.

23.130.030    Improvement officer and appeals commission designated.

23.130.040    Improvement officer authority – Issuance of complaint.

23.130.050    Service of complaint.

23.130.060    Complaint hearing.

23.130.070    Determination, findings of fact and order.

23.130.080    Appeal to appeals commission.

23.130.090    Appeal to superior court.

23.130.100    Remediation/penalties.

23.130.110    Tax lien.

23.130.120    Salvage.


23.130.005 Intention.

This chapter is intended to comply with state law requirements in order to place a lien on private property with unfit dwellings, buildings and structures. (Ord. O2011-302 §2 (Att. A))


23.130.010 Additional enforcement mechanism.

In addition to, and in combination with, the enforcement methods set forth in this title and elsewhere in the Sammamish Municipal Code, violations of the Sammamish Municipal Code may be enforced under the provisions set forth in this chapter. (Ord. O2011-302 §2 (Att. A))


23.130.020 Chapter 35.80 RCW adopted.

Chapter 35.80 RCW, Unfit Dwellings, Buildings and Structures, as it currently exists or is hereinafter amended, is hereby adopted. (Ord. O2011-302 §2 (Att. A))


23.130.030 Improvement officer and appeals commission designated.

The director is designated as the City’s “improvement officer,” and shall have the full scope of authority granted to that official under Chapter 35.80 RCW. The City of Sammamish hearing examiner is designated as the City’s “appeals commission,” and shall have the full scope of authority granted to that commission under Chapter 35.80 RCW. (Ord. O2011-302 §2 (Att. A))


23.130.040 Improvement officer authority – Issuance of complaint.

If, after a preliminary investigation of any dwelling, building, structure or premises, the improvement officer finds that it is unfit for human habitation or other use, the improvement officer may issue a complaint conforming to the provisions of RCW 35.80.030, stating in what respects such dwelling, building, structure or premises is unfit for human habitation or other use. In determining whether a dwelling, building, structure or premises should be repaired or demolished, the improvement officer shall be guided by Chapter 16.25 SMC and such other codes adopted pursuant to the Sammamish Municipal Code as the improvement officer deems applicable. (Ord. O2011-302 §2 (Att. A))


23.130.050 Service of complaint.

A complaint issued under this chapter shall be served on the parties and posted on the subject property pursuant to RCW 35.80.030, and shall also be filed with the King County auditor. All complaints or other documents posted on the subject property shall remain in place until the complaint has been resolved. For purposes of service, such complaints or other documents are deemed effective on the day of posting. (Ord. O2011-302 §2 (Att. A))


23.130.060 Complaint hearing.

Not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days after serving a complaint, the improvement officer shall hold a hearing conforming to the provisions of RCW 35.80.030, at which all parties in interest shall be given the right to appear in person, to bring witnesses, and to give testimony regarding the complaint. At any time prior to or at the time of the hearing, any party may file an answer to the complaint. The procedural rules adopted by the City’s hearing examiner, codified in Chapter 20.10 SMC, shall govern the procedure of such hearing. (Ord. O2011-302 §2 (Att. A))


23.130.070 Determination, findings of fact and order.

Within 10 days of the complaint hearing, the improvement officer shall issue a determination, findings of fact and order stating the improvement officer’s determination as to whether the subject dwelling, building, structure or premises is unfit for human habitation or other use; the findings of fact supporting the determination; and an order specifying the actions necessary to address any unfitness, and a deadline for completing the actions. The determination, findings of fact and order shall be served and posted as set forth in SMC 23.130.050, and if no appeal is filed within the deadline specified in SMC 23.130.080, a copy of the determination, findings of fact, and order shall be filed with the King County auditor. (Ord. O2011-302 §2 (Att. A))


23.130.080 Appeal to appeals commission.

Within 10 days of service of a determination, findings of fact and order, any party may file an appeal to the appeals commission. Such an appeal shall be governed by the City of Sammamish hearing examiner’s procedural rules, except that the appeals commission shall conduct a hearing on the appeal and issue a ruling within 60 days from the date the appeal is filed; and if the appeals commission issues any oral findings of fact, the ruling shall contain a transcript of such findings in addition to any findings issued at the time of the ruling. The ruling shall be served and posted as set forth in SMC 23.130.050, and if no appeal is filed within the deadline specified in SMC 23.130.090, a copy of the ruling shall be filed with the King County auditor. (Ord. O2011-302 §2 (Att. A))


23.130.090 Appeal to superior court.

Any person affected by a determination, findings of fact and order issued by the improvement officer, who has brought an appeal before the appeals commission pursuant to SMC 23.130.080 may, within 30 days after the appeals commission’s ruling has been served and posted pursuant to SMC 23.130.050, petition the King County superior court for an injunction restraining the improvement officer from carrying out the provisions of the determination, findings of fact and order. In all such proceedings, the court is authorized to affirm, reverse or modify the order, and such trial shall be heard de novo. (Ord. O2011-302 §2 (Att. A))


23.130.100 Remediation/penalties.

If a party, following exhaustion of the party’s rights to appeal, fails to comply with the determination, findings of fact and order, the improvement officer may direct or cause the subject dwelling, building, structure or premises to be repaired, altered, improved, vacated, and closed, removed, or demolished pursuant to Chapter 35.80 RCW. (Ord. O2011-302 §2 (Att. A))


23.130.110 Tax lien.

The cost of any action taken by the improvement officer under SMC 23.130.100 shall be assessed against the subject property pursuant to Chapter 35.80 RCW. Upon certification by the City of Sammamish finance director that the assessment amount is due and owing, the King County treasurer shall enter the amount of such assessment upon the tax rolls against the subject property pursuant to the provisions of RCW 35.80.030. (Ord. O2011-302 §2 (Att. A))


23.130.120 Salvage.

Materials from any dwelling, building, structure or premises removed or demolished by the improvement officer shall, if possible, be salvaged and sold as if the materials were surplus property of the City of Sammamish, and the funds received from the sale shall be credited against the cost of the removal or demolitions; and if there be any balance remaining, it shall be paid to the parties entitled thereto, as determined by the improvement officer, after deducting the costs incident thereto. (Ord. O2011-302 §2 (Att. A))


Chapter 23.140 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

23.140.010    General provisions.


23.140.010 General provisions.

(1) The director shall have the authority to administer this title and is authorized to adopt procedures, rules or guidelines for that purpose. The director may seek assistance from City departments, other public agencies or private contractors to resolve code violations.

(2) No provision or any term used in this title is intended to impose any duty upon the City, nor any of its officers, employees or agents, which would subject them to damages in a civil action.

(3) The provisions of this title detailing administration of code compliance procedures are not to be construed as creating a substantive basis for appeal or a defense of any kind to an alleged violation.

(4) The provisions of this title authorizing the enforcement of noncodified ordinances are intended to assure compliance with conditions of approval on plats, conditional use or special use permits, zone reclassifications and other similar permits or approvals which may have been granted by ordinances which have not been codified, and to enforce new regulatory ordinances which are not yet codified.

(5) The director may modify or revoke any action under this title taken by the City if the City action was incomplete or issued in error, or in response to new information or a change in circumstances.

(6) In the event of a conflict between a provision of this title and any other provision of the SMC or City ordinance, the more restrictive provision shall apply as determined by the director. (Ord. O2011-302 §2 (Att. A))


Chapter 23.150 DEFINITIONS

Sections:

23.150.010    Definitions.


23.150.010 Definitions.

Except where specifically defined in this section, all words used in this title shall carry their customary meanings. The word “shall” is always mandatory, and the word “may” denotes a use of discretion in making a decision. The following words and phrases used in this title shall have the following meanings:

“Abate” means to take whatever steps are deemed necessary in the interest of the general health, safety, and welfare of the City by the director to return a property to the condition in which it existed before a civil code violation occurred or to assure that the property complies with applicable code requirements. Abatement may include, but is not limited to, rehabilitation, demolition, removal, replacement or repair.

“Appeal hearing” means a hearing requested in response to a notice and order, stop work order, infraction or other official written notice of violation issued by the director to contest the finding that a violation occurred or to contest that the person cited for a violation is responsible for the violation.

“Civil code violation” or “code violation” means and includes one or more of the following:

(1) Any act or omission contrary to any ordinance, resolution, regulation or public rule of the City that regulates or protects public health, the environment or the use and development of land or water, whether or not the ordinance, resolution or regulation is codified; and

(2) Any act or omission contrary to the conditions of any permit, notice and order or stop work or other order issued pursuant to any such ordinance, resolution, regulation or public rule.

“Development” means the erection, alteration, enlargement, demolition, maintenance or use of any structure or the alteration or use of land above, at, or below ground or water level, and all acts authorized by a City permit or regulation.

“Director” means the director of the community development department, or his or her designee.

“Found in violation” means that:

(1) A notice and order, stop work order or infraction has been issued and not timely appealed; or

(2) The hearing examiner has determined that the violation has occurred and the hearing examiner’s determination has not been stayed or reversed on appeal.

“Hearing examiner” means the City of Sammamish hearing examiner, as provided in Chapters 20.10 and 23.110 SMC.

“Infraction” or “civil infraction” means any code violation designated as an infraction or civil infraction by the director pursuant to Chapter 7.80 RCW, incorporated herein by reference.

“Nuisance” (also referred to herein as “violation” or “nuisance violation”) means:

(1) A violation of any City of Sammamish development, land use, or public health ordinance;

(2) Doing an act, omitting to perform any act or duty, or permitting or allowing any act or omission that annoys, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, or safety of others, is unreasonably offensive to the senses, or that obstructs or interferes with the free use of property so as to interfere with or disrupt the free use of that property by any lawful owner or occupant;

(3) Potential vermin habitat or fire hazard; or

(4) Junk Vehicles. A “junk vehicle” includes apparent inoperable, immobile, disassembled, or extensively damaged vehicles. In addition, any wrecked inoperable, abandoned, or disassembled trailer, house trailer, boat, tractor, automobile, other vehicle, or any parts thereof.

“Permit” means any form of certificate, approval, registration, license or any other written permission issued by the City of Sammamish. All conditions of approval, and all easements and use limitations shown on the face of an approved final plat which are intended to serve or protect the general public are deemed conditions applicable to all subsequent plat property owners and their tenants and agents as permit requirements enforceable under this title.

“Person responsible” means the owner, occupier, tenant, manager, agent or other person who caused or is causing the civil code violation under this title or other public law.

“Public nuisance” means a nuisance that affects equally the rights of an entire community or neighborhood, although the extent of the damage may be unequal.

“Resolution” means any resolution adopted by the Sammamish City council.

“Stop work order” means a written order specifying code violations and prohibiting any work or other activity at a particular site.

“Voluntary compliance agreement” or “VCA” means a written contract between the person responsible for the violation and the City, under which such person agrees to abate the violation within a specified time and according to specified conditions. (Ord. O2011-302 §2 (Att. A))


Title 24 INTERIM COMPREHENSIVE PLAN

Chapters:

24.05    Repealed

24.10    Repealed

24.15    Repealed

24.20    Basin Plans

24.25    Repealed


Chapter 24.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS

(Repealed by Ord. O2019-483)


Chapter 24.10 DEFINITIONS

(Repealed by Ord. O2019-483)


Chapter 24.15 SAMMAMISH COMPREHENSIVE PLAN

(Repealed by Ord. O2019-483)


Chapter 24.20 BASIN PLANS*

Sections:

24.20.010    East Lake Sammamish basin plan and nonpoint action plan.

24.20.020    Issaquah Creek basin and nonpoint action plan.

*Code reviser’s note: The ordinances listed in this chapter are available at the office of the clerk of the King County council.


24.20.010 East Lake Sammamish basin plan and nonpoint action plan.

The East Lake Sammamish basin plan and nonpoint action plan consisting of Volume 1, dated May 11, 1992, and Volume 2, dated December 1992, as shown in Attachment A to King County Ordinance 11111, as amended in Attachment B to King County Ordinance 11111 and by Appendix E of King County Ordinance 13190, is adopted to implement surface water management and environmental policies of the King County comprehensive plan. The East Lake Sammamish basin plan and nonpoint action plan constitutes official City policy with regard to surface water management in the East Lake Sammamish basin and designates regionally significant resource areas and locally significant resource areas in the basin. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


24.20.020 Issaquah Creek basin and nonpoint action plan.

The watershed management committee – proposed Issaquah Creek basin and nonpoint action plan, as shown in Attachment A to King County Ordinance 11886, and amended in Appendix B to King County Ordinance 11886, and Appendix F of King County Ordinance 13190, is adopted to implement the surface water management and environmental policies of the King County comprehensive plan. The watershed management committee – proposed Issaquah Creek basin and nonpoint action plan constitutes official City policy with regard to surface water management in the Issaquah Creek basin and designates regionally significant resource areas and locally significant resource areas in the basin. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


Chapter 24.25 PROCEDURES FOR AMENDMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE PLAN OR OF DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS – PUBLIC PARTICIPATION

(Repealed by Ord. O2019-483)


Title 24A COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION AMENDMENT PROCEDURES

Chapters:

24A.05    General Provisions

24A.10    Annual Amendments

24A.15    Noticing and Public Participation


Chapter 24A.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

24A.05.010    Purpose.

24A.05.020    Periodic update.

24A.05.030    Annual review.


24A.05.010 Purpose.

(1) The purpose of this chapter is to provide procedures and criteria for amending and updating the Sammamish Comprehensive Plan and the Sammamish Municipal Code development regulations pursuant to Chapter 36.70A RCW.

(2) Comprehensive plans are living documents that require regular review and revision to ensure they respond to changing circumstances or needs of the City and respond to new federal or state laws. Development regulations may need to be modified so that the City can bring its land use and development regulations into conformity with the Comprehensive Plan or respond to changing conditions or needs of the City.

(3) Comprehensive Plan and development regulation amendments will be reviewed in accordance with this chapter, the State Growth Management Act (GMA), the King County Countywide Planning Policies (CPPs), the Sammamish Comprehensive Plan, the Office of Financial Management’s population projections, the Puget Sound Regional Council’s planning documents, King County’s Urban Growth Capacity Study, and the Washington State Department of Commerce’s Review and Evaluation Program, as applicable. (Ord. O2019-483 § 2 (Att. A))


24A.05.020 Periodic update.

(1) The periodic update is when the City reviews and, if needed, revises its Comprehensive Plan and development regulations in conformance with the procedures in RCW 36.70A.130(3)(a) and the schedule in RCW 36.70A.130(5)(a).

(2) Area-wide future land use map and/or area-wide zoning map amendments shall only be considered during the periodic update. (Ord. O2019-483 § 2 (Att. A))


24A.05.030 Annual review.

(1) The annual review is when updates, proposed amendments, or revisions of the Comprehensive Plan and development regulations are considered by the City’s planning commission and City council in conformance with RCW 36.70A.130(2)(a).

(2) The annual review follows the procedures of Chapters 24A.10 and 24A.15 SMC. The director of community development shall make available a visual overview of the procedures detailed in Chapter 24A.10 SMC to accompany annual docket forms and applications.

(3) Amendments identified in RCW 36.70A.130(2)(a)(i) through (v) are exempt from following SMC 24A.10.010 and will receive expediated review. (Ord. O2019-483 § 2 (Att. A))


Chapter 24A.10 ANNUAL AMENDMENTS

Sections:

24A.10.010    Annual docket procedures.

24A.10.020    Legislative review of annual docket.

24A.10.030    Decision criteria.

24A.10.040    Concurrent review.


24A.10.010 Annual docket procedures.

Pursuant to RCW 36.70A.130, except in certain limited situations, the GMA permits amendments to the Comprehensive Plan no more frequently than once every year. The annual docket determines the list of items that will go through review by the City council as possible amendments to the Comprehensive Plan.

(1) Docket Request Submittal Deadline and Requirements.

(a) Docket requests from any interested person, entity, or agency shall be accepted throughout the year.

(b) The deadline for submitting such an application is 5:00 p.m. on the first Monday of August each year. Any docket request received after the submittal deadline shall be considered during the following year’s annual docket.

(c) The City shall review all complete docket requests proposing amendments to the Comprehensive Plan filed by the submittal deadline and consider these requests during docket review.

(d) Docket requests to amend the Comprehensive Plan shall be submitted on the form provided by the City.

(e) To be considered complete, a form must contain all the required information, including supporting documentation, and the applicant must pay any established fees, as established by the City.

(2) Docket Request Types. During the annual review, the City shall accept two types of docket requests:

(a) Text amendments to change the text of the Sammamish Comprehensive Plan or the Sammamish Municipal Code development regulations through additions, corrections, or other modifications.

(b) Site-specific land use map amendments to change the Comprehensive Plan’s future land use map for a property, up to three contiguous properties with more than one ownership, or up to six contiguous properties under the same ownership. Site-specific land use map amendments must be initiated by an applicant as defined in SMC 21A.15.070.

(3) Docket Request Process.

(a) People interested in submitting a site-specific land use map docket request must complete a site-specific land use map amendment pre-application conference prior to submitting their application in order to learn about the application requirements as well as the Comprehensive Plan amendment process for a site-specific land use map amendment.

(b) The City shall review, assess, and prepare a recommendation regarding whether or not to add the docket request to the annual docket for each docket request that meets the requirements in subsection (1) of this section, based on alignment with work plan items, budget and staff availability to complete a full review of the proposal, and consistency with the City’s current policies and programmatic priorities.

(c) The planning commission shall hold a public hearing, consistent with the procedures listed in SMC 24A.15.030, on the docket requests deemed complete pursuant to subsection (1) of this section and shall review the docket requests based on the analysis and recommendation of the director of community development using the guidance provided in subsection (3)(b) of this section.

(d) The planning commission shall make a recommendation on which docket requests should be added to the annual docket and transmit that recommendation to the City council.

(e) The City council shall hold a public hearing, consistent with the procedures listed in SMC 24A.15.030 and decide which docket requests warrant placement on the annual docket. The City council shall take into consideration the recommendations of the planning commission, and the guidance provided in subsection (3)(b) of this section, and other legislative priorities for the City.

(f) The annual docket shall be created by City council’s approval of a resolution that lists the requests that have been placed on the docket.

(g) The City council may deny, approve, or modify the docket request at its discretion. Placement of a docket request on the annual docket does not mean the amendment request will be approved by the City council.

(h) If a site-specific land use map amendment docket request is not placed on the annual docket, the applicant, as defined in SMC 21A.15.070, must wait until the third docket cycle following the proposal’s rejection before they can resubmit a docket request for the same proposal. (Ord. O2019-483 § 2 (Att. A))


24A.10.020 Legislative review of annual docket.

(1) Amendment Proposal Submittal Requirements.

(a) Once placed on the annual docket, docket requests shall be referred to as amendment proposals and shall undergo legislative review.

(b) Proposals to amend the Comprehensive Plan or the Sammamish Municipal Code development regulations shall be submitted on the application form provided by the City.

(c) To be considered complete, an application must contain all the required information in the City’s application form, including supporting documentation, and the applicant must pay any established fees, as established by the City.

(2) Text Amendment Proposal Process.

(a) Applicants shall submit a text amendment proposal application within 30 days of City council’s approval of the annual docket.

(b) The City shall analyze and consider each text amendment proposal for conformance with the decision criteria detailed in SMC 24A.10.030.

(c) The planning commission shall hold a public hearing, consistent with the procedures listed in SMC 24A.15.030, on the amendment proposals deemed complete pursuant to subsection (1) of this section. The director of community development may combine amendment proposals into one or more public hearings. The planning commission shall review text amendment proposals based on the criteria in SMC 24A.10.030 and the analysis and recommendation of the director of community development. Following the public hearing(s), the planning commission shall make a recommendation on which amendment proposals should be approved and transmit that recommendation to the City council.

(d) The City council shall hold a public hearing, consistent with the procedures listed in SMC 24A.15.030, on the amendment proposals deemed complete pursuant to subsection (1) of this section. The director of community development may combine amendment proposals into one or more public hearings. The City council shall review text amendment proposals based on the criteria in SMC 24A.10.030 and the recommendations of the planning commission before voting on which amendment proposals should be denied, approved, or modified.

(e) City council shall adopt an ordinance amending the Comprehensive Plan and development regulations that includes all changes previously approved by the City council.

(f) City council shall adopt an ordinance amending the Sammamish Municipal Code development regulations as changes are approved by the City council.

(3) Site-Specific Land Use Map Amendment Proposal Process.

(a) Applicants shall submit a site-specific land use map amendment proposal application within 30 days of City council’s approval of the docket.

(b) The City shall analyze and consider each site-specific land use map amendment proposal for conformance with the decision criteria detailed in section SMC 24A.10.030.

(c) The planning commission shall hold a public hearing, consistent with the procedures listed in SMC 24A.15.030, on each amendment proposal deemed complete pursuant to SMC subsection (1) of this section and shall review each site-specific land use map amendment proposal based on the criteria in SMC 24A.10.030 and the analysis and recommendation of the director of community development. The planning commission shall make a recommendation on which amendment proposals should be approved and transmit that recommendation to the City council.

(d) The City council shall hold a public hearing, consistent with the procedures listed in SMC 24A.15.030, on each amendment proposal deemed complete pursuant to subsection (1) of this section. The City council shall review each site-specific land use map amendment proposal based on the criteria in SMC 24A.10.030 and the recommendation of the planning commission before voting on which amendment proposals should be denied, approved, or modified.

(e) City council shall adopt an ordinance amending the Comprehensive Plan that includes all changes previously approved by the City council.

(f) In the case that the City council’s approval of a site-specific land use map amendment creates inconsistency with the current zoning map, the approval of the proposed site-specific land use map amendment will be contingent on the subsequent approval of a zone reclassification.

(g) Contingent approval of a site-specific land use map amendment proposal is required before an associated zone reclassification will be considered.

(h) Applicants shall submit a zone reclassification application within 90 days of City council contingent approval of the site-specific land use map amendment application. The zone reclassification is a Type 3 land use decision and follows the process detailed in Chapter 20.05 SMC.

(i) A City council contingent approval shall be null and void if the zone reclassification application:

(i) Is not received within 90 days of the contingent approval; and

(ii) Is not consistent with the contingent approval. (Ord. O2019-483 § 2 (Att. A))


24A.10.030 Decision criteria.

The planning commission may recommend, and the City council may approve, or approve with modifications, an amendment to the Comprehensive Plan or the Sammamish Municipal Code development regulations if:

(1) The amendment is consistent with the GMA, the King County CPPs, the Sammamish Comprehensive Plan, the office of financial management’s population projections, the Puget Sound Regional Council’s planning documents, King County’s Urban Growth Capacity Study, and the Washington State Department of Commerce’s Review and Evaluation Program, as applicable; and

(2) The amendment addresses changing circumstances, changing community values, or corrects information; and

(3) The amendment is in the greater public interest and represents an action that best serves the entire community, taking into account the fiscal impact. (Ord. O2019-483 § 2 (Att. A))


24A.10.040 Concurrent review.

(1) Proposed amendments may be considered at separate meetings or hearings; however, the final action taken shall consider the cumulative effect of all proposed amendments to the Comprehensive Plan.

(2) The City shall complete an environmental review of the combined impacts of all docketed requests consistent with WAC 365-196-620. (Ord. O2019-483 § 2 (Att. A))


Chapter 24A.15 NOTICING AND PUBLIC PARTICIPATION

Sections:

24A.15.010    Periodic updates.

24A.15.020    Annual amendments.

24A.15.030    Notice for public hearings.


24A.15.010 Periodic updates.

(1) To provide for the opportunity of citizens, interested parties and reviewing agencies to suggest and make comments on proposed Comprehensive Plan and development regulation amendments, the director of community development shall ensure the broad dissemination of information regarding the periodic update using the City website, newspaper of record, and at least one of the following methods:

(a) A general mailing to interested parties;

(b) Posting of signs or flyers;

(c) Posting of notice boards;

(d) Press releases to the local media;

(e) Notifying public or private groups with known interest in a certain proposal or in the type of proposal being considered;

(f) Placing notices in appropriate regional, neighborhood, ethnic, or trade journals;

(g) Publishing notice in agency newsletters or sending notice to agency mailing lists, including general lists or lists for specific proposals or subject areas;

(h) Posting on social media; and

(i) City email notifications. (Ord. O2019-483 § 2 (Att. A))


24A.15.020 Annual amendments.

(1) Summaries of the proposed annual amendments will be posted on the City’s website with instructions on how to submit comments.

(2) The opportunity for the public to provide comment on the proposed amendments will be shared by the City on social media.

(3) The director of community development shall outline the noticing procedures for site-specific land use map amendments on the site-specific land use map amendment proposal application form, which shall include one or more of the methods listed in SMC 24A.15.010(1).

(4) The City will provide the Washington Department of Commerce with a notice of the intent to adopt and will transmit a complete and accurate copy of the adopted amendments in accordance with RCW 36.70A.106 and WAC 197-11-230. (Ord. O2019-483 § 2 (Att. A))


24A.15.030 Notice for public hearings.

(1) Public hearings held by the planning commission and the City council under this title shall be noticed as follows:

(a) Notice of the time, place and purpose of a public hearing shall be posted on the City’s website and in the newspaper of record and shared via City email notifications and social media at least 14 days before the hearing.

(b) Comments received prior to the public hearings will be distributed to planning commission and City council prior to their meetings. (Ord. O2019-483 § 2 (Att. A))


Title 25 SHORELINE MANAGEMENT1

Chapters:

25.01    Introduction

25.02    Definitions

25.03    Master Program Element Goals

25.04    Shoreline Management Policies

25.05    Jurisdiction and Environmental Designations

25.06    General Shoreline Regulations

25.07    Use/Development Regulations

25.08    Permit Criteria and Administrative Standards

Appendix A        Shoreline Inventory and Characterization Report and Map Folio2

Appendix B        Final Restoration Plan

Appendix C        Cumulative Impact Analysis1

The 2009 Sammamish Shoreline Master Program was adopted by Ord. O2009-265 and amended by Ord. O2011-308 after input from the Department of Ecology. 2

The appendices to this title can be found on the City’s website at http://www.ci.sammamish.wa.us/departments/communitydevelopment/smp/Default.aspx. 


Chapter 25.01 INTRODUCTION

Sections:

25.01.005    Introduction.

25.01.010    Purpose and intent.

25.01.020    Title.

25.01.030    Applicability.

25.01.040    Authority.

25.01.050    Governing principles.

25.01.060    Relationship to plans, policies and regulations.

25.01.070    Critical areas regulations incorporated by reference.

25.01.080    Effective date.

25.01.090    Liberal construction.

25.01.100    Severability.


25.01.005 Introduction.

The Sammamish shoreline master program (SMP) update fulfills the requirements of the Washington State Shoreline Management Act (SMA) and associated guidelines “to prevent the inherent harm in an uncoordinated and piecemeal development of the state’s shorelines.” The SMP balances local needs, interests and character with the general public’s interests in protecting key shoreline environments and important resources. The overarching goal is meant to strike a balance among private ownership, public access, and public protection of the state’s shorelines. 

The SMA establishes a broad policy preference for shoreline uses that protect water quality and the natural environment, that depend on proximity to the shoreline, and preserve and enhance public access and public recreational opportunities. New uses and developments will follow regulations established by a set of goals and policies designed to avoid and/or mitigate for impacts to the environment while protecting property rights. Existing legally established uses and developments are allowed to continue as “grandfathered.” (SMC 25.08.100)

The SMA guidelines require that an SMP result in “no net loss” of shoreline ecological functions. This SMP accomplishes that requirement through its goals, policies, and regulations noted above providing restoration program and enhancement incentives to offset the cumulative impacts of new shoreline uses and developments over time. The SMP is an amendment to the Sammamish comprehensive plan and to associated development regulations in the Sammamish Municipal Code. (Ord. O2019-493 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O2011-308 § 1 (Att. A))


25.01.010 Purpose and intent.

The purposes of this shoreline master program are:

(1) To promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the community by providing long range, comprehensive policies and effective, reasonable regulations for development, use, and restoration of Sammamish’s shorelines; and

(2) To manage shorelines in a positive, effective, balanced and equitable manner consistent with requirements established by the Shoreline Management Act (the Act) contained in Chapter 90.58 RCW, and the State Shoreline Guidelines in Chapter 173-26 WAC; and

(3) To maintain the ecological functions of Sammamish’s shorelines. (Ord. O2019-493 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O2011-308 § 1 (Att. A))


25.01.020 Title.

This document shall be known and cited as “the Sammamish shoreline master program,” referred to herein as the “SMP” or the “program.” (Ord. O2019-493 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O2011-308 § 1 (Att. A))


25.01.030 Applicability.

(1) All proposed uses and development, as defined in Chapter 25.02 SMC (Definitions) occurring within the shoreline jurisdiction (see Chapter 25.05 SMC for a description of the jurisdiction) shall comply with this program, Chapters 173-26 and 173-27 WAC and Chapter 90.58 RCW. This program regulates all uses and developments within the shoreline jurisdiction whether or not a shoreline permit is required. This program will regulate all development proposed after the effective date of the program. 

(2) For purposes of this SMP, shoreline uses and developments shall be classified as follows: 

(a) Permitted Uses and Developments. These are allowed uses and development that are consistent with this program and RCW 90.58.030. Such uses/development shall require a shoreline substantial development permit, a shoreline conditional use permit, a statement that the use/development is exempt from a shoreline substantial development permit, or a determination that an exempt use/development is consistent with this program during land use/building permit review (see Chapter 25.07 SMC for a list and description of exempt uses/developments and exemption criteria). Development within the shoreline jurisdiction that does not meet the standards of this program shall require a shoreline variance.

(b) Prohibited Uses and Developments. Uses and developments that are inconsistent with this program and/or Chapter 90.58 RCW and which cannot be allowed through any shoreline permit or variance. 

(3) This program shall apply to: 

(a) All of the lands and waters of Sammamish that meet the definition of “shorelines of the state” in Chapter 25.02 SMC and RCW 90.58.030. This includes all areas waterward of the OHWM extending to the City’s legal in-water jurisdictional boundary and any areas landward of the OHWM that meet the definition of “shorelands” in Chapter 25.02 SMC; and 

(b) Every person, individual, firm, partnership, association, organization, local or state governmental agency, public or municipal corporation, or other entity proposing or undertaking any new use and/or development in the Sammamish shoreline jurisdiction. 

(4) Existing lawfully established uses and developments are not subject to regulations of this program until or unless there is a change in use or development. Shoreline property owners are encouraged to consult the City community development department to determine if a proposed use or development activity requires review under this program. 

(5) The provisions of this program shall not apply to lands held in trust by the United States for Indian nations, tribes or individuals. (Ord. O2019-493 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O2011-308 § 1 (Att. A))


25.01.040 Authority.

This shoreline master program is adopted under the authority granted by Chapter 90.58 RCW and Chapter 173-26 WAC. (Ord. O2019-493 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O2011-308 § 1 (Att. A))


25.01.050 Governing principles.

(1) The goals, policies and regulations of this program are informed by the governing principles in Chapters 173-26 and 173-27 WAC, and the policy statements of Chapter 90.58 RCW. 

(2) Any inconsistencies between this program and the Act must be resolved in accordance with the Act. 

(3) Regulatory or administrative requirements of this program must not unconstitutionally infringe upon private property rights or result in an unconstitutional taking of private property. 

(4) The territorial jurisdictions of the SMP planning function and regulatory function are legally distinct. The planning function may, and in some circumstances must, look beyond the territorial limits of the shoreline jurisdiction.

(5) The policies and regulations established by the program must be integrated and coordinated with the Sammamish Comprehensive Plan and the development regulations in the Sammamish Municipal Code (SMC).

(6) Protecting the shoreline environment is an essential statewide policy goal, consistent with other statewide policy goals in Chapter 173-26 WAC. This program protects shoreline ecology from impairments in the following ways:

(a) By including regulations and regulatory incentives designed to protect shoreline ecological functions, and restore impaired ecological functions where such functions have been identified; and 

(b) By including policies and regulations that require mitigation sequencing to avoid, then minimize, and then apply mitigation of adverse impacts not otherwise avoided or mitigated by compliance with this program and other applicable regulations in a manner that ensures no net loss of shoreline ecological functions consistent with Chapter 90.58 RCW and WAC 173-26-201(2)(e)(i). 

(c) By including policies and regulations that require consideration of cumulative impacts of anticipated and reasonable future development in a manner that ensures no net loss of shoreline ecological functions. (Ord. O2019-493 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O2011-308 § 1 (Att. A))


25.01.060 Relationship to plans, policies and regulations.

(1) Uses, alterations and developments regulated by this program are subject to applicable provisions of the Sammamish Municipal Code (SMC), the Sammamish Comprehensive Plan, the Shoreline Management Act (Chapter 90.58 RCW), the Growth Management Act (Chapter 36.70A RCW), State Environmental Policy Act (Chapter 43.21C RCW and Chapter 197-11 WAC), and other local, state and federal laws.

(2) This program shall be implemented according to the definitions contained in Chapter 25.02 SMC. Where definitions contained in this program conflict or differ from definitions contained in other sections of the SMC, these definitions shall prevail. 

(3) Unless otherwise stated, where this program makes reference to any RCW, WAC, or other federal, state or local law or regulation, the most recent amendment or current edition shall apply.

(4) In the event the regulations of this program differ from other applicable City policies or regulations, the more restrictive provisions shall apply.

(5) The following provisions of the Sammamish Municipal Code are adopted as part of this SMP, and attached herein: SMC Title 13 (Surface Water Management, adopted by Ord. 2011-304 on May 16, 2011), SMC 21.10.120 (Historic resources – Review process, adopted by Ord. 2008-240 on Dec. 16, 2008) and sections of the City’s critical areas ordinance as described within SMC 25.01.070 (adopted by Ord. 2005-193 on December 20, 2005, and revised by Ord. 2009-264 on October 6, 2009, Ord. 2009-274 on December 1, 2009, and Ord. O2013-350 on July 9, 2013). (Ord. O2019-493 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2011-308 § 1 (Att. A))


25.01.070 Critical areas regulations incorporated by reference.

Provisions of the Sammamish critical areas ordinance codified in Chapter 21A.50 SMC, exclusive of SMC 21A.50.050 (Complete exemptions), 21A.50.070 (Exceptions), 21A.50.320(1) (isolated wetlands) and 21A.50.320(3) (isolated wetlands – pilot program), are considered part of this SMP. (Ord. O2019-493 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O2017-431 § 3 (Att. C); Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2011-308 § 1 (Att. A))


25.01.080 Effective date.

This program and all amendments thereto shall become effective 14 days from the date of the Department of Ecology’s written notice of final approval. (Ord. O2019-493 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2011-308 § 1 (Att. A))


25.01.090 Liberal construction.

In accordance with RCW 90.58.090, this program is exempt from the rule of strict construction; therefore, this program shall be liberally construed to give full effect to its goals, policies and regulations. (Ord. O2019-493 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O2011-308 § 1 (Att. A))


25.01.100 Severability.

If any section or provision of this program is declared invalid such declaration shall not affect the validity of this program as a whole. (Ord. O2019-493 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O2011-308 § 1 (Att. A))


Chapter 25.02 DEFINITIONS

Sections:

25.02.010    Definitions.


25.02.010 Definitions.

(1) Accessory Dwelling Unit. “Accessory dwelling units” are separate living quarters contained within, or detached from, a single-family dwelling on a single lot. 

(2) Accessory Use. An “accessory use” is a use associated with the principal use on a shoreline property that is subordinate to the principal use and minor in nature. In order to be classified as an accessory use, a use must commonly occur in the immediate vicinity and in the same shoreline environment. “Accessory use” includes normal appurtenances. 

(3) Amendment. “Amendment” means a revision, update, addition, deletion, and/or re-enactment of the Sammamish SMP (WAC 173-26-020).

(4) Archaeological Resource/Site. “Archaeological resource/site” means a site or feature that meets the criteria of a historic resource pursuant to SMC 21.10.020 (Historic Preservation Ordinance).

(5) Average Grade Level. “Average grade level” means the average of the natural or existing topography of the portion of the lot, parcel, or tract of real property which will be directly under the proposed building or structure; in the case of structures to be built over water, average grade level shall be the elevation of the ordinary high water mark. Calculation of the average grade level shall be made by averaging the ground elevations at the midpoint of all exterior walls of the proposed building or structure (WAC 173-27-030).

(6) Backfill. “Backfill” means the placement of earth material behind a retaining wall or structure.

(7) Bank. “Bank” means a rise or slope at the edge of a body of water or watercourse.

(8) Repealed by Ord. O2019-493.

(9) Benthic. “Benthic” refers to the sediment surface and subsurface layers providing habitat for the micro-organisms of a stream or lake bottom.

(10) Berm. “Berm” means a constructed area of compacted earth that has been artificially mounded or placed against a wall or structure.

(11) Bioengineering or Biostabilization. “Bioengineering” or “biostabilization” means the practice of using natural materials to stabilize shorelines and prevent erosion as an alternative to bulkheads. This may include use of rocks, bundles of stems, root systems, or other living plant material, fabric, or other soil stabilization techniques. Bioengineering projects often include fisheries habitat enhancement measures in project design (e.g., anchored logs, root wads, etc.). Such techniques may be applied to creeks, rivers, lakes, and reservoirs. Bioengineering may also be applied in upland areas away from the immediate shoreline. See “bulkhead alternative” definition.

(12) Boathouse. “Boathouse” means a structure designed for the storage of vessels and not used as a residence or dwelling unit. Boathouses are to be distinguished from houseboats. 

(13) Boating Facilities. “Boating facilities” means docks, floats, buoys and accessory structures which are associated with a private noncommercial recreational beach jointly owned by upland property owners serving five or more residences. “Boating facilities” excludes facilities serving four or fewer single-family residences. 

(14) Boat Launch or Boat Ramp. “Boat launch” or “boat ramp” means a slab, pad, rail, or graded slope specifically constructed and used for launching boats or other vessels.

(15) Boat Lift. “Boat lift” is an in-water structure used for the dry berthing of vessels above the water level and lowering of vessels into the water periodically. A boat lift is used to berth and launch a single vessel suspended over the water’s surface. A boat lift is generally a manufactured unit and may be placed in the water adjacent to a dock or stand-alone structure.

(16) Breakwater. “Breakwater” means an off-shore structure, either floating or not, that may or may not be connected to the shore, such structure being designed to absorb and/or reflect back into the water body the energy of the waves.

(17) Buffer. “Buffer” means a critical area buffer as designated by regulations in Chapter 21A.50 SMC.

(18) Building Setback. “Building setback” means the minimum required distance between a structure and a lot line, easement, or shoreline setback, into which space a structure or the foundation of a building shall not extend. 

(19) Bulkhead. “Bulkhead” means a vertical or nearly vertical structure placed parallel to the shoreline at or near the OHWM for purposes of armoring the shoreline and protecting structures from effects of erosion caused by wind or waves. Bulkheads generally consist of concrete, timber, steel, rock, or other material resistant to erosion.

(20) Bulkhead Alternative. “Bulkhead alternative” means a measure to achieve shoreline stabilization other than a wall or solid structure, erected at or above OHWM. Bulkhead alternatives provide for beach restoration and protection of property during storms, and may consist of large rocks or revetments integrated with vegetation and other materials (see also “bioengineering”/“biostabilization”).

(21) Buoy, Mooring. “Mooring buoy” means a floating object anchored to the bottom of a water body that provides tie-up capabilities for vessels.

(22) Clearing. “Clearing” means removal of vegetation or other organic plant matter by physical, mechanical, chemical, or any other means.

(23) Compatible. “Compatible” means uses or activities capable of existing together or in the vicinity of one another without disharmony or without generating effects or impacts that are disruptive to the normal use and enjoyment of surrounding property.

(24) Conservation. “Conservation” means the careful, prudent, and planned management of a natural resource to preserve ecological and shoreline functions and to prevent exploitation, destruction, or neglect.

(25) Covered Moorage/Canopy. “Covered moorage” means boat or other vessel moorage, without walls, that has a roof or canopy to protect the vessel(s).

(26) Critical Habitat. “Critical habitat” means those areas in the City that are wetlands, streams, and fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas.

(27) Development. “Development” means the construction or exterior alteration of structures; dredging; drilling; dumping; filling; removal of any sand, gravel, or minerals; bulkheading; driving of piling; placing of obstructions; or any project of a permanent or temporary nature that interferes with the normal public use of the surface of the waters overlying lands subject to the SMA (Chapter 90.58 RCW) at any stage of water level (WAC 173-27-030). “Development” does not include dismantling or removing structures if there is no other associated development or redevelopment. 

(28) Director. “Director” means, unless otherwise specified, the director of the City of Sammamish department of community development or the director’s designee.

(29) Dock. “Dock” means a fixed or floating platform structure anchored in and/or floating upon a water body and connected to land to provide moorage or landing for waterborne vessels and/or water-dependent recreation uses. 

(30) Dredging. “Dredging” means the removal, displacement, and/or disposal of unconsolidated material such as sand, silt, gravel or other submerged materials, for purposes of modifying the bottom elevation of a water body, ditch, or wetland.

(31) Ecological Functions or Shoreline Functions. “Ecological functions” or “shoreline functions” means the work performed or role played by the physical, chemical, and biological processes that contribute to the maintenance of the aquatic and terrestrial environments that constitute the shoreline’s natural ecosystem. See WAC 173-26-201(2)(c) (WAC 173-26-020).

(32) Ecosystem-Wide Processes. “Ecosystem-wide processes” means the suite of naturally occurring physical and geologic processes of erosion, transport, and deposition; and specific chemical processes that shape landforms within a specific shoreline ecosystem and determine both the types of habitat and the associated ecological functions (WAC 173-26-020).

(33) Excavation. “Excavation” means the removal of earth material from other than within a water body.

(34) Exempt Development. “Exempt developments” are those set forth in WAC 173-27-040 and RCW 90.58.030(3)(e), 90.58.140(9), 90.58.147, 90.58.355, and 90.58.515 which are not required to obtain a substantial development permit but which must otherwise comply with applicable provisions of the act and the local master program (WAC 173-27-030). Conditional use, variance, or other permits may also still be required even though the activity does not require a shoreline substantial development permit.

(35) Fair Market Value. “Fair market value” (synonymous with “replacement cost”) of a development is the open market bid price for conducting the work, using the equipment and facilities, and purchase of the goods, services and materials necessary to accomplish the development. This would normally equate to the cost of hiring a contractor to undertake the development from start to finish, including the cost of labor, materials, equipment and facility usage, transportation and contractor overhead and profit. The fair market value of the development shall include the fair market value of any donated, contributed or found labor, equipment or materials (WAC 173-27-030).

(36) Feasible. “Feasible” means that an action, such as a development project, mitigation, or preservation requirement, meets all of the following conditions:

(a) The action can be accomplished with technologies and methods that have been used in the past in similar circumstances, or studies or tests have demonstrated in similar circumstances that such approaches are currently available and likely to achieve the intended results;

(b) The action provides a reasonable likelihood of achieving its intended purpose; and

(c) The action does not physically preclude achieving the project’s primary intended legal use. In cases where these guidelines require certain actions unless they are infeasible, the burden of proving infeasibility is on the applicant. In determining an action’s infeasibility, the reviewing agency may weigh the action’s relative public costs and public benefits, considered in the short- and long-term time frames (WAC 173-26-030). 

(37) Fill. “Fill” means the addition of soil, sand, rock, gravel, sediment, earth retaining structure, or other material to an area waterward of the OHWM, in wetlands, or on shorelands in a manner that raises the elevation or creates dry land (WAC 173-26-020). 

(38) Float. “Float” means a structure that is moored, anchored, or otherwise secured in a water body and which is not connected to the shoreline.

(39) Floodplain. “Floodplain” is synonymous with “100-year floodplain” and means that land area susceptible to inundation with a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The limit of this area is based upon flood ordinance regulation maps or a reasonable method that meets the objectives of the Act (WAC 173-26-020).

(40) Flood Hazard Reduction. “Flood hazard reduction” refers to actions taken to reduce risk of flood damage or hazards. Flood hazard reduction measures may consist of nonstructural or indirect measures, including but not limited to setbacks, land use controls, wetland restoration, dike removal, use relocation, bioengineering measures, and stormwater management programs; and of structural measures intended to contain flow within the channel, channel realignment, and elevation of structures consistent with the National Flood Insurance Program.

(41) Footprint. “Footprint” means a two-dimensional outline of a structure or building where it intersects or covers the ground surface, including upper story eaves and cantilevers where they cover or overhang the ground surface.

(42) Grading. “Grading” means the movement or redistribution of the soil, sand, rock, gravel, sediment, or other material on a site in a manner that alters the natural contour of the land (WAC 173-26-020).

(43) Geotechnical Report or Geotechnical Analysis. “Geotechnical report” or “geotechnical analysis” means a scientific study or evaluation conducted by a qualified expert that includes a description of the ground and surface hydrology and geology, the affected land form and its susceptibility to mass wasting, erosion, and other geologic hazards or processes, conclusions and recommendations regarding the effect of the proposed development on geologic conditions, the adequacy of the site to be developed, the impacts of the proposed development, alternative approaches to the proposed development, and measures to mitigate potential site-specific and cumulative geological and hydrological impacts of the proposed development, including the potential adverse impacts to adjacent and down-current properties. Geotechnical reports shall conform to accepted technical standards and must be prepared by qualified professional engineers or geologists who have professional expertise about the regional and local shoreline geology and processes.

(44) Hard Structural Shoreline Stabilization. “Hard structural shoreline stabilization,” also referred to as “shoreline armoring” or “bulkhead,” refers to the use of a solid, essentially vertical wall constructed of concrete, wood, or other material for the purpose of resisting shoreline erosion caused by wind or waves.

(45) Hearings Board. “Hearings Board” means the Shoreline Hearings Board established by the SMA.

(46) Height. “Height” is measured from average grade level to the highest point of a structure; provided, that television antennas, chimneys, and similar appurtenances shall not be used in calculating height, except where such appurtenances obstruct the view of the shoreline of a substantial number of residences on areas adjoining such shorelines, or the applicable master program specifically requires that such appurtenances be included; provided further, that temporary construction equipment is excluded in this calculation (WAC 173-27-030).

(47) Houseboat. “Houseboat” means a vessel that is designed or used as a place of residence without a means of self-propulsion and steering equipment or capability.

(48) Landward. “Landward” means to or toward the land in a direction away from the water body.

(49) Maintenance. “Maintenance” means those usual acts to prevent a decline, lapse or cessation from a lawfully established condition or use.

(50) Marina. “Marina” means a facility offering dockage and other service for small water craft but excluding boating facilities as defined in this program, facilities serving four or fewer single-family residences, and accessory uses to public lands.

(51) Moorage Structure. “Moorage structure” means any structure or device, including but not limited to docks, moorage piles and buoys placed at or below the OHWM and designed to provide for the moorage of boats or other watercraft or vessels.

(52) Multifamily Residential Development. “Multifamily residential development” means a dwelling, apartment (SMC 21A.15.355), townhouse (SMC 21A.15.370) and similar structures containing two or more attached residential units. “Multifamily” shall not include cottage housing or accessory dwelling units.

(53) Native Shoreline Vegetation. “Native shoreline vegetation” means vegetation comprised of plant species, other than noxious weeds, that are indigenous to the Pacific Northwest and that reasonably could have been expected to naturally occur on the site.

(54) Natural or Existing Topography. “Natural or existing topography” means the topography of the lot, parcel, or tract of real property immediately prior to any site preparation or grading, including excavation or filling (WAC 173-27-030).

(55) Nonconforming Development. “Nonconforming development” or “nonconforming structure” means an existing structure that was lawfully constructed at the time it was built but is no longer fully consistent with present regulations such as setbacks, buffers or yards; area; bulk; height or density standards due to subsequent changes to the master program, except for such existing development that is defined as conforming development consistent with SMC 25.08.100.

(56) Nonconforming Lot. “Nonconforming lot” means a lot that was legally established at the time it was recorded with King County, but now contains less than the required width, depth or area due to currently effective development code (SMC Title 21A) requirements and/or requirements of this program.

(57) Nonconforming Use. “Nonconforming use” means an existing shoreline use that was lawfully established prior to the effective date of this program, but which does not conform to the range of uses permitted in the site’s current zone and/or shoreline environment designation due to subsequent changes to this program.

(58) Non-Water-Oriented Uses. “Non-water-oriented uses” means those uses that are not water-dependent uses, water-related uses or water-enjoyment uses (WAC 173-26-020). Examples of non-water-oriented uses include professional offices, automobile sales or repair shops, mini-storage facilities, department stores, gas stations, and athletic fields.

(59) Normal Appurtenance. “Normal appurtenance” means a structure, site improvement, or use that is necessarily connected to the use and enjoyment of a principal use and is located landward of the OHWM. Normal appurtenances include a garage, deck, driveway, utilities, fences, septic tanks and drainfield, and grading which does not exceed 250 cubic yards and which does not involve placement of fill in any wetland or waterward of the ordinary high water mark. As authorized in WAC 173-27-040(2)(g), an accessory dwelling unit is considered a normal appurtenance.

(60)  No Net Loss. The concept of “no net loss,” as used herein, recognizes that any development has potential or actual, short-term or long-term impacts and that through application of appropriate development standards and employment of mitigation measures in accordance with the mitigation sequence, those impacts will be addressed in a manner necessary to assure that the end result will not diminish the shoreline resources and values as they currently exist. Where uses or development that impact ecological functions are necessary to achieve other objectives of RCW 90.58.020, master program provisions shall, to the greatest extent feasible, protect existing ecological functions and avoid new impacts to habitat and ecological functions before implementing other measures designed to achieve no net loss of ecological functions. 

(61) Ordinary High Water Mark (OHWM). “Ordinary high water mark (OHWM)” means the mark on all lakes and streams that will be found by examining the beds and banks and ascertaining where the presence and action of waters are so common and usual and so long continued in all ordinary years as to mark upon the soil a character distinct from that of the abutting upland, in respect to vegetation, as that condition existed on June 1, 1971, as it may naturally change thereafter, or as it may change thereafter in accordance with permits issued by a local government or the Department of Ecology; provided, that in any area where the ordinary high water mark cannot be found, the ordinary high water mark adjoining fresh water shall be the line of mean high water (RCW 90.58.030(2)(b)).

(62) Owner. “Owner” means individuals holding legal title to real property; members in a limited liability company, shareholders or members in a corporation, or partners in a partnership that holds legal title to real property; or a public agency or public or private utility that owns right-of-way or other easement rights in real property.

(63) Personal Watercraft. “Personal watercraft” means a vessel of less than 16 feet in length that uses a water jet pump as its primary source of motor power and that is designed to be operated by a person sitting, standing, or kneeling on the vessel, rather than in the conventional manner of sitting or standing inside the vessel. 

(64) Personal Watercraft Lift. “Personal watercraft lift” means a structure used for the dry berthing of personal watercraft above the water level and lowering of the personal watercraft into the water periodically. A personal watercraft lift is generally a manufactured unit without a canopy cover and may be attached to a dock, placed in the water adjacent to a dock, or erected as a stand-alone structure. 

(65) Preferred Shoreline Use. “Preferred shoreline use” is identified in the Act as a use that is unique to or dependent upon a shoreline location. Water-dependent, water-related, and water-enjoyment and single-family residential developments are preferred shoreline uses according to the Act. (RCW 90.58.020)

(66) Primary Structure. “Primary structure” means the structure associated with the principal use of the property. If more than one structure is associated with the principal use of the property, the one with the highest assessed value shall be considered the primary structure.

(67) Priority Species. “Priority species” means any species designated by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife (WDFW) as requiring protective measures for their survival due to population status, sensitivity to habitat alteration, and/or recreational, commercial, or tribal importance, often but not exclusively referring to salmonid species. Priority species include state endangered, threatened, sensitive, and candidate species; animal aggregations (e.g., heron colonies, bat colonies) considered vulnerable; and species of recreational, commercial, or tribal importance that are vulnerable. See WAC 173-26-020. 

(68) Private Beach Park Use. “Private beach park use” means privately owned shoreline properties used by an owner (or an ownership or membership group) for water-oriented recreational activities that are not associated with or subordinate to residential use, with associated facilities necessary for access, active use of shorelands and allowances for private docks, floats, and mooring buoys.

(69) Protective Bulkhead Common to Single-Family Residences. “Normal protective bulkhead common to single-family residences” means a bulkhead constructed on a lot zoned to permit one single-family residence and containing one single-family residence.

(70) Provisions. “Provisions” means policies, regulations, standards, guidelines, criteria, or environment designations (WAC 173-26-020).

(71) Public Access. “Public access” means the public’s ability to get to and use the state’s public waters, the water/land interface and associated public shoreline area. It includes physical access that is either lateral (areas paralleling the shore) or perpendicular (an easement or public corridor to the shore), and/or visual access facilitated by scenic roads and overlooks, viewing towers and other public sites or facilities.

(72) Public Interest. “Public interest” means the interest shared by the citizens of the state or community at large in the affairs of government, or some interest by which their rights or liabilities are affected including, but not limited to, an effect on public property or on health, safety, or general welfare resulting from a use or development (WAC 173-27-030).

(73) Public utility. “Public utility” means the facilities of a private business organization such as a public service corporation, or a governmental agency performing some public service and subject to special governmental regulations, the services that are paid for directly by the recipients thereof. Such services shall include but are not limited to: water supply, electric power, telephone, cablevision, natural gas and transportation for persons and freight. The term also includes broadcast towers, antennas and related facilities operated on a commercial basis.

(74) Repair. “Repair” means to restore to a state comparable to the original condition after deterioration or partial destruction.

(75) Replacement. “Replacement” means to rebuild using new materials.

(76) Restoration, or Ecological Restoration. “Restoration” or “ecological restoration” means the reestablishment or upgrading of impaired ecological shoreline processes or functions. This may be accomplished through measures including, but not limited to, revegetation, removal of intrusive shoreline structures and removal or treatment of toxic materials. “Restoration” does not imply a requirement for returning the shoreline area to aboriginal or pre-European settlement conditions (WAC 173-26-020).

(77) Revetment. “Revetment” means a sloped wall constructed of riprap or other suitable material placed on stream banks or other shorelines to retard bank erosion and minimize lateral stream movement. A revetment typically slopes away from the water and has a rough or jagged face. These features differentiate it from a bulkhead, which is a vertical structure.

(78) Riprap. “Riprap” means a layer, facing or protective mound of angular stones randomly placed to prevent erosion, scour or sloughing of a structure or embankment; also, the stone so used.

(79) Sediment. “Sediment” is material settled from suspension in a liquid medium.

(80) Setback. “Setback” means the minimum required distance between a structure and a specified line such as a lot, easement or buffer line that is required to remain free of structures (SMC 21A.15.1070).

(81) Shorelands. “Shorelands,” also referred to as “shoreland areas,” means those lands extending landward for 200 feet in all directions as measured on a horizontal plane from the OHWM; floodways and contiguous floodplain areas landward 200 feet from such floodways; and all wetlands and river deltas associated with the streams, lakes, and tidal waters that are subject to the provisions of this program; the same to be designated as to location by the Department of Ecology (RCW 90.58.030).

(82) Shoreline Conditional Use. “Shoreline conditional use” means a use specifically designated as a shoreline conditional use in the SMP or a use that is not classified within the SMP.

(83) Shoreline Environment Designation. “Shoreline environment designation” means the categories of shorelines of the state established by this program to differentiate between areas whose features imply differing objectives regarding their use and future development.

(84) Shoreline Jurisdiction. “Shoreline jurisdiction” means all shorelines of the state and shorelands as defined by this program and Chapter 90.58 RCW. 

(85) Shoreline Modifications. “Shoreline modifications” means those actions that modify the physical configuration or qualities of the shoreline area, usually through the construction of a physical element such as a dike, breakwater, pier, weir, dredged basin, fill, bulkhead, or other shoreline structure. They can include other actions, such as clearing, grading, or application of chemicals (WAC 173-26-020). 

(86) Shoreline Stabilization. “Shoreline stabilization” means actions taken to prevent or mitigate erosion impacts to property, dwellings, businesses, or structures caused by shoreline processes such as currents, floods, tides, wind or wave action. Shoreline stabilization includes but is not limited to structural armoring approaches such as bulkheads, bulkhead alternatives and nonstructural approaches such as bioengineering. 

(87) Shorelines. “Shorelines” means all of the water areas within the City of Sammamish, including reservoirs, and their associated shorelands together with the lands underlying them; except:

(a) Shorelines of statewide significance;

(b) Shorelines on segments of streams upstream of a point where the mean annual flow is 20 cubic feet per second or less and the wetlands associated with such upstream segments; and

(c) Shorelines on lakes less than 20 acres in size and wetlands associated with such lakes (RCW 90.58.030(2)(d)).

(88) Shorelines of Statewide Significance. “Shorelines of statewide significance” means those shorelines described in RCW 90.58.030(2)(e) that are within the City of Sammamish. Lake Sammamish is a designated shoreline of statewide significance. This is a distinct subcategory of shorelines of the state.

(89) Shorelines of the State. “Shorelines of the state” are the total of all shorelines and shorelines of statewide significance within the City of Sammamish. Please also see definitions for “shorelines” (subsection (87) of this section) and “shorelines of the state” (RCW 90.58.030(2)(c)).

(90) Shoreline Variance. “Shoreline variance” is a means to grant relief from the specific bulk, dimensional or performance standards in the SMP. A shoreline variance is not a means to vary a use of a shoreline.

(91) Structure. “Structure” means anything permanently constructed in or on the ground, or over the water, excluding fences six feet or less in height, uncovered decks less than 18 inches above grade, uncovered paved areas, and structural or nonstructural fill (SMC 21A.15.1255).

(92) Substantial Development. “Substantial development” means any development that meets the requirements of RCW 90.58.030(3)(e).

(93) Transportation Use. “Transportation use” means a use whose primary purpose is the movement and circulation of people, goods, and services. This includes but is not limited to public roads, rails, parking areas, nonmotorized travel corridors, trails, and similar features.

(94) Vegetation Enhancement Area. “Vegetation enhancement area” means an area immediately landward of the OHWM in which existing trees and native vegetation are preserved or native vegetation is restored and in which up to 25 percent by area of preserved and/or restored vegetation can be comprised of noninvasive, nonnative vegetation. 

(95) Vessel. “Vessel” includes ships, boats, barges, personal watercraft, or any other floating craft that are designed and used for navigation and do not interfere with the normal public use of the water (WAC 173-27-030).

(96) Water-Dependent Use. “Water-dependent use” means a use or portion of a use that cannot exist in a location that is not adjacent to the water and that is dependent on the water by reason of the intrinsic nature of its operations. Water-dependent uses are preferred uses of the shoreline according to the Act (SMC 21A.15.1385).

(97) Water-Enjoyment Use. “Water-enjoyment use” means a recreational use or other use that facilitates public access to the shoreline as a primary characteristic of the use; or a use that provides for recreational use or aesthetic enjoyment of the shoreline for a substantial number of people as a general characteristic of the use and which through location, design, and operation ensures the public’s ability to enjoy the physical and aesthetic qualities of the shoreline. In order to qualify as a water-enjoyment use, the use must be open to the general public and the shoreline-oriented space within the project must be devoted to the specific aspects of the use that foster shoreline enjoyment (WAC 173-26-020) (SMC 21A.15.1386).

(98) Water-Oriented Use. “Water-oriented use” means a use that is water-dependent, water-related, or water-enjoyment, or a combination of such uses (WAC 173-26-020) (SMC 21A.15.1387).

(99) Water-Related Use. “Water-related use” means a use or portion of a use that is not intrinsically dependent on a waterfront location but whose economic viability is dependent upon a waterfront location because:

(a) The use has a functional requirement for a waterfront location such as the arrival or shipment of materials by water or the need for large quantities of water; or

(b) The use provides a necessary service supportive of the water-dependent uses and the proximity of the use to its customers makes its services less expensive and/or more convenient (WAC 173-26-020) (SMC 21A.15.1388).

(100) Water Quality. “Water quality” means the physical characteristics of water within shoreline jurisdiction, including water quantity, hydrological, physical, chemical, aesthetic, recreation-related, and biological characteristics. Where used in this chapter, the term “water quantity” refers only to development and uses regulated under this chapter and affecting water quantity, such as impermeable surfaces and storm water handling practices. “Water quantity,” for purposes of this chapter, does not mean the withdrawal of ground water or diversion of surface water pursuant to RCW 90.03.250 through 90.03.340 (WAC 173-26-020).

(101) Wetland, Associated. “Associated wetland” means wetlands that are in proximity to lakes, rivers or streams that are subject to the Shoreline Management Act and either influence or are influenced by such waters. Factors used to determine proximity and influence include but are not limited to: location contiguous to a shoreline water body, presence of a surface connection including through a culvert or similar device, location in part or whole within the 100-year floodplain of a shoreline, periodic inundation, and/or hydraulic continuity. (Ord. O2019-493 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O2011-308 § 1 (Att. A))


Chapter 25.03 MASTER PROGRAM ELEMENT GOALS11

Chapters 25.03 and 25.04 of the shoreline master program amend the Sammamish Comprehensive Plan and have been omitted from the code at the request of the City. Refer to the Sammamish Comprehensive Plan, copies of which are on file at City Hall, for information on shoreline goals and policies. 


Chapter 25.04 SHORELINE MANAGEMENT POLICIES


Chapter 25.05 JURISDICTION AND ENVIRONMENT DESIGNATIONS

Sections:

25.05.010    Shoreline jurisdiction.

25.05.020    Shoreline environment designations.

25.05.030    Shorelines of statewide significance – Lake Sammamish.


25.05.010 Shoreline jurisdiction.

(1) The policies and regulations of this program shall apply to Lake Sammamish, Pine Lake and Beaver Lake and their adjacent shorelands and any other areas that the City may annex that qualify as shorelines as defined in Chapter 25.02 SMC and RCW 90.58.030. 

(2) The City determines the extent of shoreline jurisdiction on a case-by-case basis in conjunction with a development proposal, permit request, or request for statement of exemption. The landward extent of shoreline jurisdiction is measured from the OHWM and includes associated wetlands. For Lake Sammamish, the waterward extent of shoreline jurisdiction, as measured from the OHWM toward the western city boundary, shall be governed by the regulations pertaining to the adjoining shoreland area and all such uses shall be considered accessory to the primary use. For Pine and Beaver Lakes, the waterward extent of shoreline jurisdiction, as measured from the OHWM toward the center of each lake, shall be governed by the regulations pertaining to the adjoining shoreland area and all such uses shall be considered accessory to the primary use. The OHWM shall be determined based on site-specific observation and assessment using accepted protocols and criteria in accordance with RCW 98.58.030(2)(b).

(3) No streams meeting the definition of “shoreline” are included within the City limits as of the date of adoption of this program. If the City annexes unincorporated areas that include Patterson Creek or other shorelines or shorelands as defined by this program, shoreline jurisdiction will be determined based on the criteria and definitions in Chapter 25.02 SMC and Chapter 90.58 RCW. (Ord. O2019-493 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O2011-308 § 1 (Att. A))


25.05.020 Shoreline environment designations.

(1) Shorelines shall be assigned one of the following environment designations:

(a) Shoreline Residential Environment (SR). The purpose of the shoreline residential environment is to accommodate residential development and accessory structures that are consistent with this program. This designation shall apply to shorelines that do not meet the criteria for urban conservancy and that are characterized by single-family or multifamily residential development or are planned and platted for residential development.

(b) Urban Conservancy Environment (UC). The purpose of the urban conservancy environment is to protect and restore relatively undeveloped or unaltered shorelines to maintain open space, floodplains, or habitat, while allowing a variety of compatible uses. This designation shall apply to shorelines that retain important ecological functions, even if partially altered. These shorelines are suitable for low intensity development, uses that are a combination of water-related or water-enjoyment uses, including single-family residential use, or uses that allow substantial numbers of people to enjoy the shoreline.

(2) The shoreline environment designations established in subsection (1) of this section shall apply to the land and water areas subject to shoreline jurisdiction as defined in Chapter 25.02 SMC and Chapter 90.58 RCW. Uses and developments that occur waterward of the OHWM shall be governed by the regulations pertaining to the adjoining shoreland area and all such uses shall be considered accessory to the adjacent primary use. 

(3) Shoreline environment designations are delineated on a map, hereby incorporated as a part of this program (Appendix A), that shall be known as the official shoreline map. The official shoreline map is for planning purposes only. The map does not necessarily identify or depict the actual extent of shoreline jurisdiction or all associated wetlands. The lateral extent of the shoreline jurisdiction shall be determined on a case-by-case basis based on the location of the OHWM, floodway and/or the presence of associated wetlands. The landward extent so determined may extend beyond that depicted on the official shoreline map. 

(4) Undesignated and/or unmapped shorelines shall be designated urban conservancy in accordance with WAC 173-26-211(2)(e).

(5) If disagreement develops as to the exact location of a shoreline environment designation boundary line shown on the official shoreline map, the following rules shall apply:

(a) Boundaries indicated as approximately following lot, tract, or section lines shall be so construed.

(b) Boundaries indicated as approximately following roads shall be construed to follow their centerlines.

(c) Boundaries indicated as approximately parallel to or extensions of lots lines or roads shall be so construed.

(d) Whenever existing physical features are inconsistent with boundaries on the official shoreline map, the director shall interpret the boundaries.

(e) Appeals of such interpretations may be filed pursuant to the applicable appeal procedures described in Chapter 25.08 SMC. (Ord. O2019-493 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O2011-308 § 1 (Att. A))


25.05.030 Shorelines of statewide significance – Lake Sammamish.

In accordance with RCW 90.58.020, the following policies are hereby adopted for Lake Sammamish, which is a shoreline of statewide significance. The City shall manage Lake Sammamish to give preference to uses and developments that:

(1) Recognize and protect the statewide interest over local interest;

(2) Preserve the natural character and wildlife habitat of the shoreline;

(3) Result in long-term over short-term benefit;

(4) Protect the resources and ecology of the shoreline;

(5) Increase public access to publicly owned areas of the shoreline;

(6) Increase recreational opportunities for the public in the shoreline environment. (Ord. O2019-493 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O2011-308 § 1 (Att. A))


Chapter 25.06 GENERAL SHORELINE REGULATIONS

Sections:

25.06.005    Generally.

25.06.010    Archaeological, historic and cultural resources regulations.

25.06.020    Environmental protection and conservation regulations.

25.06.030    Shoreline public access regulations.

25.06.040    Restoration regulations.

25.06.050    Water quality, stormwater, and nonpoint pollution regulations.


25.06.005 Generally.

The general regulations in this chapter shall apply to all new development and uses within the Lake Sammamish, Pine Lake, and Beaver Lake shoreline jurisdictions unless otherwise stated. These regulations shall only apply within the shoreline jurisdiction, and shall not apply to portions of lots extending further landward than the landward extent of shoreline jurisdiction, as specified by Chapter 25.05 SMC. Additional regulations pertaining to specific uses and development activities are contained in Chapter 25.07 SMC. (Ord. O2019-493 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O2011-308 § 1 (Att. A))


25.06.010 Archaeological, historic and cultural resources regulations.

(1) Upon receipt of application for a shoreline permit or request for a statement of exemption for a development proposal located on or adjacent to a City of Sammamish historic, cultural, or archeological resource, the application or request shall be additionally processed pursuant to the requirements of SMC 21.10.120 (Historic resources – Review process).

(2) Whenever historic, cultural or archaeological sites or artifacts are inadvertently discovered during shoreline development, work on that portion of the development site shall be stopped immediately, the site secured and the discovery reported as soon as possible to the director. Upon notification of such find, the property owner shall notify the Washington State Department of Archaeology and Historic Preservation, and the director shall notify the historic preservation officer, all affected tribes and shall require a site investigation and archaeological study to determine the significance of the discovery. (Ord. O2019-493 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O2011-308 § 1 (Att. A))


25.06.020 Environmental protection and conservation regulations.

(1) All development projects shall include measures to mitigate environmental impacts not otherwise avoided or mitigated by compliance with this program and other applicable regulations. Where required, mitigation measures shall be applied in the following order:

(a) Avoiding the impact altogether by not taking a certain action or parts of an action;

(b) Minimizing impacts by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action and its implementation by using appropriate technology or by taking affirmative steps to avoid or reduce impacts;

(c) Rectifying the impact by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the affected environment;

(d) Reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation and maintenance operations;

(e) Compensating for the impact by replacing, enhancing, or providing substitute resources or environments; and

(f) Monitoring the impact and the compensation projects and taking appropriate corrective measures.

(2) Restoration. Restoration of native vegetation shall consist of a mixture of trees, shrubs and groundcover and be designed to improve habitat functions. 

(3) Aquatic Bed Wetlands. Wetlands located entirely waterward of the ordinary high water mark of a lake shall be regulated by the development standards provided for in the program, including this section. Where a wetland area extends landward of the shoreline’s OHWM boundary, additional wetland buffer protections pursuant to SMC 21A.50.290 may apply.

(4) Aquatic Weed Control and Noxious Weed Control. Aquatic weed control and noxious weed control may occur when the health and sustainability of native plant communities and associated habitats are threatened or when a water dependent use is restricted by their presence. Control with hand labor and/or light equipment is allowed; provided, that the appropriate erosion control measures are used and the area is replanted with native vegetation. Control shall occur in conformance with applicable local, state and/or federal regulations.

(5)  Clearing and Grading. The amount of clearing and grading shall be limited to the minimum necessary to accommodate the allowed use/development. This minimum shall include clearing and grading necessary for landscaping and establishment of a vegetation enhancement area, if required or desired.

(6) Light and Glare. Exterior lighting shall not shine directly onto the water. Exterior lighting fixtures shall include full cutoff devices (light shields) such that glare or direct illumination onto the lake is minimized.

(7) Mitigation. Property owners proposing new shoreline use or development shall include measures to mitigate environmental impacts not otherwise avoided or mitigated by compliance with this program and other applicable regulations. Where required, mitigation measures shall follow mitigation sequencing principles described in subsection (1) of this section and other applicable regulations whether or not the use/development requires or is exempt from a shoreline substantial development permit. Shoreline setback reductions are listed in subsection (11) of this section. 

(8) Building Setback – Pine and Beaver Lakes. A five-foot-wide building setback shall be established from the landward edge of the shoreline setback required in subsection (9) of this section for Pine and Beaver Lakes. The following may be allowed in the building setback subject to the square footage limits of SMC 25.07.080:

(a) Landscaping;

(b) Uncovered decks that are less than 18 inches above grade;

(c) Building overhangs if such overhangs do not extend more than 18 inches into the building setback area;

(d) Impervious ground surfaces, such as driveways and patios; 

(e) Trails.

(9) Shoreline Setback. A shoreline setback is established for Lake Sammamish, Pine Lake, and Beaver Lake. The shoreline setback area for Lake Sammamish is the area extending 50 feet (or as reduced by Table 25.06.020) landward from the OHWM. For Pine and Beaver Lakes, the shoreline setback area is the area extending 45 feet landward from the OHWM.

The following regulations shall apply:

(a) Non-water-dependent shoreline uses and developments, including residential developments, shall be located landward of the shoreline setback unless otherwise specified by this program; 

(b) Two hundred square feet maximum of residential accessory structure is allowed as specified in SMC 25.07.080(2) and subsection (9)(d) of this section;

(c) Docks and shoreline stabilization structures shall be allowed within the shoreline setback as specified in this program; 

(d) Public access structures, picnic areas, boat launches, docks and shoreline stabilization structures shall be allowed within the shoreline setback as specified in this program; 

(10) Lake Sammamish Vegetation Enhancement Area. The 15-foot-wide portion of the shoreline setback immediately landward of the OHWM is reserved as a vegetation enhancement area. The following regulations apply:

(a) Property owners shall be required to establish and maintain the vegetation enhancement area:

(i) As part of any new development or (exterior) redevelopment project that displaces or affects applicable shoreline setbacks. For developments or additions of less than 500 square feet, the landscaping requirement shall be proportional (1:1) to the area of disturbance or redevelopment; or

(ii) If they propose to construct or expand an existing bulkhead or other stabilization structure by more than 10 percent.

(iii) Excluded from this requirement are changes to a structure that do not expand the footprint. 

(b) The vegetation enhancement area, excluding the active use area, shall be planted or maintained with at least 75 percent by area of the vegetation consisting of native trees, shrubs, and groundcover designed to improve ecological functions. The VEA planting plan shall include one tree for every 500 square feet, one shrub for every 25 square feet, and 100 percent groundcover within the VEA. Note: Illustrations of the code will be included in the User Guide.

(c) An area of up to 25 percent of the vegetation enhancement area may be used as an active use area consistent with the requirements of this program; provided, that the active use area is located to avoid areas of greater sensitivity and habitat value. If this 25 percent limitation would not allow a corridor extending back from the lake measuring at least 15 feet parallel to the lake, a 15-foot-wide corridor may be used.

(d) Structures, decks and paved areas within the vegetation enhancement area may only be located within the limits of the active use area as specified within this program.

(e) When the establishment of the vegetation enhancement area is required, the final installation shall be approved by the city.

(11) Lake Sammamish Reduced Shoreline Setback. The Lake Sammamish shoreline setback may be reduced in the shoreline residential environment or for public uses and public development in the urban conservancy environment. All proposals for shoreline setback reduction must be completed in accordance with mitigation sequencing principles (subsection (1) of this section) and setback reductions as shown in Table 25.06.020. 

(a) Reduction measures shall be installed, monitored, maintained and City inspected. Mitigation provisions in SMC 21A.50.140 and 21A.50.145 shall apply and financial guarantees pursuant to SMC Title 27 may be required.

(b) When setback reductions of Table 25.06.020 are utilized such that the resulting setback is 20 feet, and the residence or accessory structure directly abuts the vegetated area, maintenance activities necessary for the residence or accessory structure may occur as needed. However, damage, disruption, or removal of required vegetation shall be restored immediately upon completion of the maintenance activities.

 

Table 25.06.020: Lake Sammamish Shoreline Setback Reductions Adopted Alternative  

	Reduction 	Setback Reduction (feet)	Reduction Criteria

• Reductions from the 50-foot standard setback may be cumulative, but in no case shall the resulting shoreline setback be less than 20 feet from OHWM. Planting shall be installed and maintained in accordance with VEA requirements.

• Reductions must be utilized in the following priority order: Reduction 1, Reduction 2 or 3 if a bulkhead is present, Reduction 4*, and Reduction 5. After Reductions 1 – 5, then Reductions 6, 7, and 8 may be utilized in any order. 

• Significant trees within the 50-foot setback area shall be retained, with the exception that the minimum necessary significant tree removal may occur for allowed development in order to utilize setback reductions. Removed significant trees shall be replanted at a 2:1 ratio.

	1	15 feet	For establishment of a 15-foot vegetation enhancement area landward and immediately adjacent to the OHWM and planting of 250 square feet of additional native vegetation planting area added landward and adjacent to the VEA. 

	2	15 feet	For removal of an existing bulkhead located at, below, or within five feet landward of the lake’s OHWM and subsequent restoration of the shoreline to a natural or semi-natural state, including the restoration of topography, soil composition, and vegetation. 

	3	10 feet	For creation of a durable inclined fill of gravel/small rock against the waterside of an existing bulkhead and planting, enhancement, or restoration of at least a 5-foot width of native vegetation along the entire inclined fill, as part of an Army Corps of Engineers-approved plan and in compliance with all WDFW and other appropriate agency regulations. 

	4	5 feet	For a reduction in the active use area, from the allowed 25 percent of the shoreline setback to 15 percent, and additional planting in that area.

	5	5 feet	For planting, enhancement, or restoration and subsequent preservation of existing native vegetation, as necessary, in a minimum 5-foot-wide near-shore area below the lake’s OHWM, excluding the area below the active use area.

	6	5 feet	For reduction of impervious surface coverage by 10 percent less than the city standard as allowed by SMC 25.07.080(2)(c) or (d).

	7	5 feet	For limiting lawn area to no greater than 20 percent of the shoreline jurisdiction area.

	8	5 feet	For preparation of, and agreement to adhere to, a written shoreline vegetation management plan that includes appropriate limitations on the use of fertilizer, herbicides, and pesticides to protect lake water quality.

	*This reduction is optional if it would result in an active use area that is less than 15 feet wide

(12) Pine Lake and Beaver Lake Tree Retention. Eighty percent of the significant trees within the shoreline jurisdiction must be retained. This requirement shall not apply to documented hazard trees. 

(13) Pine and Beaver Lakes Vegetation Enhancement Area. A vegetation enhancement area immediately landward of the OHWM is required as compensatory mitigation for any new or expanded development that is proposed within applicable shoreline setback or buffer areas. For developments or additions of less than 500 square feet the landscaping requirement shall be proportional (1:1) to the area of disturbance of the development or redevelopment.

(a) The vegetation enhancement area when required, excluding the active use area, shall be planted or maintained with at least 75 percent by area of the vegetation consisting of native trees, shrubs, and groundcover designed to improve ecological functions. The VEA planting plan shall include one tree for every 500 square feet, one shrub for every 25 square feet, and 100 percent groundcover within the VEA.

(b) An area of up to 25 percent of the vegetation enhancement area may be used as an active use area consistent with the requirements of this program; provided, that the active use area is located to avoid areas of greater sensitivity and habitat value. If this 25 percent limitation would not allow a corridor extending back from the lake measuring at least 15 feet perpendicular to the lake, a 15-foot-wide corridor may be used.

(14) Critical Areas within Shoreline Jurisdiction. Where critical areas including wetlands, streams, frequently flooded areas, geologically hazardous areas, or fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas designated in Chapter 21A.50 SMC occur in the shoreline jurisdiction, the Chapter 21A.50 SMC buffer or shoreline setback that provides the greatest protection shall prevail.

(15) Allowed Activities within Critical Areas within Shoreline Jurisdiction. The following activities are allowed subject only to compliance with best management practices and procedural requirements of this program:

(a) Emergencies.

(b) Public water, electric, and natural gas distribution, public sewer collection, cable communications, telephone utility, and related activities undertaken pursuant to City-approved best management practices.

(16) Notice on Title. The owner of any property required to maintain a vegetation enhancement area on which a development proposal is submitted or any property on which mitigation is established as a result of development, except a public right-of-way or the site of a permanent public facility, shall file a notice approved by the City with the King County records and elections division. The required contents and form of the notice shall be determined by the director. The notice shall run with the land. (Ord. O2019-493 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O2011-308 § 1 (Att. A))


25.06.030 Shoreline public access regulations.

(1) Physical and/or visual access should be made available to the public through public parks, rights-of-way and other public lands. 

(2) New public access is not required for new single-family residential subdivisions of nine lots or residential units or less.

(3) Development of public access facilities in, on or over the water shall be constructed using materials that allow light penetration and do not contaminate water. Facilities in, on or over the water shall be of non-reflective materials that are compatible in terms of color and texture with the surrounding area. The underside of over-water facilities should incorporate reflective materials where necessary to reduce the effects of shadowing.

(4) Public access should be located adjacent to other public areas, accesses and connecting trails, and connected to the nearest public street end or other public access point. (Ord. O2019-493 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O2011-308 § 1 (Att. A))


25.06.040 Restoration regulations.

(1) Ecological restoration projects shall be carried out in accordance with a City-approved restoration plan, and in accordance with the policies and regulations of this program.

(2) Voluntary enhancement and restoration of the shoreline not associated with any other development proposal is encouraged and should be accomplished according to a City-approved plan for its design, implementation, maintenance, and monitoring. Restoration or enhancement should result in a net improvement to the functions of the lake ecosystem.

(3) Voluntary establishment of vegetation enhancement areas is encouraged to restore shoreline ecological function. Previously established and City-approved vegetation enhancement areas or buffer reductions shall be credited toward shoreline setback reductions in accordance with this program.

(4) The City may grant relief from development standards and use regulations within this program that result from shoreline restoration projects that cause a landward shift in the extent of shoreline jurisdiction; such relief must be provided consistent with criteria and procedures in WAC 173-27-215. (Ord. O2019-493 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O2011-308 § 1 (Att. A))


25.06.050 Water quality, stormwater, and nonpoint pollution regulations.

(1) New shoreline uses and developments (and their related construction processes) shall incorporate all known, available, and reasonable methods of preventing, controlling, and treating stormwater to protect and maintain surface and ground water quantity and water quality in accordance with Chapter 15.05 SMC (Surface Water Management), requirements of Chapter 21A.50 SMC and other applicable laws.

(2) Best management practices (BMPs) for controlling erosion and sedimentation and preventing pollutants from entering lakes shall be implemented for all new uses and developments (and their related construction processes).

(3) To avoid water quality degradation by malfunctioning or failing septic systems located in the shoreline jurisdiction, new on-site sewage systems shall be located, designed, and maintained to meet all applicable water quality, utility, and health standards.

(4) New structures installed below OHWM or that regularly and frequently come in contact with water shall be constructed of Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife (WDFW)-approved materials. (Ord. O2019-493 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O2011-308 § 1 (Att. A))


Chapter 25.07 USE/DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS

Sections:

25.07.005    Generally.

25.07.010    Summary of uses, approval criteria, and process.

25.07.020    Dredging regulations.

25.07.030    Filling and excavation regulations.

25.07.035    Forest practices.

25.07.040    Boat facilities and boat launches – Ramps and rails regulations.

25.07.050    Private docks, floats, mooring buoys and watercraft lift regulations.

25.07.060    Public docks and floats regulations.

25.07.070    Shoreline stabilization regulations.

25.07.080    Residential use regulations.

25.07.090    Public recreational use regulations.

25.07.100    Transportation regulations.

25.07.110    Utilities regulations.

25.07.120    Agricultural use regulations.

25.07.130    Private beach park use regulations.


25.07.005 Generally.

These regulations apply to all new development and uses within the Lake Sammamish, Pine Lake, and Beaver Lake shoreline jurisdictions. These regulations shall only apply within the shoreline jurisdiction and shall not apply to portions of lots extending further landward than the landward extent of shoreline jurisdiction, as specified by SMC 25.05.010. Regulations pertaining to general requirements are contained in Chapter 25.06 SMC. (Ord. O2019-493 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O2011-308 § 1 (Att. A))


25.07.010 Summary of uses, approval criteria, and process.

Table 25.07.010-1 summarizes the permitted, conditional, and prohibited uses for each lake. All permitted and conditional uses may not appear in the table. In cases where uses are not listed, or conflicts exist with other section(s) of the program, the text provisions shall control. Table 25.07.010-2 summarizes the dimensional standards for each lake.

 

Table 25.07.010-1: Permitted Uses  

	Use (SMC Section)	Lake Sammamish Shoreline Residential	Lake Sammamish Urban Conservancy	Pine and Beaver Lakes Shoreline Residential	Pine and Beaver Lakes Urban Conservancy

	P = Permitted; C = Conditional Use; X= Prohibited

	Agriculture (25.07.110)	C	C	C	C

	Aquaculture	C	X	C	X

	Boating facilities	P	P	P	P

	Dredging (25.07.020(1))	P	P	P	P

	Dredging (25.07.020(2))	C	C	C	C

	Fill and excavation and grading landward of the OHWM (25.07.030)	P	P	P	P

	Fill waterward of the OHWM, except for ecological restoration (25.07.030)	C	C	C	C

	Fill waterward of the OHWM for ecological restoration (25.07.030)	P	P	P	P

	Forest practices (25.07.035)	C	C	C	C

	New private boat launches (25.07.040)	X	X	X	X

	Maintenance and repair of existing private boat launches (25.07.040)	P	P	P	P

	Public boat launches (25.07.040)	P	P	P	P

	Private docks, floats, mooring buoys (25.07.050)	P	P	P 	P

	Canopies and lifts (25.07.050)	P	P	X	X

	Maintenance and repair of docks, lifts, mooring buoys and floats (25.07.050)	P	P	P	P

	Public docks, floats, and mooring buoys (25.07.060)	P 	P	P	P

	Shoreline stabilization bulkheads and bio-engineered solutions (25.07.070)	P	P	P	P

	Repair, replacement and maintenance of shoreline stabilization (25.07.070) 	P	P	P	P

	Breakwaters, gabions, jetties, rock weirs, groins and other similar structures (25.07.070) 	X	X	X	X

	Single-family residences and appurtenances (accessory structures) (25.07.080) 	P	P	P	P

	Accessory dwelling units (25.07.080(7))	P	P	P	P

	Subdivision (25.07.080(6))	P	P	P	P

	Houseboats and floating homes (25.07.080(2)(a))	X	X	X	X

	Transportation uses and facilities (25.07.100)	P	P	P	P

	Parking, accessory to a permitted shoreline use (25.07.100)	P	P	P	P

	Parking as a primary use (25.07.100)	X	X	X	X

	Parking in, on or over water (25.07.100)	X	X	X	X

	Private beach park use and structures (25.07.130)	C	C	C	C

	Public recreational use and structures (25.07.090)	P	P	P	P

	Utilities, primary land use (25.07.110)	P	P	P	P

	Utilities, accessory to a single-family normal appurtenance (25.02.010 and 25.07.080)	P	P	P	P

	Water-oriented commercial development (25.02.010)	C	C	X	X

	Non-water-oriented commercial development (25.02.010(56))	X	X	X	X

	Water-dependent industry (25.02.010(92))	X	X	X	X

	Non-water-dependent industry (25.02.010(56))	X	X	X	X

	Mining	X	X	X	X

	Marina (25.02.010)	X	X	X	X

Table 25.07.010-2: Dimensional Standards  

	 	Lake Sammamish Shoreline Residential	Lake Sammamish Urban Conservancy	Pine and Beaver Lakes Shoreline Residential	Pine and Beaver Lakes Urban Conservancy

	Single-Family Residential (SMC 25.06.020 and 25.07.080) 

	Height	35 feet	35 feet	35 feet	35 feet

	Setbacks	15% of lot width, minimum setback 5 feet	15% of lot width, minimum setback 5 feet	R-4	R-4

	Minimum yard area	45%	60%	45%	60%

	Fences	6 feet	6 feet	6 feet	6 feet

	Accessory structures (not ADU) (SMC 25.07.080)

	Height	10 feet	10 feet	10 feet	10 feet

	Maximum footprint	200 square feet	200 square feet	200 square feet	200 square feet

	Other structures outside shoreline setback

	Height	35 feet	35 feet	35 feet	35 feet

	Footprint maximum	None	None	None	None

	Docks: Private Residential (SMC 25.07.050)

	Length	Dock length of 80 feet maximum or length necessary to reach a depth of 8 feet. No dock shall be more than 1/4 the distance to the opposite shoreline.	Dock length of 80 feet maximum or length necessary to reach a depth of 8 feet. No dock shall be more than 1/4 the distance to the opposite shoreline.	Dock length of 80 feet maximum or length necessary to reach a depth of 8 feet. No dock shall be more than 1/4 the distance to the opposite shoreline.	Dock length of 80 feet maximum or length necessary to reach a depth of 8 feet. No dock shall be more than 1/4 the distance to the opposite shoreline.

	Area: One owner	480 square feet	480 square feet	480 square feet	480 square feet

	Area: Two to nine owners	700 square feet	480 square feet	700 square feet 	480 square feet

	Area: 10 or more owners	1,000 square feet	480 square feet	700 square feet 	480 square feet

	Width	4 feet within 30 feet of OHWM, 6 feet when more than 30 feet from OHWM 	4 feet within 30 feet of OHWM, 6 feet when more than 30 feet from OHWM 	4 to 6 feet within 10 feet of OHWM. Total of the platform area and walkway area are not to exceed 480 square feet or 700 square feet for joint use docks.	4 to 6 feet within 10 feet of OHWM. Total of the platform area and walkway area are not to exceed 480 square feet.

	Placement	At least 15 feet from property line	At least 15 feet from property line	At least 15 feet from property line	At least 15 feet from property line

	Subdivision (SMC 25.07.080)	Shared use docks are required (see above for shared use dock allowances).	Shared use docks are required (see above for shared use dock allowances).	Shared use docks are required (see above for shared use dock allowances).	Shared use docks are required (see above for shared use dock allowances).

	Canopy (SMC 25.07.050)

	Coverage	25 x 15 feet	25 x 15 feet	N/A	N/A

	Height above OHWM	10 feet	10 feet	N/A	N/A

	Docks: Public Recreational (SMC 25.07.060)

	Length	No limit	No limit	No limit	No limit

	Area	3,000 square feet	3,000 square feet	3,000 square feet	3,000 square feet

	Width	6 feet	6 feet	6 feet	6 feet

	Setbacks (SMC 25.06.020)

	Shoreline setback	50 feet	50 feet	45 feet	45 feet

	Building setback	N/A	N/A	5 feet	5 feet

	Vegetation enhancement area (VEA)	15 feet	15 feet	15 feet as specified in the program	15 feet as specified in the program 

	Active use area	15 – 25% of VEA 	15 – 25% of VEA	25% of VEA	25% of VEA

	Subdivision (SMC 25.07.080(6))

	Minimum area	12,500 square feet	12,500 square feet	12,500 square feet	12,500 square feet

	Minimum lot width	50 feet	50 feet	50 feet	50 feet

(Ord. O2019-493 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2011-308 § 1 (Att. A))


25.07.020 Dredging regulations.

Dredging shall be the minimum necessary to accomplish its purpose, and projects shall be designed to minimize or eliminate the need for future dredging. 

(1) Dredging may be permitted when necessary to support the following:

(a) Construction of a public dock for public water-dependent recreational use; provided, that the dredging is limited to the minimum needed to accommodate the public dock and then only when there is no feasible alternative; or

(b) Public sponsored ecological restoration or enhancement projects; or

(c) City-approved restoration and mitigation projects that involve bulkhead removal and/or shoreline vegetation enhancement; or

(d) Bioengineered shoreline stabilization projects, including bioengineered shoreline stabilization associated with private residential developments. 

(2) Dredging for any purpose other than listed in subsection (1) of this section may be permitted with a conditional use permit.

(3) When permitted, dredging activities must comply with all of the following standards:

(a) Alternatives to dredging are infeasible; and

(b) The dredging is timed to minimize damage to shoreline ecological functions and aquatic life; and

(c) Unavoidable impacts of dredging are mitigated as required by this program.

(4) Dredging for the purpose of public transportation is not permitted.

(5) Dredge material shall be disposed of in legally established upland locations away from the shoreline and should be coordinated with appropriate agencies. (Ord. O2019-493 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O2011-308 § 1 (Att. A))


25.07.030 Filling and excavation regulations.

(1) All filling and excavation activities in the shoreline jurisdiction shall comply with the provisions of this program and all other applicable City and state requirements.

(2) Fill and excavation is allowed only in association with a permitted use. Where allowed, fill and excavation shall be the minimum necessary to accommodate the development.

(3) Development that involves fill or excavation within the shoreline jurisdiction shall obtain a shoreline substantial development permit unless exempt by WAC 173.27.040(2).

(4) Fill shall be permitted landward of the OHWM and as allowed in subsection (5) of this section as a permitted or conditional use, and only where it is demonstrated that the proposed action will not result in ecological damage to water quality, fish, and/or wildlife habitat; or adversely alter natural drainage patterns.

(5) Fill shall not be used to alter the OHWM, except as part of an approved restoration project. Filling waterward of the OHWM shall only be allowed when necessary to support one or more of the following:

(a) Public sponsored ecological restoration or enhancement projects;

(b) City-approved restoration and mitigation projects that involve bulkhead removal, shoreline vegetation enhancement and/or shoreline restoration; 

(c) Bioengineered shoreline stabilization projects, including bioengineered shoreline stabilization associated with private residential developments;

(d) Publicly sponsored nonrestoration projects that provide public access or improve access to the shoreline for a substantial number of people;

(e) Construction of public docks for public water-dependent recreational use; provided, that the filling and/or excavation are limited to the minimum needed to accommodate the public dock; 

(f) Expansion or alteration of public transportation facilities of statewide significance currently located in the shoreline on the date of adoption of this SMP where there is no feasible alternative;

(g) When associated with a permitted or conditional use and as required by state or federal agencies;

(h) Fill waterward of the OHWM for any other purpose than ecological restoration shall require a shoreline conditional use permit.

(6) Fill or excavation shall not be located where structural shore stabilization will be required to maintain materials placed or removed. Disturbed areas shall be immediately stabilized and revegetated, as applicable. (Ord. O2019-493 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O2011-308 § 1 (Att. A))


25.07.035 Forest practices.

Forest practices, as defined by SMC 21A.15.520, that only involve timber cutting are not considered development under this program and do not require a shoreline substantial development permit or a shoreline exemption. Forest practice activities other than timber cutting shall be considered development under this program, and shall require a conditional use permit. (Ord. O2019-493 § 1 (Att. 1))


25.07.040 Boat facilities and boat launches – Ramps and rails regulations.

(1) Existing legally established launch ramps and rails associated with private residential development may be maintained and repaired.

(2) Public launch ramps and rails associated with public recreational uses shall be allowed on public land along the Lake Sammamish, Pine Lake, and Beaver Lake shorelines.

(3) New launch ramps and rails shall be designed as follows: 

(a) New launch ramps or rails shall be anchored to the ground through the use of tie-type construction. New ramps that solidly cover the water body bottom are prohibited; and

(b) No portion of a launch ramp or rail shall be placed or extend more than 60 feet waterward of the OHWM; and

(c) A launch ramp or rail shall be not be placed or extend to a depth greater than eight feet below the OHWM.

(4) New launch ramps and rails associated with private residential development are prohibited.

(5) Private beach park uses as regulated by SMC 25.07.130, and private joint access parcels associated with residential use as allowed by SMC 25.07.080, may have docks, mooring buoys, and floats consistent with the regulations in SMC 25.07.050.

(6) Structures accessory to the docks, mooring buoys, and floats may be constructed on the upland parcels with a shoreline substantial development permit issued consistent with this program, specifically SMC 25.06.020 and 25.07.080(2)(e). (Ord. O2019-493 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O2011-308 § 1 (Att. A))


25.07.050 Private docks, floats, mooring buoys and watercraft lift regulations.

(1) All Lakes. The following regulations shall apply to private docks, floats, mooring buoys and lifts:

(a) No new dock, mooring buoy, or float shall be located closer than 15 feet from the side property line extended, except that joint-use docks, lifts and floats may abut or cross property lines for the common use of adjacent property owners when mutually agreed to by the property owners in an agreement recorded with King County. Lifts (Lake Sammamish only) may be located within five feet of property lines consistent with subsection (2)(i) of this section. 

(b) Mooring buoys shall be limited to the number allowed pursuant to Washington State Department of Natural Resources requirements.

(c) No new float shall cover more than 150 square feet of the lake. The area of the float shall be counted as part of the overall dock area.

(d) No dwelling unit or building may be constructed on a dock, float or other moorage structure.

(e) The use of fill to construct new docks, floats, and/or lifts (lifts allowed on Lake Sammamish only) shall only be allowed pursuant to the requirements of SMC 25.07.030.

(f) New private docks, floats and/or lifts (lifts allowed on Lake Sammamish only) shall be designed and constructed using WDFW-approved methods and materials.

(g) The top surface of new private docks shall not exceed five feet in height above the OHWM.

(h)  Docks, and platform lifts must be fully grated or contain other materials that allow a minimum of 40 percent light transmission through the decking material. If float tubs for docks preclude use of fully grated decking materials, then a minimum of two feet of grating must be installed down the center of the entire float.

(i) Pilings or moorage piles shall not be treated with pentachlor chlorophenol, creosote, chromate copper arsenate (CCA) or comparable toxic compounds.

(j) Existing legally established private docks and floats may be repaired or replaced consistent with the following standards provided within this chapter and listed below.

(k) Repair or replacement of an existing residential dock shall be administered as follows:

(i) Repair proposals which replace 75 percent or greater of the existing dock support piles, cumulatively over the lifetime of the dock, are considered replacement docks and must comply with requirements for replacement docks (below); and

(ii) On Lake Sammamish, repair proposals which replace between 25 and 75 percent of the existing dock support piles, cumulatively over the lifetime of the dock, must achieve the minimum 18-foot spacing to the extent allowed by site-specific engineering or design considerations and shall install deck grating on all areas of replaced decking; and

(iii) All proposed replacement piles shall be the minimum size allowed by site-specific engineering or design considerations.

(l) A replacement of an existing private dock shall be consistent with the following requirements:

(i) A proposal to replace the entire dock, or 75 percent or more of the dock support piles, cumulatively over the lifetime of the dock, must meet the dimensional, decking, and design standards for new docks as described above in subsections (1)(a) through (l) of this section, except the City may administratively approve an alternative design as provided in subsection (1)(m) of this section.

(m) Alternative Design. The City shall approve the following modifications to a dock or pier replacement proposal that deviates from the dimensional standards required by this chapter subject to approval by other permitting agencies such as the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, or the Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife.

In addition, the following requirements and all other applicable provisions of the chapter shall be met:

(i) State and Federal Agency Approval. U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife has approved the proposal; and

(ii) Materials. Use of grated decking consistent with this chapter; and

(iii) Maximum Area. No larger than existing dock; and

(iv) Minimum Water Depth. No shallower than authorized through state and federal approval.

(2) Lake Sammamish. The following requirements apply to all new private docks, floats, and lifts on Lake Sammamish, including shared/joint-use facilities and private beach park facilities:

(a) Each individual residential lot or private beach park lot on Lake Sammamish shall be allowed one residential dock, one float, two boat lifts, and two personal watercraft lifts. In lieu of the two boat lifts and two personal watercraft lifts, four personal watercraft lifts may be permitted.

(b) Contiguous lots using shared/joint-use docks shall be allowed one additional boat lift and one additional personal watercraft lift or two additional personal watercraft lifts in addition to the allowances within subsection (2)(a) of this section.

(c) Lots that provide shared/joint-use for more than nine residential homes shall be allowed one additional dock for service of existing legally established launch ramps and rails; provided, that the total area of overwater coverage does not exceed the maximum overwater area coverage allowed by this section.

(d) Lots providing private beach park use, as allowed by SMC 25.07.130, shall be allowed one additional boat lift and one additional personal watercraft lift or two additional personal watercraft lifts in addition to the allowances within subsection (2)(a) of this section.

(e) Maximum overwater area coverage for private docks accessory to residential use on Lake Sammamish in the shoreline residential environment, including any float coverage but excluding canopy coverage, shall not exceed:

(i) Four hundred eighty square feet for private residential docks serving one lot; or

(ii) Seven hundred square feet for private residential docks serving two to nine lots in a shared use agreement; or

(iii) One thousand square feet for private residential docks serving more than nine lots in a joint-use agreement.

(f) Maximum overwater area coverage for private docks accessory to residential use on Lake Sammamish in the Urban Conservancy Environment, including any float coverage but excluding canopy coverage, shall not exceed 480 square feet.

(g) Maximum overwater coverage for private docks accessory to private beach park uses on Lake Sammamish in the Shoreline Residential Environment, including any float coverage but excluding canopy coverage, shall be consistent with SMC 25.07.130, shall be the minimum size necessary to meet the needs of the proposed water-dependent use as approved through conditional use permit, and shall not exceed 1,000 square feet.

(h) Maximum overwater coverage for private docks accessory to private beach park uses on Lake Sammamish in the Urban Conservancy Environment, including any float coverage but excluding canopy coverage, shall be consistent with SMC 25.07.130, shall be the minimum size necessary to meet the needs of the proposed water-dependent use as approved through conditional use permit, and shall not exceed 480 square feet.

(i) Docks shall be no wider than four feet, except an additional two feet of width can be allowed without a variance, where associated with a residential property owner or private beach park member with a condition that qualifies for state disabled accommodations. The City can also allow without a variance, up to two feet of additional dock width limited to areas more than 30 feet waterward of the OHWM, if approved by other permitting agencies, such as the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife. Otherwise docks shall not exceed four feet in width.

(j) Ells, fingers and deck platforms can be no closer than 30 feet waterward of the ordinary high water mark.

(k) The first set of pilings for a dock shall be located no closer than 18 feet from the ordinary high water mark.

(l) Maximum Length of Private Docks. The maximum waterward extent of any new dock or other in-water/overwater moorage structure shall be no longer than 80 feet or the length needed to reach a depth of eight feet (measured from ordinary high water), whichever is greater. No dock shall be more than one-quarter the distance to the opposite shoreline.

(m) No boat lift shall be located closer than five feet from the side property line extended. New boat lifts installed between five and 15 feet of the side property line extended must be installed perpendicular to the shoreline.

(n) One boat canopy per private dock is allowed; provided, that private docks providing moorage for two or more users through joint residential use or private beach park use may be allowed a maximum of two boat canopies per private dock. All boat canopies shall be made of translucent material. Canopies may be a maximum of 25 feet in length, 15 feet in width, and 10 feet at the highest point over ordinary high water.

(3) Pine Lake and Beaver Lake. The following requirements apply to all new private docks and floats on Pine Lake and Beaver Lake, including shared/joint-use facilities and private beach park facilities:

(a) Each individual residential lot on Pine and Beaver Lake shall be allowed one residential dock and one float.

(b) Maximum overwater coverage area for private docks on Pine and Beaver Lake in the Shoreline Residential Environment shall not exceed:

(i) Four hundred eighty square feet for private residential docks serving one lot.

(ii) Seven hundred square feet for private residential docks serving two or more lots in a joint-use agreement.

(c) Maximum overwater coverage area for private docks on Pine and Beaver Lake in the Urban Conservancy Environment shall not exceed 480 square feet.

(d) Maximum overwater coverage for private docks accessory to private beach park uses on Pine or Beaver Lake in the Shoreline Residential Environment shall be the minimum size necessary to meet the needs of the proposed water-dependent use as approved through conditional use permit and shall not exceed 700 square feet.

(e) Maximum overwater coverage for private docks accessory to private beach park uses on Pine or Beaver Lake in the Urban Conservancy Environment shall be the minimum size necessary to meet the needs of the proposed water-dependent use as approved through conditional use permit and shall not exceed 480 square feet.

(f)  Docks shall be no wider than four feet, except:

(i) Dock width may be increased from four feet to six feet if the platform area and the total area of the walkway do not exceed 480 square feet or 700 square feet for joint use docks.

(ii) The maximum square footage of platforms (ells, Ts, etc.) at the end of the dock is 250 square feet.

(iii) Between OHWM and the platform the walkway shall be no wider than six feet for a minimum distance of 10 feet.

(g) New boat lifts and canopies are not permitted on Pine and Beaver Lakes. Existing lifts and canopies may be maintained.

(h) The maximum waterward extent of any new dock or other in-water/over-water moorage structure shall be no longer than 80 feet or the length needed to reach a depth of eight feet (measured from ordinary high water), whichever is greater. No dock shall be more than one-quarter the distance to the opposite shoreline. (Ord. O2019-493 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O2011-308 § 1 (Att. A))


25.07.060 Public docks and floats regulations.

New public recreational docks and floats on public lands shall comply with the following:

(1) Public recreational docks shall be designed and constructed using WDFW-approved methods and materials; and

(2) With the exception of total over-water coverage, public recreational docks shall comply with design standards required for private docks listed in SMC 25.07.050(1)(a) through (l).

(3) Consistent with SMC 25.07.050(2)(e) and (3)(c), the width of public recreational piers and docks should be minimized, but can be authorized up to six feet in width subject to Army Corps of Engineers and/or Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife approval;

(4) No public recreational dock shall exceed 3,000 square feet in surface area. There is no dock length limit for public recreational docks; however, public piers and docks shall not interfere with navigation. (Ord. O2019-493 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O2011-308 § 1 (Att. A))


25.07.070 Shoreline stabilization regulations.

This section describes the types of shoreline stabilization permitted on all shorelines in Sammamish.

(1) When allowed pursuant to this program, shoreline stabilization and permitted alternatives, including new, expanded, or replacement bulkhead alternatives and bulkheads, must meet all of the following requirements:

(a) The impacts must be first avoided, then minimized and then mitigated through compliance with this program and other applicable regulations such that there is no net loss of shoreline ecological functions. This is achieved by maintaining the required vegetation enhancement area in a vegetated condition, or planting the shoreline vegetation enhancement area in accordance with this program;

(b) The size of shoreline stabilization structure shall be limited to the minimum necessary to protect the primary structure;

(c) The shoreline stabilization is designed by a state licensed professional geotechnical engineer and/or engineering geologist and constructed according to applicable state and federal laws; and

(d) The shoreline stabilization is designed and constructed to incorporate natural vegetation and habitat elements wherever reasonable, and constructed and maintained in a manner that does not degrade the water quality of affected waters;

(e) No gabions, motor vehicles, appliances, structure demolition debris, or solid waste of any kind shall be used for shoreline stabilization. Any such objects that may be remnant from replaced shoreline stabilization must be removed from the shoreline and shoreline setback unless doing so would cause damage to the environment;

(f) The shoreline stabilization shall be designed and constructed with gravel backfill and weep holes so that natural downward movement of surface or ground water may continue without ponding or saturation;

(g) The shoreline stabilization on shores exposed to significant wave action shall be designed to dissipate wave energy and scouring; and

(h) Shoreline stabilization shall be placed landward of associated wetlands and buffers.

(2) Bulkhead alternatives and bioengineered shoreline stabilization (also known as biostabilization) are the preferred method for stabilizing shorelines and shall be permitted with proof of demonstrated need provided in a technical report prepared by a Washington state licensed engineer and/or a qualified biologist as appropriate. Such alternatives include large rocks, logs, revetments and other natural materials integrated with native vegetation to prevent erosion of land into the lakes. 

(3) New or expanded hard structural stabilization may be permitted only when bulkhead alternatives are determined to be infeasible or insufficient and when required:

(a) To protect an existing primary residential structure from shoreline erosion caused by currents or waves (and not caused by normal sloughing, vegetation removal, or poor drainage) when there is a significant possibility that the primary structure will be damaged within three years as a result of shoreline erosion in the absence of armoring measures.

(b) For projects whose primary purpose is remediating hazardous substances pursuant to Chapter 70.105 RCW. 

(c) For stabilization on public land to facilitate public shoreline access for substantial numbers of people.

(4) To comply with subsection (3) of this section, the property owner shall provide technical reports that: 

(a) Evaluate the need for structural shoreline stabilization; and

(b) Describe alternatives to structural approaches and analyze the environmental effects of each alternative. Geotechnical analysis shall address the necessity of bulkheads or other armoring by estimating time frames and rates of erosion and report on the urgency associated with the specific situation. The geotechnical reports and alternatives analysis shall be prepared by a Washington state licensed engineer, engineering geologist and/or a qualified biologist as appropriate. The reports shall meet the application requirements of Chapter 20.05 SMC (Procedures for Land Use Permit Applications, Public Notice, Hearings and Appeals) and the critical areas study requirements of SMC 21A.50.130.

(5) Stairs may be built into shoreline stabilization but shall not extend waterward of OHWM. Stairs on the waterward side of existing bulkheads may be maintained and repaired in kind.

(6) When there is a need for an existing legally established bulkhead to be replaced, it may be done with bulkhead alternatives or biostabilization. An existing bulkhead or similar stabilization structure may only be replaced with a structure of similar dimension and location when bulkhead alternatives are demonstrated to be infeasible or inadequate to protect the primary residential structure and the following criteria are met:

(a) There is a demonstrated need to protect the primary residential structure from erosion caused by currents or waves and not caused by normal sloughing, vegetation removal, or poor drainage; and

(b) The replacement structure shall not encroach waterward of the OHWM or the existing stabilization structure unless the primary use being protected is a residence that was occupied prior to January 1, 1992, and there are overriding safety or environmental concerns. In such cases, the replacement structure shall abut the landward side of the existing shoreline stabilization structure.

(7) Existing shoreline stabilization structures that are being replaced shall be removed unless removing the structure will cause more environmental harm than leaving it in place.

(8) An existing legally established bulkhead or similar hard shoreline stabilization structure may be repaired and maintained. If the repair or maintenance activity changes the location of the structure or alters any dimension of the structure by more than 10 percent, it shall be treated as a new/replacement hard shoreline stabilization structure and the City may require mitigation in accordance with this program. 

(9) Subdivisions shall be designed to assure that future development of the established lots will not require armoring. Use of a bulkhead, wall, or similar structure to protect a platted lot where no structure presently exists shall be prohibited.

(10) Breakwaters, jetties, rock weirs, groins and similar structural modifications shall be prohibited. 

(11) New bulkheads on vacant lands are prohibited. (Ord. O2019-493 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O2011-308 § 1 (Att. A))


25.07.080 Residential use regulations.

(1) Preferred Use. Single-family residential use is a preferred shoreline use and shall be permitted when consistent with this program and the Act, including the goal to ensure no net loss of shoreline ecological functions.

(2) New Residential Development. New residential development and normal appurtenances shall be located sufficiently landward of the OHWM to preclude the need for new structural shoreline stabilization and/or flood protection for the useful life of the structure in accordance with the following: 

(a) New residential development and normal appurtenances shall be located landward of the shoreline setback, or if applicable the reduced shoreline setback, or as otherwise allowed, in accordance with this program. Houseboats, live-aboards, or other dwelling units are prohibited overwater.

(b) Residential structures shall be located to avoid the need for future shoreline stabilization. 

(c) For shoreline residential areas, 45 percent of the lot shall be yard area. For purposes of this section, “yard” is any surface area that is not structured or hardened. Yard areas may be landscaped, contain uncovered decks of less than 18 inches above grade, or artificial turf, but do not include areas covered by pervious concrete or other similar materials.

(d) For urban conservancy areas, the minimum amount of yard shall be no less than 60 percent of the lot area above OHWM. For purposes of this section, “yard” is any surface area that is not structured or hardened. Yard areas may be landscaped, contain uncovered decks of less than 18 inches above grade, or artificial turf, but do not include areas covered by pervious concrete or other similar materials.

(e) New structures, excluding accessory dwelling units, may be located waterward of the shoreline setback; provided, that all of the following criteria are met:

(i) The maximum total footprint is not more than 200 square feet; and

(ii) The maximum height is not more than 10 feet above existing average grade level; and

(iii) The structure is located outside of wetlands, streams, other ecologically sensitive areas and associated buffers; and

(iv) Potential impacts are managed consistent with the provisions of this program. Where environmental impacts not otherwise avoided or mitigated by compliance with the program and other applicable regulations are identified, mitigation sequencing (i.e., avoid, minimize, and then mitigate), including identification of appropriate mitigation to offset any anticipated impacts resulting from the project, shall be utilized.

(f) New accessory dwelling units may be located landward of the shoreline setback; provided, that all of the applicable zoning requirements and provisions of this program are met. 

(3) Expansion of Existing Legally Established Residential Use. 

(a) All Lakes. An existing legally established residential structure may be expanded or reconfigured consistent with the substantive requirements of this program.

(4) Interior Setbacks.

(a) Lake Sammamish. Interior setbacks within shoreline jurisdiction shall total 15 percent of the width of the lot, with a minimum setback of five feet on either side of the lot. 

(5) Fences. No portion of any fences within shoreline jurisdiction shall exceed six feet in height, as measured from the existing ground elevation along the proposed fence alignment, and shall not be located within wetlands, streams, or Chapter 21A.50 SMC, buffers.

Fences should be located outside of the shoreline setback upland of the OHWM, in an effort to minimize disruption of wildlife migration along shoreline areas. Fences may be located within the shoreline setback upland of the OHWM when needed to serve their primary function. When located within the shoreline setback the fence height shall not exceed 42 inches, and nonsolid materials shall be utilized.

(6) Subdivision. Shoreline lots may be subdivided in accordance with SMC Title 19. 

(a) The minimum lot width required for subdivision within shoreline jurisdiction shall be 50 feet as measured by scaling a circle of the applicable diameter within the boundaries of the lot. For lots fronting directly on the OHWM, the lot width circle shall touch the OHWM. An access easement may be included in the lot width circle; and

(b) Landward portions of all lots created through subdivision shall have a minimum size of 12,500 square feet; provided, that all other applicable regulations are met, including this program, Chapter 21A.25 SMC and the King County department of health (septic system siting standards); and 

(c) All new subdivisions shall be allowed one additional shared use dock. A dock existing prior to subdivision application may remain for either shared use or use by one lot in the subdivision.

(7) Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU). Only one accessory dwelling is allowed per primary single detached dwelling unit. An ADU is only allowed in the same building as the primary dwelling unit when the lot is less than 10,000 square feet in area or when there is more than one primary dwelling on a lot. One of the dwelling units shall not exceed a floor area of 1,000 square feet except when one of the dwelling units is wholly contained within a basement or attic. A detached ADU shall be located outside of all critical area buffers and/or shoreline setback areas and shall not be subject to any shoreline setback reductions or variances. 

(8) Accessory Utilities. For single-family residences accessory utilities include electrical, gas, water, cable, telephone, and public sewer connections to the primary utilities, and also installation of septic tank and drainfields.

(9) Private Joint Access Beach Parcels. Private joint access parcels associated with and subordinate to adjacent residential lots shall be allowed, provided that all applicable standards of Chapter 25.06 SMC and this section are implemented such that there is no net loss of shoreline ecological functions. Joint use private docks, floats, mooring buoys, and watercraft lifts shall be allowed at private joint access parcels consistent with standards in SMC 25.07.050. (Ord. O2019-493 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O2016-410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2011-308 § 1 (Att. A))


25.07.090 Public recreational use regulations.

(1) Public recreational development on public land is a preferred shoreline use and is permitted when consistent with underlying zoning pursuant to Chapter 21A.10 SMC, this program, and the Act, including the goal to ensure no net loss of shoreline ecological functions.

(2) New public recreational activities and facilities proposed within shoreline jurisdiction shall be water-oriented, and shall provide physical and/or visual access to the shoreline.

(3) The following water-oriented public recreational structures are permitted waterward of the shoreline setback and building setback: 

(a) Public docks, and/or floats allowed pursuant to SMC 25.07.060; and

(b) Public picnic shelters and similar facilities for water enjoyment uses; provided, that such structures are not located in wetland or stream buffers, or in, on or over water and that no structure exceeds 15 feet above existing average grade level.

(4) Non-water-oriented public recreational development, including parking, restrooms and similar facilities, shall be located landward of the shoreline setback where feasible. 

(5) Public recreational developments shall provide for public nonmotorized connectivity between existing public roads, trails and said development on the shoreline (e.g., pedestrian and/or bicycle paths), unless such access is infeasible due to public health and safety considerations.

(6) Public recreational developments shall include landscaping that uses native, self-sustaining vegetation. (Ord. O2019-493 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O2011-308 § 1 (Att. A))


25.07.100 Transportation regulations.

(1) The following regulations for transportation use shall apply to any use or development where transportation infrastructure is, or is proposed to be, a primary land use, including new or expanded roadways, trails, nonmotorized facilities and parking facilities. Transportation use regulations shall not apply to residential access drives that are accessory to residential use. 

(2) New transportation development shall be carried out in a manner that maintains or improves water quality for receiving waters through implementation of state and City stormwater regulations (see SMC 25.07.110).

(3) New transportation and stormwater facilities and improvements to existing transportation facilities, not including trails, shall be located outside of the shoreline setback and any required building setback unless there is no feasible alternative. Adverse impacts shall be mitigated according to the mitigation requirements of Chapter 21.50 SMC and other applicable regulations.

(4) New roads shall be developed to minimize impacts to surface waters and new culverts shall meet applicable City and state standards.

(5) New transportation facilities shall be located and designed to preclude the need for shoreline stabilization where reasonable.

(6) Parking within the shoreline jurisdictions shall be limited to parking facilities that directly serve a permitted shoreline use, such as waterfront regional trails, including on-street parking where otherwise allowed in SMC Titles 14A and 21A. Parking as a primary use shall be prohibited.

(7) To the extent possible, vehicle and pedestrian circulation systems shall be designed to minimize clearing, grading and alteration of topography and natural features. Roadway and driveway alignment shall follow the natural contours and minimize width to the maximum extent reasonable.

(8) Parking facilities shall be located and designed to minimize adverse environmental impacts including, but not limited to, the following:

(a) Stormwater runoff;

(b) Water quality and shoreline habitat;

(c) Visual qualities;

(d) Public access; and

(e) Lake management districts regulated by Chapter 21A.50 SMC.

(9) Parking is prohibited on structures located in, on or over water. (Ord. O2019-493 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O2011-308 § 1 (Att. A))


25.07.110 Utilities regulations.

(1) Utility regulations shall apply to any use or development where utility infrastructure is required to support the primary land use.

(2) Utility facilities shall provide for multiple use of sites and rights-of-way (e.g., trail corridors along underground utility rights-of-way), except in instances where multiple uses would unduly interfere with utility operations, endanger public health and safety, or create a significant and disproportionate liability for the owner.

(3) When reasonable, new utility lines shall use existing rights-of-way, corridors and/or bridge crossings and shall avoid duplication and/or construction of new or parallel corridors in all shoreline jurisdictions.

(4) Conveyance utilities shall be placed underground or alongside or under bridges except where the presence of bedrock or other obstructions make such placement infeasible. Stormwater conveyance facilities may be open ditch where appropriate and beneficial to water quality. 

(5) New transmission and distribution facilities shall avoid shoreline setbacks and shoreline jurisdiction wherever possible. Otherwise, such facilities shall only cross areas of shoreline jurisdiction by the shortest, most direct route reasonable, unless such route would cause significant environmental damage.

(6) Utility developments shall be located and designed so as to avoid or minimize the need for current or future structural shoreline stabilization.

(7) All underwater pipelines transporting liquids intrinsically harmful to aquatic life or potentially injurious to water quality are prohibited, except in situations where no other reasonable alternative exists. In those limited instances when permitted, automatic shutoff valves shall be provided on both sides of the water body.

(8) Surface water management facilities, such as an energy dissipater and associated pipes, are allowed in the Lake Sammamish, Pine Lake, and Beaver Lake shoreline setbacks only if the applicant demonstrates, to the satisfaction of the department, that:

(a) No feasible alternative exists; and

(b) The functions of the lake and related VEA are not adversely affected or are appropriately mitigated.

(9) Clearing of vegetation for the installation or maintenance of utilities shall be minimized and disturbed areas shall be restored following project completion consistent with the requirements of City stormwater management regulations.

(10) Utility production and processing facilities, such as power plants and sewage treatment plants, or parts of those facilities that are non-water-oriented, shall not be allowed in shoreline areas, unless it can be demonstrated that no other feasible option is available.

(11) Accessory Utilities. For single-family residences accessory utilities include electrical, gas, water, cable, telephone, and public sewer connections to the primary utilities, and also installation of septic tank and drainfields. (Ord. O2019-493 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O2011-308 § 1 (Att. A))


25.07.120 Agricultural use regulations.

(1) New agricultural operations are not permitted within the shoreline jurisdiction; this applies to all three lakes.

(2)  Existing agricultural operations on all three lakes may be continued. Expansion or modification of existing agricultural operations or facilities may be permitted as a shoreline conditional use. (Ord. O2019-493 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O2011-308 § 1 (Att. A))


25.07.130 Private beach park use regulations.

(1) To manage private beach park uses along the Lake Sammamish shoreline, this SMP establishes standards for lots providing private recreational access and use, consistent with the definition of private beach park use included in Chapter 25.02 SMC. All new development under this use category shall require a conditional use permit in addition to a substantial development or exemption permit. 

(2) New private beach park development and associated structures shall be allowed with conditional use permit approval on the Lake Sammamish shoreline on private lots within the urban residential zone (all zoned R-4 per SMC Title 21A) in accordance with the following: 

(a) All structures shall be located to avoid the need for future shoreline stabilization.

(b) Except as reasonable to provide shoreline and/or dock access and to accommodate water-dependent recreation activities within the allowed active use area per SMC 25.06.020(10), all structures and impervious surfaces shall be located landward of the shoreline setback, or if applicable the reduced shoreline setback in accordance with this program. Proposed new water-dependent structures located waterward of the shoreline setback shall be limited to not more than 200 square feet in total coverage, shall not have a maximum height of more than 10 feet above existing average grade level, and shall be located outside of ecologically sensitive areas and associated buffers.

(c) Maximum combined overwater area allowed for private docks and floats accessory to private beach park uses shall be consistent with standards in SMC 25.07.050.

(d) Where any new private beach park development activity is proposed, including a new or expanded dock and/or float accessory to the private beach park use, the applicant shall be required to provide the following use plans consistent with the scale and intensity of the proposed use:

(i) Site access plan, ensuring that reasonable vehicular and/or pedestrian access is available that will accommodate the intensity of proposed private beach park use and not result in unreasonable negative impacts to adjacent public parks and trails or to adjacent private residential uses.

(ii) Site management plan, including identified approach for garbage and recycling disposal, and for meeting restroom facility needs.

(iii) Plan for establishment and maintenance of the required vegetation enhancement area consistent with SMC 25.06.020(10), including allowance for an active use area extending to the shoreline, that demonstrates no net loss of ecological function will occur with the proposed development and future private beach park use.

(e) As part of shoreline conditional use review, the director may require submittal of documentation to verify the proposed intensity of private beach park use is accurately characterized and may condition approvals as necessary to meet standards of this SMP and to ensure that the proposed development and use will result in no net loss of ecological functions.

(3) Existing private beach park uses in existence prior to the effective date of this program, as updated, shall be considered conforming. These lots shall be allowed to maintain existing conditions. However, any existing private beach park use shall not be allowed to further expand without demonstrating compliance with this section. (Ord. O2019-493 § 1 (Att. 1))


Chapter 25.08 PERMIT CRITERIA AND ADMINISTRATIVE STANDARDS

Sections:

25.08.010    Permits – General regulations.

25.08.020    Permits – Substantial development.

25.08.030    Permits – Exemptions from a substantial development permit.

25.08.040    Permits – Statements of exemption.

25.08.050    Permits – Shoreline variances.

25.08.060    Permits – Conditional use.

25.08.070    Administration – General standards.

25.08.080    Permit process – Land use decisions.

25.08.090    Permit process – Appeals.

25.08.100    Existing development.

25.08.110    Rules of director.

25.08.120    Enforcement, violations and penalties.

25.08.130    Initiation of development.

25.08.140    Permit revisions.


25.08.010 Permits – General regulations.

(1) To be authorized under this program, all uses and developments shall be planned and carried out in a manner that is consistent with SMC and this program regardless of whether a shoreline substantial development permit, statement of exemption, shoreline variance, or shoreline conditional use permit is required.

(2) The City shall not issue any permit for development within the shoreline jurisdiction until approval has been granted pursuant to this program. 

(3) When a development or use is proposed that does not comply with the bulk, dimensional and/or performance standards of this program, such development or use may only be authorized by approval of a state-issued shoreline variance even if the development or use does not require a substantial development permit (WAC 173-27-170).

(4)  A new use or development that is unlisted or listed as a conditional use pursuant to this program must obtain a conditional use permit even if the development or use does not require a substantial development permit.

(5) Issuance of a shoreline substantial development permit, shoreline variance or shoreline conditional use permit does not constitute approval pursuant to any other federal, state or City laws or regulations.

(6) The fee(s) that shall accompany an application for a shoreline development (including applications for shoreline substantial development permits, statements of exemption, shoreline variances, or shoreline conditional use permits) shall be determined by the City council.

(7) Those development activities codified in WAC 173-27-044 and 173-27-045 are not required to obtain a shoreline permit and do not require review by the City for compliance with this program. (Ord. O2019-493 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O2011-308 § 1 (Att. A))


25.08.020 Permits – Substantial development.

(1) Substantial development as defined by RCW 90.58.030 shall not be undertaken by any person on the shorelines of the state without first obtaining a substantial development permit from the director, unless the use or development is specifically identified as exempt from a substantial development permit per Chapter 90.58 RCW or by Chapter 173-27 WAC.

(2) The director may grant a substantial development permit only when the development proposed is consistent with the policies and procedures of Chapter 90.58 RCW, the provisions of Chapter 173-27 WAC, and this program. (Ord. O2019-493 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O2011-308 § 1 (Att. A))


25.08.030 Permits – Exemptions from a substantial development permit.

(1) Uses and developments that are not considered substantial developments pursuant to Chapter 90.58 RCW and Chapter 173-27 WAC shall not require a substantial development permit but shall conform to the policies and regulations of this program (WAC 173-27-040).

(2) If any part of a proposed development is not eligible for exemption as defined in Chapter 90.58 RCW and Chapter 173-27 WAC, then a substantial development permit is required for the entire proposed development project.

(3) Exemptions shall be construed narrowly. Only those developments that meet the precise terms of one or more of the listed exemptions may be granted exemptions from the substantial development permit process.

(4) The burden of proof that a development or use is exempt from a substantial development permit is on the applicant or property owner proposing the use or development action.

(5) The holder of a certification from the Governor pursuant to Chapter 80.50 RCW shall not be required to obtain a substantial development permit under this program. (Ord. O2019-493 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O2011-308 § 1 (Att. A))


25.08.040 Permits – Statements of exemption.

(1) The director shall have the authority to require a statement of exemption for any proposed development or use if she/he has cause to believe a substantial question exists as to qualifications of the specific use or development for the exemption or there is a likelihood of adverse impacts to shoreline ecological functions.

(2) No written statement of exemption is required for emergency development pursuant to WAC 173-14-040(1)(d). 

(3) In accordance with WAC 173-27-040, statements of exemptions may contain conditions and/or mitigating measures of approval to achieve consistency and compliance with the provisions of the program and Act. 

(4) A denial of an exemption shall be in writing and shall identify the reason(s) for the denial. In accordance with SMC 20.50.020(1)(a), the director’s decision to deny an exemption is not subject to administrative appeal. See SMC 25.08.090 for the formal appeal process.

(5) Whenever the exempt activity potentially requires a hydraulic project approval from the Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife (WDFW), a copy of the written statement of exemption shall be sent to the applicant/property owner and WDFW.

(6) Whenever the exempt activity also requires a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Section 10 permit under the Rivers and Harbors Act of 1899, or a Section 404 permit under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1972, a copy of the written statement of exemption shall be sent to the applicant/property owner and Department of Ecology pursuant to WAC 173-27-050. (Ord. O2019-493 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O2011-308 § 1 (Att. A))


25.08.050 Permits – Shoreline variances.

(1) The director is authorized to grant a shoreline variance from the performance standards of this program only when all of the criteria enumerated in WAC 173-27-170 are met.

(2) The purpose of a variance is to grant relief to specific bulk or dimensional requirements set forth in this program where there are extraordinary or unique circumstances relating to the property such that the strict implementation of this program would impose unnecessary hardships on the applicant/property owner or thwart the policies set forth in RCW 90.58.020.

(3) Variance permits should be granted in circumstances where denial of the permit would result in a thwarting of the policy enumerated in RCW 90.58.020. In all instances extraordinary circumstances shall be shown and the public interest shall suffer no substantial detrimental effect.

(4) The burden of proving that a proposed variance meets the criteria in WAC 173-27-170 shall be on the applicant. Absence of such proof shall be grounds for denial of the application.

(5) In the granting of all shoreline variances, consideration shall be given to the cumulative environmental impact of additional requests for like actions in the area. For example, if variances were granted to other developments in the area where similar circumstances exist, the total of the variances should also remain consistent with the policies of RCW 90.58.020 and should not produce significant adverse effects to the shoreline ecological functions or other users.

(6) A variance from City development code requirements shall not be construed to mean a shoreline variance from SMP use regulations and vice versa.

(7) Variances may not be used to permit a use or development that is specifically prohibited. (Ord. O2019-493 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O2011-308 § 1 (Att. A))


25.08.060 Permits – Conditional use.

(1) The director is authorized to issue shoreline conditional use permits only when all the criteria enumerated in WAC 173-27-160 are met.

(2) The burden of proving that a proposed shoreline conditional use meets the criteria in WAC 173-27-160 shall be on the applicant. Absence of such proof shall be grounds for denial of the application.

(3) The director is authorized to impose conditions and standards to enable a proposed shoreline conditional use to satisfy the conditional use criteria. (Ord. O2019-493 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O2011-308 § 1 (Att. A))


25.08.070 Administration – General standards.

Unless otherwise stated, this program shall be administered according to the standards and criteria in Chapter 90.58 RCW and Chapter 173-27 WAC. (Ord. O2019-493 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O2011-308 § 1 (Att. A))


25.08.080 Permit process – Land use decisions.

Shoreline substantial development permits, statements of exemption, shoreline variances and shoreline conditional use permits shall be subject to all of the applicable requirements of Chapter 20.05 SMC. (Ord. O2019-493 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O2011-308 § 1 (Att. A))


25.08.090 Permit process – Appeals.

(1) Appeals of the final decision of the City with regard to shoreline management shall be governed by the provisions of RCW 90.58.180.

(2) Appeals to the Shoreline Hearings Board of a decision on a shoreline substantial development permit, shoreline variance or shoreline conditional use permit may be filed by the applicant/property owner or any aggrieved party pursuant to RCW 90.58.180.

(3) Projects that require conditional use permits or variances shall be mailed by the City simultaneously to the Department of Ecology and the Office of the Attorney General with any substantial development permit for the project.

(4) The effective date of the City’s decision shall be the date of filing with the Department of Ecology as defined in RCW 90.58.140. The Department of Ecology will notify the City and the applicant/property owner of the date of filing by telephone or electronic means followed by written communication. (Ord. O2019-493 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O2011-308 § 1 (Att. A))


25.08.100 Existing development.

(1) Existing single-family homes, other structures, existing uses, and appurtenances that were legally established prior to the effective date of this SMP are considered to be conforming to the SMP. Additions, expansion or reconstruction must meet the provisions of the SMP. 

(a) Allowed Activities in Critical Areas. The following developments, activities and uses are allowed, provided such activities are otherwise consistent with this program and other applicable regulations. The director may apply conditions to an underlying permit or approval to ensure that the activities are consistent with the provisions of this chapter.

(i) Structural modification of, addition to or replacement of existing legally created structures, except single detached residences in existence before November 27, 1990, which do not meet the building setback or buffer requirements for wetlands, streams, ponds or landslide hazard areas if the modification, addition, replacement or related activity does not increase the existing footprint of the structure lying within the above-described building setback area, critical area or buffer.

(ii) Structural modification of, addition to or replacement of legally created single detached residences in existence before November 27, 1990, which do not meet the building setback or buffer requirements for wetlands, streams, ponds or landslide hazard areas if the modification, addition, replacement or related activity does not increase the existing total footprint of the residence and associated impervious surface lying within the above-described buffer or building setback area by more than 1,000 square feet over that existing before November 27, 1990, and no portion of the modification, addition or replacement is located closer to the critical area. Mitigation of impacts to critical areas or buffers disturbed is required and shall be evaluated to assure no net loss of ecological function. 

(iii) Maintenance or repair of structures that do not meet the development standards of this chapter for landslide or seismic hazard areas if the maintenance or repair does not increase the footprint of the structure and there is no increased risk to life or property as a result of the proposed maintenance or repair.

(iv) Conservation, Preservation, Restoration and/or Enhancement.

(A) Conservation and preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish and other wildlife that does not entail alteration of the location, size, dimensions or functions of an existing critical area or buffer; and

(B) Restoration and enhancement of critical areas or buffers; provided, that actions do not alter the location, dimensions or size of the critical area or buffer; that actions improve and do not reduce the existing quality or functions of the critical areas or buffers; and that actions are implemented according to a restoration or enhancement plan that has been approved by the City of Sammamish.

(C) Existing and ongoing agriculture and grazing of livestock is allowed subject to any limitations established by law, if the agriculture or grazing activity was in existence before November 27, 1990.

(b) Structures Not Meeting Current Regulations Other Than Critical Areas Requirements.

(i) Reconstruction, replacement, or expansion of the exterior footprint of an existing, legally established structure not meeting current regulations is allowed; provided, that the addition or reconstruction does not increase the noncompliance to current regulations.

(ii) Replacement may be allowed in a different location not meeting current regulations if a determination is made by the City that the new location results in less impact to shoreline functions than replacement in the existing footprint. 

(iii) Existing structures that were legally established but which are not meeting current regulations with regard to the setback, area, bulk, height or density standards established by this program may be maintained, reconstructed, or repaired; provided, that the maintenance/reconstruction/repair does not increase the extent of noncompliance with current regulations by encroaching upon or extending into the building setback area or shoreline setback or other area where new construction or use would not be allowed. 

(iv) If a structure not meeting current regulations is damaged by fire, explosion, or other casualty and/or natural disaster, it may be reconstructed to match the footprint that existed immediately prior to the time the damage occurred or in accordance with subsection (1)(b) of this section; provided, that all of the following criteria are met: 

(A) The owner(s) submit a complete application within 24 months of the date the damage occurred; and 

(B) All permits are issued within two years of initial submittal of the complete application, and the restoration is completed within two years of permit issuance. This period may be extended for one additional year by the director if the applicant has submitted the applications necessary to establish the use or activity and has provided written justification for the extension; and 

(C) If a structure not meeting current regulations is damaged by fire, explosion, or other casualty and/or natural disaster and these criteria are not met, the City may require the applicant to plant the vegetation enhancement area with native trees and shrubs in accordance with SMC 25.06.020. 

(v) A structure not meeting current regulations that is moved outside the existing footprint must be brought into conformance with this program and Chapter 90.58 RCW, except as allowed by subsection (1)(b) of this section. 

(vi) Allowances. The following developments, activities and uses are allowed, provided such activities are otherwise consistent with this program and other applicable regulations and law. The director may apply conditions to an underlying permit or approval to ensure that the activities are consistent with the provisions of the program. 

(A) Structural modification of, addition to or replacement of existing legally created structures, except single detached residences, in existence before the effective date of the program, which do not meet the current shoreline setback or building setback requirements if the modification, addition, replacement or related activity does not increase the existing footprint of the structure lying within the above-described shoreline setback or building setback area. 

(B) Structural modification of, or replacement of legally created single detached residences in existence before the effective date of the program, that do not meet the current shoreline setback or building setback, if: 

(1) The modification, addition, replacement or related activity does not increase the existing total footprint of the residence and associated impervious surface lying within the shoreline or building setback area more than 200 feet over that existing before the effective date of the program; and

(2) No portion of the modification, addition or replacement is located closer to the OHWM. This allowance may only be used once. 

(3) Mitigation proportional (1:1) to the setback area impacted is required through planting of the VEA in accordance with the standards of this program. 

(C) Structural modification of, or replacement of legally created single detached residences in existence before the effective date of the program, which do not meet the current shoreline setback or building setback, if:

(1) The footprint expansion extends landward (to the rear) from the existing structure footprint and maintains the same interior lot line setback distances up to the shoreline setback line (known as the “shadow” of the existing structure).

(2) Mitigation proportional (1:1) to the setback area impacted is required through planting of the VEA in accordance with the standards of this program. If the area impacted is over 500 square feet, the entire 15-foot VEA shall be vegetated with the exception of the allowed active use area. 

 (2) Nonconforming Lots. An undeveloped lot, tract, parcel, site, or division of land located landward of the OHWM that was legally established prior to the effective date of this program, but which does not conform to the present lot size standards, may be developed subject to conformance to other applicable requirements of this program.

(3) Nonconforming Uses.

(a) Uses that were legally established prior to the adoption or amendment of this program and are nonconforming with regard to the use regulations of this program may continue as legal nonconforming uses.

(b) An existing use designated as a conditional use that lawfully existed prior to the adoption or amendment of this program and which has not obtained a conditional use permit shall be considered a legal nonconforming use and may be continued subject to the provisions of this section without obtaining a conditional use permit.

(c)  If a nonconforming use is discontinued for 12 consecutive months or for 12 months during any two-year period, the nonconforming rights shall expire and any subsequent use shall be conforming unless in compliance with this program. (Ord. O2019-493 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O2011-308 § 1 (Att. A))


25.08.110 Rules of director.

The director is authorized to adopt administrative rules as are necessary and appropriate to implement this program. The director may prepare and require the use of such forms as are necessary to its administration. (Ord. O2019-493 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O2011-308 § 1 (Att. A))


25.08.120 Enforcement, violations and penalties.

The director is authorized to enforce the provisions of this program, including any rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, pursuant to the enforcement and penalty provisions of Chapter 173-27 WAC. (Ord. O2019-493 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O2011-308 § 1 (Att. A))


25.08.130 Initiation of development.

Development pursuant to a shoreline substantial development permit, shoreline variance, or shoreline conditional use shall not begin and shall not be authorized until 21 days after the date of filing or until all appeal proceedings before the Shoreline Hearings Board have terminated. (Ord. O2019-493 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O2011-308 § 1 (Att. A))


25.08.140 Permit revisions.

(1) A permit revision is required whenever the applicant/property owner proposes substantive changes to the design, terms or conditions of a use or development from those as approved in the existing and approved permit. Changes are substantive if they materially alter the project in a manner that relates to its conformance to the terms and conditions of the existing and approved permit, this program or the Act. Changes that are not substantive in effect do not require a permit revision.

(2) An application for a revision to a shoreline permit shall be submitted to the director. The application shall include detailed plans and text describing the proposed changes. The City shall review and process the request in accordance with the requirements of WAC 173-27-100. (Ord. O2019-493 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O2011-308 § 1 (Att. A))


Title 26 RESTRAINING ORDERS AND TOBACCO

Chapters:

26.05    Offenses


Chapter 26.05 OFFENSES*

Sections:

26.05.010    Domestic violence protection.

26.05.020    Tobacco – Giving/selling to minors.

*For penalty and other related provisions, see SMC 9.05.010 through 9.05.070.


26.05.010 Domestic violence protection.

The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

26.09.300    Restraining orders – Notice – Refusal to comply – Arrest – Penalty – Defense – Peace officers, immunity.

26.50.010    Definitions.

26.50.020    Commencement of action – Jurisdiction – Venue.

26.50.025    Orders under this chapter and Chapter 26.09, 26.10, or 26.26 RCW – Enforcement – Consolidation.

26.50.030    Petition for an order for protection – Availability of forms and informational brochures – Bond not required.

26.50.040    Fees not permitted – Filing, service of process, certified copies.

26.50.050    Hearing – Service – Time.

26.50.060    Relief – Duration – Realignment of designation of parties – Award of costs, service fees, and attorneys’ fees.

26.50.070    Ex parte temporary order for protection.

26.50.080    Issuance of order – Assistance of peace officer – Designation of appropriate law enforcement agency.

26.50.090    Order – Service – Fees.

26.50.100    Order – Transmittal to law enforcement agency – Record in law enforcement information system – Enforceability.

26.50.110    Violation of order – Penalties.

26.50.115    Enforcement of ex parte temporary order – Knowledge of order prerequisite to penalties – Reasonable efforts to serve copy of order.

26.50.120    Violation of order – Prosecuting attorney or attorney for municipality may be requested to assist – Cost and attorneys’ fees.

26.50.130    Order – Modification – Transmittal.

26.50.140    Peace officers – Immunity.

26.50.160    Judicial information system – Data base.

26.50.200    Title to real estate – Effect.

26.50.210    Proceedings additional.

26.50.900    Short title.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 25)


26.05.020 Tobacco – Giving/selling to minors.*

The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

26.28.080    Selling or giving tobacco to minor – Belief of representative capacity, no defense – Penalty.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 49)

*See also SMC 70.05.020, Tobaco – Possession/use by minors.


Title 27 (Reserved)            


Title 27A FINANCIAL GUARANTEES

Chapters:

27A.05    General

27A.10    Definitions

27A.15    Administration

27A.20    Requirements


Chapter 27A.05 GENERAL

Sections:

27A.05.010    Title established.

27A.05.020    Purpose.

27A.05.030    Provisions.

27A.05.040    Applicability.

27A.05.050    Rules.


27A.05.010 Title established. 

There is hereby created a title in the Sammamish Municipal Code (SMC) entitled “Financial Guarantees.” (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


27A.05.020 Purpose. 

The purpose of this title is to establish authority and procedures for accepting and enforcing financial guarantees, with the intent of assuring that development projects are completed and maintained in accordance with City approval conditions. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


27A.05.030 Provisions. 

This chapter sets forth provisions general to the administration of financial guarantees and includes applicability, default, financial guarantee conditions, financial guarantees form and amount, performance guarantee reductions, release of financial guarantees, scheduling of performance, maintenance and defects inspections, financial guarantee waivers, and status of current financial guarantees. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


27A.05.040 Applicability. 

The provisions of this title shall apply to permits and approvals granted pursuant to SMC Titles 14A, 15, 16, 19, or 21A (or successor titles). (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


27A.05.050 Rules.

The department is authorized to adopt, pursuant to Chapter 2.55 SMC, such rules as are deemed appropriate to implement this title. The department may prepare and require the use of such forms as are deemed appropriate for its administration. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


Chapter 27A.10 DEFINITIONS

Sections:

27A.10.010    Applicant.

27A.10.020    Default.

27A.10.030    Department.

27A.10.040    Director.

27A.10.050    Financial guarantee.

27A.10.060    Guarantor.


27A.10.010 Applicant.

“Applicant” means the person or entity who is required to post the financial guarantee. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


27A.10.020 Default. 

“Default” means the failure to: 

(1) Comply with financial guarantee conditions;

(2) Complete, in the specified time, the required improvements in accordance with this code and with approved project plans and conditions; or

(3) Maintain, for the specified period of time, the required improvements in accordance with this code and with approved project plans and conditions. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


27A.10.030 Department.

“Department” means the City of Sammamish department of community development or public works department, as appropriate. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


27A.10.040 Director. 

“Director” means the director of the department of community development or the director of the public works department, as appropriate. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


27A.10.050 Financial guarantee.

“Financial guarantee” means a form of financial security posted to ensure timely and proper completion of improvements, to ensure compliance with this code, and/or to warranty materials, workmanship of improvements, and design. Financial guarantees include assignments of funds, cash deposits, surety bonds, and/or other forms of financial security acceptable to the director. For the purposes of this title, the terms “performance guarantee,” “maintenance guarantee” and “defect guarantee” are considered subcategories of financial guarantee. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


27A.10.060 Guarantor. 

“Guarantor” means a bank or other acceptable entity that issues the financial guarantee. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


Chapter 27A.15 ADMINISTRATION

Sections:

27A.15.010    Financial guarantee conditions.

27A.15.020    Financial guarantees – Form and amount.

27A.15.030    Performance guarantee reductions.

27A.15.040    Release of financial guarantees.

27A.15.050    Scheduling of final performance, maintenance, and defect inspections.

27A.15.060    Financial guarantee waivers.

27A.15.070    Status of current financial guarantees.

27A.15.080    Performance guarantees authorized.

27A.15.090    Maintenance and defect guarantees authorized.

27A.15.100    Default.


27A.15.010 Financial guarantee conditions. 

(1) Every financial guarantee shall obligate the applicant to comply with all of the provisions of this code and complete all conditions required by the permit or approval within the time limit specified.

(2) The City may collect against the financial guarantee when work is not completed in a timely manner in accordance with conditions of the permit and/or approval granted pursuant to SMC Titles 14A, 15, 16, 19, or 21A (or their successors). It is in the director’s sole reasonable discretion to determine whether the permit or approval conditions have been satisfied in a timely manner, and to determine whether the performance guarantee shall be collected to remedy the violation. The director shall notify the applicant in writing of any such determination. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


27A.15.020 Financial guarantees – Form and amount.

Financial guarantees shall be in a form approved by the director, in consultation with the City attorney, the City engineer, and the finance director. The amounts of the financial guarantees shall be based on the schedules appropriate to the required work that are updated on a periodic and frequent basis to ensure that the amount fully captures likely costs. Financial guarantees shall also require a contingency in an amount to be determined by the director. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


27A.15.030 Performance guarantee reductions. 

The director may allow reductions in performance guarantee amounts in accordance with the City’s cost estimate of the work remaining to be completed; provided, such performance guarantee amount, including contingency, shall be at least $200,000 or 30 percent of the initial guarantee value, whichever is less. No more than one reduction will be allowed except at the director’s discretion: (1) two reductions may be allowed for phased subdivisions; and (2) financial guarantees for restoration and reclamation activities may be reduced as set forth in SMC 27A.20.030. The request for reduction shall be in writing, accompanied by a schedule for completion of remaining work. The director shall provide a written response within 20 days of receipt of the request. (Ord. O2004-137 § 1; Ord. O99-29 § 1)


27A.15.040 Release of financial guarantees. 

The department shall not release performance guarantees until all permit fees have been paid to date, maintenance guarantees and defect guarantees have been posted, if applicable, inspection of the development site has been performed, and the director has determined that the conditions and requirements of the permit/approval otherwise specified in the financial guarantee have been met and granted final construction approval if applicable. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


27A.15.050 Scheduling of final performance, maintenance, and defect inspections. 

The department shall be responsible for scheduling final performance, and maintenance and defects inspections. The department should schedule such inspections approximately 45 days prior to expiration of the performance or maintenance period. If necessary to determine completion of performance, additional inspections should also be made after the expiration of the performance period. Periodic inspections may also be made at the discretion of the director. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


27A.15.060 Financial guarantee waivers.

Consistent with Chapter 36.32 RCW, the City of Sammamish shall not require any state agency, unit of local government, or gas company, or electrical company (as those terms are defined in RCW 80.04.010) to secure the performance of a permit requirement with a financial guarantee as a condition of issuing a permit or approval for a building construction project. The director, however, may require such state agency or unit of local government, gas company, or electric company to sign an agreement to complete required improvements and protect the City’s rights and duty to remedy unsatisfactory performance. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


27A.15.070 Status of current financial guarantees.

All financial guarantees required by the department and posted by the applicant prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall continue to be in force until released by the director following satisfactory compliance with financial guarantee conditions. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


27A.15.080 Performance guarantees authorized. 

(1) The department is authorized to require all applicants constructing improvements pursuant to any permits and approvals granted pursuant to SMC Titles 14A, 15, 16, 19, or 21A (or their successors) to post performance guarantees with the director to guarantee completion of required improvements and compliance with this code. 

(2) If more than one such guarantee is required, the applicant may, with the permission of the director, and to the extent allowable by law, combine guarantees; provided, that at no time shall the guaranteed amount be less than the total amount that would have been required in the form of separate financial guarantees; and provided further, that such guarantee shall on its face clearly delineate those separate additional financial guarantees that it is intended in lieu of. 

(3) Unless otherwise specifically indicated in this code, performance guarantees shall require actual construction and installation of required improvements within two years after recording for final subdivision, two years after recording for short subdivision, one year after right-of-way permit issuance or six months after temporary building occupancy issued for a building permit. The time limit for performance guarantee compliance may be extended by six months at the director’s discretion, if circumstances beyond the control of the applicant warrant an extension. The request for an extension shall be in writing, accompanied by a schedule for completion of remaining work. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


27A.15.090 Maintenance and defect guarantees authorized.

(1) The department is authorized to require all applicants to post a maintenance guarantee and/or defect guarantee warranting the successful operation and maintenance of improvements, and guaranteeing the workmanship, materials, and design used in construction of improvements required by the conditions of any permits or approvals issued pursuant to SMC Titles 14A, 15, 16, 19, or 21A (or their successors) and assuring compliance with this code. 

(2) Unless otherwise specifically indicated in this code, all maintenance guarantees and defect guarantees shall guarantee successful operation, workmanship, materials, and design of required facilities for a period of two years following final inspection and approval of improvements.

(3) Inspections of facilities required pursuant to SMC Titles 14A, 15, 16, 19, or 21A (or their successors) should be scheduled by the department approximately 45 days prior to the end of the two-year maintenance and/or defect period. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


27A.15.100 Default.

(1) Determination of default shall be made by the department after an inspection has indicated that improvements need to be corrected or completed. In the event of failure to comply with any of the conditions and terms of the permits and/or approvals covered by this title, the director shall notify the applicant and guarantor in writing of the default. If satisfactory assurance is not received by the department within a time period determined by the director that conditions will be appropriately corrected, the department may: 

(a) Order the applicant to perform all necessary corrective work; and/or 

(b) Demand payment on the financial guarantee(s). Nothing in this title shall limit the ability of City of Sammamish to enforce or otherwise compel compliance with conditions of any City permit or approval in accordance with any enforcement provision set forth in SMC Title 23.

(2) The guarantor shall be responsible, up to the limits of the financial guarantee, for the payment of any and all necessary costs and expenses that have been or will be incurred or expended by the City in causing any and all such required work to be done. In the event that total costs associated with the required work exceed the guarantee amount, the applicant shall remain responsible to City of Sammamish for the payment of any remaining amount.

(3) In the event of default, the City of Sammamish may contract with a third party to complete work required pursuant to this title. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


Chapter 27A.20 REQUIREMENTS

Sections:

27A.20.010    General.

27A.20.020    Drainage improvements.

27A.20.030    Restoration and reclamation activities.

27A.20.040    Rights-of-way.

27A.20.050    Site development and restoration.

27A.20.060    Subdivisions.

27A.20.070    Landscaping.

27A.20.080    Sensitive areas.

27A.20.090    UBC Section 107.1 financial guarantees.

27A.20.100    Moved and temporary buildings.


27A.20.010 General. 

The following provisions set forth special financial guarantee requirements for certain improvements required pursuant to SMC Titles 14A, 15, 16, 19 or 21A (or their successors). (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


27A.20.020 Drainage improvements.

Financial guarantees for drainage improvements pursuant to SMC Title 15 shall be sufficient to cover the time and cost of any:

(1) Monitoring required by approved plans and conditions;

(2) Department review of monitoring results and reports; and

(3) Corrective work on or off the project site that is necessary to provide drainage control consistent with approved plans and conditions, stabilize and restore disturbed areas and remove sources of any hazard associated with work that is in progress but is not completed. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


27A.20.030 Restoration and reclamation activities. 

(1) Financial guarantees for restoration and reclamation activities required pursuant to SMC Titles 16 and 21A shall be sufficient to cover the cost of conformance with conditions of the permit, including corrective work necessary to provide drainage consistent with approved plans and conditions, to remove geologic hazards, and to protect water quality and the public health, safety, and welfare. The financial guarantee may be reduced proportionately for phased projects as work is complete and subsequent reclamation and/or restoration on each phase is completed. The request for reduction shall be in writing.

(2) Financial guarantees may be waived on: 

(a) Projects of less than 1,000 cubic yards;

(b) City of Sammamish projects; and

(c) Reclamation projects with financial guarantees posted with the State of Washington Department of Natural Resources.

(3) A cash guarantee shall accompany the operating permit and may be used after proper notice at the discretion of the director to correct deficiencies affecting public health, safety, and welfare, including effects on water quality. The amount of the cash guarantee shall be determined by the director, and shall be maintained at the full value established by the director at all times during the life of the permit. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


27A.20.040 Rights-of-way.

Financial guarantees for any right-of-way improvement required pursuant to SMC Title 14A shall be sufficient to cover the cost of restoring the right-of-way to original condition or complying with conditions of any permit or approval, including corrective work necessary to provide drainage consistent with approved plans and conditions, and to protect the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. O2018-466 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O99-29 § 1)


27A.20.050 Site development and restoration. 

(1) Financial guarantees for any improvement required pursuant to SMC Titles 16, 19, or 21A (or their successors) shall be sufficient to cover the cost of complying with conditions of the permit or approval, including corrective work necessary to provide drainage consistent with approved plans and conditions, to remove geologic hazards, and to protect water quality and the public health, safety, and welfare. Such financial guarantees shall include site restoration and stabilization requirements.

(2) No temporary certificate of occupancy shall be issued until:

(a) Drainage facility improvements are functional;

(b) Required parking is provided; and

(c) Safe access is provided.

(3) The director may allow a performance guarantee to be posted for some or all of the improvements required by subsection (2) of this section if no life safety hazard exists. The request shall be made in writing, accompanied by a schedule for completion of required improvements. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


27A.20.060 Subdivisions.

Pursuant to RCW 58.17.130, an applicant may request recording of a subdivision prior to the completion of the construction of required improvements subject to the posting of a performance financial guarantee. Performance guarantees for subdivisions that record prior to completing all improvements shall be subject to the following requirements:

(1) A performance guarantee shall be posted with the department in an amount equal to the director’s estimate for such improvements as assurance that the applicant will, within two years from the date of recording of the final subdivision, complete the improvements in accordance with the requirements and to the satisfaction of the development engineer (as defined in SMC Title 19 or its successor).

(2) Requests for performance guarantees shall be in writing, shall be correlated with the original terms and conditions of preliminary approval, and shall be accompanied by a detailed schedule for completion of the improvements and conditions.

(3) Performance guarantees for improvements required pursuant to SMC Title 19 (or its successor) shall be sufficient to cover the cost of conformance with conditions of the preliminary approval and approved construction plans, including corrective work necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.

(4) Maintenance guarantees and defect guarantee shall be posted with the director:

(a) Prior to final construction approval and recording of the final plat when the applicant has constructed improvements in accordance with the approval of the director and the development engineer; or

(b) Prior to final construction approval and the release of performance guarantees when the applicant has previously recorded the plat.

(5) Maintenance guarantees and defect guarantees shall be released following a final maintenance and defect inspection and, if applicable, acceptance of the facilities for City maintenance. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


27A.20.070 Landscaping.

(1) Prior to receiving a temporary or permanent occupancy certificate for any building or structure for which SMC Title 21A requires landscaping, an applicant shall provide the required performance guarantee to secure the completion and improvement of required landscaping, in accordance with approved site plan, within three months following issuance of the building or buildings temporary or permanent occupancy certificate, whichever comes first. 

(2) Performance guarantees for landscaping required pursuant to Chapter 21A.35 SMC shall be sufficient to cover the cost of conformance with conditions of the permit, and shall be required for a period of two years after the planting or transplanting of vegetation to insure proper installation, establishment and maintenance. This time period may be extended by one year by the director, if necessary to cover a planting and growing season.

(3) The director may extend the time limit for compliance with the above landscaping requirement up to one year after issuance of the occupancy certificate if circumstances beyond the control of the applicant warrant an extension. The request for an extension shall be in writing, accompanied by a schedule for completion of remaining work. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


27A.20.080 Sensitive areas.

(1) Financial guarantees for mitigation required pursuant to Chapter 21A.50 SMC shall be sufficient to guarantee that all required mitigation measures will be completed no later than the time established by the City in accordance with Chapter 21A.50 SMC.

(2) Performance and maintenance guarantees shall also be required for restoration, of a sensitive area or buffer not performed as part of a mitigation or maintenance plan except that no financial guarantee shall be required for minor stream restoration carried out pursuant to Chapter 21A.50 SMC.

(3) For maintenance guarantees associated with mitigation, corrective work, restoration or enhancement, the financial guarantee shall be sufficient to cover the time and cost to guarantee satisfactory workmanship, materials, and performance of structures and improvements required by Chapter 21A.50 SMC and any monitoring of those structures and improvements required by approved plans and conditions. 

(4) Public development proposals shall be relieved from having to comply with the provisions of this section if public funds have previously been committed for mitigation, maintenance, monitoring, or restoration. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


27A.20.090 UBC Section 107.1 financial guarantees. 

Financial guarantees required pursuant to Section 107.1 of the current Uniform Building Code shall be in the form of cash deposited with the director, assignment of funds approved by the director, or in an irrevocable escrow in an amount sufficient to restore the building and site, and to perform corrective work required by SMC Title 16. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


27A.20.100 Moved and temporary buildings.

Financial guarantees required with respect to moved or temporary buildings pursuant to Section 31.03 of the current Uniform Building Code shall be in the form of cash deposited with the director, assignment of funds approved by the director, or in an approved irrevocable escrow in a sufficient amount to be determined by the director. (Ord. O99-29 § 1)


Title 28 TRANSIT OFFENSES

Chapters:

28.05    Miscellaneous Crimes


Chapter 28.05 MISCELLANEOUS CRIMES*

Sections:

28.05.010    Miscellaneous crimes.

*For penalty and other related provisions, see SMC 9.05.010 through 9.05.070.


28.05.010 Miscellaneous crimes.

The following provisions of the King County Code as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

KCC

28.96.010    Civil infractions – Misdemeanors.

28.96.020    General (Public Communications Activities).

28.96.030    Transit vehicles and tunnel platform areas.

28.96.410    General (Enforcement).

28.96.420    Immediate expulsion.

28.96.430    Suspension of use privileges.

28.96.440    Infractions – Penalty.

28.96.450    Misdemeanors – Penalty.

(Ord. O2000-64 § 1; Ord. O2000-52 § 39(2))


Title 46 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC

Chapters:

46.05    Model Traffic Ordinance

46.10    Speed Limits

46.12    Engine Compression Brakes

46.15    Vehicle Weight Limits

46.20    Motorized Foot Scooters and Other Vehicles

46.30    Stopping, Standing and Parking

46.40    Traffic Offenses


Chapter 46.05 MODEL TRAFFIC ORDINANCE

Sections:

46.05.010    Adopted by reference.

46.05.020    Sections adopted.

46.05.030    Sections not adopted.

46.05.040    Traffic engineer.


46.05.010 Adopted by reference.

The “Washington Model Traffic Ordinance,” Chapter 308-330 WAC, except as specifically excluded, is hereby adopted by reference as the traffic ordinance of the City of Sammamish as if set forth in full. (Ord. O2000-52 § 38(1))


46.05.020 Sections adopted.

The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington, and all future amendments thereto, are adopted by reference:

RCW

46.20.355    Alcohol violator – Probationary license.

46.90.005    Purpose.

46.90.010    Adoption of model traffic ordinance – Amendments.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 38(2))


46.05.030 Sections not adopted.

The following sections of the Washington Model Traffic Ordinance are not adopted by reference and are expressly deleted:

WAC

308-330-250    Police department to administer bicycle license.

308-330-275    Traffic safety commission – Powers and duties.

308-330-500    Bicycle license required.

308-330-505    Bicycle license application.

308-330-510    Issuance of bicycle license.

308-330-515    Attachment of bicycle license plate or decal.

308-330-520    Inspection of bicycles.

308-330-525    Renewal of bicycle license.

308-330-530    Bicycle transfer of ownership.

308-330-535    Bicycle rental agencies.

308-330-540    Bicycle dealers.

308-330-560    Bicycle – Penalties.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 38(3))


46.05.040 Traffic engineer.

The city manager is hereby authorized to appoint an individual or firm to serve as City traffic engineer under authority of WAC 308-330-260. (Ord. O2002-103 § 1; Ord. O2000-52 § 38(4))


Chapter 46.10 SPEED LIMITS

Sections:

46.10.010    State speed laws applicable – Exceptions.

46.10.020    Increasing state speed limit.

46.10.030    Decreasing state speed limit.

46.10.040    Former speed limits retained.


46.10.010 State speed laws applicable – Exceptions.

The state traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles at 25 miles per hour shall be applicable upon all streets within the City, except that the legislative authority of the City, as authorized by state law, may declare and determine by order, rule, or regulation, properly adopted, that certain increased or decreased speed regulations shall be applicable upon specified streets or in certain areas, in which event it is unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle at a speed in excess of the speed so established when proper signs are in place giving notice thereof. (Ord. O99-22 § 1)


46.10.020 Increasing state speed limit.

Whenever conditions are found to exist upon an arterial street or highway that warrant an increase in the speed permitted by state law, the legislative authority of this City, subject to the approval of the State Highway Commission in cases involving state highways, shall determine and declare a reasonable and safe maximum speed limit for such arterial street or highway, or portion thereof, not to exceed 55 miles per hour. (Ord. O99-22 § 2)


46.10.030 Decreasing state speed limit.

Whenever it is deemed inadvisable for vehicles to operate at the maximum speed allowed by state law at 25 miles per hour on any portion of a street or public highway on account of a sharp curvation, highway construction or repairs, excessive traffic, any dangerous condition, or other temporary or permanent cause, the legislative authority of the City, subject to the approval of the State Highway Commission in cases involving state highways, shall determine and fix a lower maximum speed or otherwise regulate a lesser speed; provided, that in no case shall the maximum speed be reduced to less than 20 miles per hour. (Ord. O99-22 § 3)


46.10.040 Former speed limits retained.

The maximum speed limits for certain streets established by King County pursuant to KCC 46.04.040, 46.04.050, and as otherwise established by King County ordinances and for which speed limit signs have been duly posted by King County are hereby adopted as the speed limits on those said streets in the City of Sammamish, unless the City manager, or designee of the City council, shall establish otherwise pursuant to this chapter or other law. (Ord. O99-22 § 4)


Chapter 46.12 ENGINE COMPRESSION BRAKES

Sections:

46.12.010    Definitions.

46.12.020    Prohibition – Exception.

46.12.030    Violation – Penalty.

46.12.040    Posting of signs.


46.12.010 Definitions.

“Unmuffled engine compression brake” means a motor vehicle brake which is activated or worked by the compression of the engine of a motor vehicle, and which is not effectively muffled to prevent excessive noise. (Ord. O2004-164 § 1)


46.12.020 Prohibition – Exception.

The application of unmuffled engine compression brakes in the City of Sammamish is prohibited, except when necessary for the protection of persons and/or property which cannot be avoided by application of an alternative braking system. Noise caused by the application of engine compression brakes which is effectively muffled or if the application is necessary for the health, safety, and welfare of the City is exempt from the provisions of this chapter. Sounds created by emergency equipment for emergency work are also exempt. (Ord. O2004-164 § 1)


46.12.030 Violation – Penalty.

Violation of this chapter shall constitute a traffic infraction, and shall be punished by a penalty of $250.00 per violation. (Ord. O2004-164 § 1)


46.12.040 Posting of signs. 

The City engineer shall post, at reasonable locations upon the boundaries of the City, signs indicating “Unmuffled Compression Brakes Prohibited,” or substantially similar wording. The City engineer shall have authority to post signs pursuant to this chapter on roads within the City limits in response to reasonable requests from the community or the City council. (Ord. O2004-164 § 1)


Chapter 46.15 VEHICLE WEIGHT LIMITS

Sections:

46.15.010    Weight limit established.

46.15.020    Exceptions to weight limit.

46.15.030    Penalty.


46.15.010 Weight limit established.

A gross vehicle weight limit of 30,000 pounds (15 tons) is hereby established for 212th Way SE from the intersection with East Lake Sammamish Parkway SE to the intersection with SE 35th Way. (Ord. O2003-119 § 1)


46.15.020 Exceptions to weight limit.

The following vehicles are exempt from the weight limit established by SMC 46.15.010 while traveling eastbound on 212th Way SE: school buses, municipal vehicles, and trucks making local deliveries to locations which are accessed from that portion of 212th Way SE between the intersection with East Lake Sammamish Parkway SE and SE 35th Way. Emergency vehicles are exempt from the weight limit established by SMC 46.15.010 while traveling either eastbound or westbound on 212th Way SE. (Ord. O2003-119 § 2)


46.15.030 Penalty.

Any operator or owner of a motor vehicle causing or allowing a motor vehicle to violate the weight limit established in SMC 46.15.010 shall be subject to the penalties set forth in RCW 46.44.105, which was adopted by reference in Chapter 46.05 SMC as part of the Model Traffic Ordinance. (Ord. O2003-119 § 3)


Chapter 46.20 MOTORIZED FOOT SCOOTERS AND OTHER VEHICLES

Sections:

46.20.010    Definition.

46.20.020    Duty to obey traffic control devices and rules of the road.

46.20.030    Unsafe use prohibited.

46.20.040    Prohibited areas.

46.20.050    Minimum age requirements.

46.20.060    Helmets required.

46.20.070    Lights required.

46.20.080    Noise restriction.

46.20.090    Parental responsibility.

46.20.100    Adoption by reference of Title 9 of the King County Health Code.

46.20.110    Penalties.


46.20.010 Definition. 

(1) “Motorized foot scooter” means a device with no more than two 10-inch or smaller diameter wheels that has handlebars, is designed to be stood or sat upon by the operator, and is powered by an internal combustion engine or electric motor that is capable of propelling the device with or without human propulsion, such as scooters or pocket bikes.

(2) For purposes of this chapter, a motor-driven cycle, a moped, and an electric-assisted bicycle, a motorcycle, a power wheelchair, or an electric personal assistive mobility device.

(3) Motorized wheelchairs being utilized by persons with temporary or permanent disabilities are specifically excluded from this chapter. (Ord. O2005-167 § 1)


46.20.020 Duty to obey traffic control devices and rules of the road.

(1) Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person operating a motorized foot scooter, a motorized vehicle not requiring a license to operate, or a vehicle powered by an electric motor requiring a license to operate (hereafter referred to as “vehicle” or “vehicles”), shall obey all rules of the road applicable to automobiles, bicycles, or pedestrians, as well as the instructions of official traffic control signals, signs and other control devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.

(2) It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on a public roadway other than as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or the right edge of the roadway, as is safe, except while preparing to make or while making a turning movement. (Ord. O2005-167 § 1)


46.20.030 Unsafe use prohibited.

Vehicles shall not be ridden in a negligent or unsafe manner, but shall be operated with reasonable regard for the safety of the operator and other persons, and in a manner to avoid damage to real or personal property. For purposes of this section, to operate “in a negligent or unsafe manner” means operation of a vehicle in such manner as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property. (Ord. O2005-167 § 1)


46.20.040 Prohibited areas.

(1) Motorized foot scooters powered by an internal combustion engine are prohibited from being operated:

(a) On sidewalks within the City limits;

(b) In City parks;

(c) On multiple use trails including bicycle paths, bikeways, equestrian trails, hiking trails and recreation trails, except where such trails are specifically marked stating that such use is permitted; and

(d) On any City street with a posted maximum speed limit greater than 25 miles per hour.

(2) Motorized foot scooters powered by an electric motor are prohibited from being operated:

(a) In City parks;

(b) On multiple use trails including bicycle paths, bikeways, equestrian trails, hiking trails and recreation trails, except where such trails are specifically marked stating that such use is permitted; and

(c) On any City street with a posted maximum speed limit greater than 25 miles per hour. (Ord. O2005-167 § 1)


46.20.050 Minimum age requirements.

No vehicle shall be operated on public property unless the operator is at least 12 years of age. (Ord. O2005-167 § 1)


46.20.060 Helmets required.

Any person operating a vehicle, and any person riding as a passenger on such vehicle, upon any public area in the City of Sammamish, shall wear an approved helmet designed for safety that meets or exceeds the requirements of Standard Z-90.4 set by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or the Snell Foundation, or a subsequent nationally recognized standard for helmet performance as the City may adopt. The helmet shall be worn over the head and equipped with either a neck or chinstrap that shall be fastened securely while such vehicle is in motion. (Ord. O2005-167 § 1)


46.20.070 Lights required.

Every vehicle in use at any time from a half-hour after sunset to a half-hour before sunrise and at any other time when, due to insufficient light or unfavorable atmospheric conditions, persons and vehicles on the highway are not clearly discernible at a distance of 500 feet ahead shall be equipped with and operate: (1) a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front; and (2) a red reflector on the rear, of a type approved by the State Patrol, which shall be visible from all distances up to 500 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful lower beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector. A light-emitting diode flashing taillight visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may also be used in addition to the red reflector. (Ord. O2005-167 § 1)


46.20.080 Noise restriction.

Operation of motorized foot scooters is subject to the provisions Chapter 8.15 SMC, Public Disturbance Noise. (Ord. O2005-167 § 1)


46.20.090 Parental responsibility.

A parent who has custody of any child under the age of 18 years and the guardian of any ward under the age of 18 years shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this section. (Ord. O2005-167 § 1)


46.20.100 Adoption by reference of Title 9 of the King County Health Code.

Title 9 of the King County Health Code, entitled “Bicycle Helmets,” is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein. (Ord. O2005-167 § 1)


46.20.110 Penalties. 

(1) Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a civil infraction with a penalty of $50.00 for each violation. The disposition of an infraction issued under this chapter shall follow the procedures adopted under WAC 308-330-700 and the applicable sections of Chapter 46.63 RCW.

(2) When a violation of any provision of this chapter by a child under the age of 16 years occurs, the City may impound the vehicle if, in the discretion of the officer, there is not a parent who has custody of the child or guardian of the child available to whom the vehicle can be released and taking custody of the vehicle is: (a) reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter; or (b) reasonably necessary to protect persons or property. Thereafter, the vehicle shall be released to the parent or guardian upon written request. (Ord. O2005-167 § 1)


Chapter 46.30 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING

Sections:

46.30.010    Short title.

46.30.020    Definitions.

46.30.030    Purpose.

46.30.040    Regulations not exclusive.

46.30.050    Parking an unlicensed vehicle.

46.30.060    Seventy-two-hour parking limit.

46.30.070    Prohibited parking places.

46.30.080    Parking next to mail boxes.

46.30.085    Enhanced penalties for civil parking infractions.

46.30.090    Miscellaneous crimes.


46.30.010 Short title.

This chapter may be known and cited as the parking ordinance. (Ord. O2017-451 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2012-323 § 1)


46.30.020 Definitions.

(1) The definitions of words and phrases contained in Chapter 46.04 RCW, for the purpose of this chapter, have the same meanings ascribed to the words and phrases therein.

(2) The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, unless where used the context thereof clearly indicates to the contrary:

(a) “Bicycle lane” means the portion of the travel way for the movement of bicycles either designated by pavement markings or signage.

(b) “Street” means and includes streets, avenues, ways, boulevards, drives, highways and all places, except alleys, open to the public for the use of vehicles.

(c) “Collective mail box” means five or more individual mail boxes grouped together in one single location for mail delivery. (Ord. O2017-451 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2012-323 § 1)


46.30.030 Purpose.

The provisions of this chapter prohibiting the standing or parking of vehicles shall apply at all times or at those times specified in this chapter or as indicated on official signs except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer, traffic control flagger, or official traffic control device. (Ord. O2017-451 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2012-323 § 1)


46.30.040 Regulations not exclusive.

The provisions of this chapter imposing parking restrictions shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. (Ord. O2017-451 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2012-323 § 1)


46.30.050 Parking an unlicensed vehicle.

(1) It is a civil infraction to stop, stand or park a vehicle on a street, highway or public property within the City limits of the City unless such vehicle possesses a proper and current vehicle license plate or plates, and such plate or plates are properly mounted thereon in accordance with the State of Washington Department of Licensing rules and regulations.

(2) It is a civil infraction to stop, stand or park a vehicle on a street, highway or public property within the City limits of the City without current, properly displayed month and year license tabs. (Ord. O2017-451 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2015-386 § 1; Ord. O2012-323 § 1)


46.30.060 Seventy-two-hour parking limit.

No person having charge of any vehicle shall permit such vehicle to stand or to be parked in any street in the City for more than 72 hours consecutively. Violation of this section is a civil infraction. (Ord. O2017-451 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2015-386 § 2; Ord. O2012-323 § 1)


46.30.070 Prohibited parking places.

(1) RCW 46.61.570 (Stopping, standing, or parking prohibited in specified places – Reserving portion of highway prohibited) and 46.61.575 (Additional parking regulations), as currently adopted and hereinafter amended, are hereby adopted by reference.

(2) No person shall stop, park, or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the travel portion of any street or upon a marked bicycle lane. The travel portion of any street, for the purposes of this section, shall include any street median, center, merge or turn lane. 

(a) This subsection (2) does not apply to:

(i) The driver of any vehicle which is disabled in such a manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving the vehicle in such a position. The driver shall nonetheless arrange for the prompt removal of the vehicle. 

(ii) The driver of any vehicle that is following the direction of a police officer, traffic control flagger, traffic control sign, traffic control signal, or other official traffic control device. 

(iii) The driver of a public transit vehicle who temporarily stops the vehicle upon the street for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers at a marked transit vehicle stop zone, or to the driver of a vehicle when actually engaged in the collection of solid waste, recyclables, or yard waste under authority of the City, so long as the vehicle is not parked or left for a longer time than reasonably necessary. 

(iv) The driver of a City-owned or approved vehicle or public utility vehicle that is being used to provide a service for the public. 

(v) The driver of an emergency vehicle.

(3) Violation of this section is a civil infraction. The fine for a violation of this section is $71.00. (Ord. O2017-451 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2015-386 § 3; Ord. O2012-323 § 1)


46.30.080 Parking next to mail boxes.

No person shall park directly adjacent to a curbside next to any clearly visible residential mail box between 10:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on any day of scheduled mail delivery by the United States Postal Service.

No owner, driver or other person having charge of any vehicle shall permit such vehicle to be parked within five feet on either side of any clearly visible collective mail box.

Unless otherwise set out in applicable law or court rule, any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an infraction. (Ord. O2017-451 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2012-323 § 1)


46.30.085 Enhanced penalties for civil parking infractions.

Failure to timely respond to a notice of civil infraction for any parking violation within 15 days of receipt of the notice of civil infraction shall result in (1) an additional fine of $25.00 for each separate parking infraction cited on the notice of civil infraction, and (2) the loss of the right to a hearing on the underlying parking infraction or infractions. (Ord. O2017-451 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2015-386 § 4)


46.30.090 Miscellaneous crimes.

The following provisions of the King County Code as presently constituted or hereafter amended are adopted by reference:

KCC

17.04.420(J)    Violation – Civil infraction.

17.04.420(K)    Violation – Civil penalty.

17.04.420(L)    Impoundment.

Except that KCC 17.04.420(J) is amended to read as follows:

J. Violation – Civil infraction. Any person who fails to mark or maintain the marking of a designated fire lane as prescribed in this chapter, or who parks a vehicle in, allows the parking of a vehicle in, obstructs, or allows the obstruction of a designated fire lane commits a civil infraction to which the provisions of Chapter 7.80 RCW shall apply. The penalty for failing to mark or maintain the marking of a designated fire lane shall be one hundred fifty dollars per day. The penalty for parking a vehicle in, allowing the parking of a vehicle in, obstructing, or allowing the obstruction of a designated fire lane shall be two hundred fifty dollars.

(Ord. O2017-451 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O2012-323 § 1)


Chapter 46.40 TRAFFIC OFFENSES

Sections:

46.40.010    Avoidance of intersection.

46.40.020    Inattentive driving.


46.40.010 Avoidance of intersection.

It is unlawful for any person operating a motor vehicle on City streets or highways to make a left- or right-hand turn upon approaching or leaving an intersection and to proceed across any private property for the purpose of avoiding the intersection, or any traffic control device controlling the intersection, unless so directed by lawful authority. Unless otherwise set out in applicable law or court rule, any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an infraction. (Ord. O2012-323 § 2)


46.40.020 Inattentive driving.

It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle within the City in an inattentive manner. For the purposes of this section, “inattentive manner” means the operation of a motor vehicle in a manner that evidences a lack of degree of attentiveness required to safely operate the vehicle under the prevailing conditions, including but not limited to the nature and condition of the roadway, presence of other traffic, presence of pedestrians, and weather conditions. The offense of operating a motor vehicle in an inattentive manner shall be considered to be a lesser offense than, but included in, the offense of operating a motor vehicle in a negligent manner. Unless otherwise set out in applicable law or court rule, any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an infraction. The penalty for any violation of this section shall be a fine as set forth under the Infraction Rules for Courts of Limited Jurisdiction (IRLJ) Rule 6.2. (Ord. O2012-323 § 2)

 


Title 66 ALCOHOL

Chapters:

66.05    Alcoholic Beverage Control


Chapter 66.05 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL*

Sections:

66.05.010    Alcoholic beverage control.

*For penalty and other related provisions, see SMC 9.05.010 through 9.05.070.


66.05.010 Alcoholic beverage control.

The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

66.04.010    Definitions.

66.20.160    “Card of identification,” “licensee,” “store employee” defined for certain purposes.

66.20.170    Card of identification may be accepted as identification card and evidence of legal age.

66.20.180    Card of identification to be presented on request of licensee.

66.20.200    Unlawful acts relating to card of identification and certification card – Penalties.

66.28.090    Licensed premises or banquet permit premises open to inspection – Failure to allow, violation.

66.32    Search and Seizure; entire chapter.

66.44    Enforcement – Penalties; entire chapter.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 14)


Title 69 DRUGS

Chapters:

69.05    Controlled Substances


Chapter 69.05 CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES*

Sections:

69.05.010    Controlled substances.

*For penalty and other related provisions, see SMC 9.05.010 through 9.05.070.


69.05.010 Controlled substances.

The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

69.50.101    Definitions.

69.50.102    Drug paraphernalia – Definitions.

69.50.204

(c)(14)    Schedule I – Marihuana or marijuana.

69.50.309    Containers.

69.50.401(e)    Prohibited acts: A-penalties.

69.50.408    Second or subsequent offenses.

69.50.412    Prohibited acts: E-penalties.

69.50.420    Violations – Juvenile driving privileges.

69.50.425    Misdemeanor violations – Minimum imprisonment.

69.50.505    Seizure and forfeiture.

69.50.506    Burden of proof; liabilities.

69.50.509    Search and seizure of controlled substances.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 19)


Title 70 MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES

Chapters:

70.05    Miscellaneous Offenses


Chapter 70.05 MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES*

Sections:

70.05.010    Littering and pollution.

70.05.020    Tobacco – Possession/use by minors.

*For penalty and other related provisions, see SMC 9.05.010 through 9.05.070.


70.05.010 Littering and pollution.

The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

70.54.010    Polluting water supply – Penalty.

70.93.060    Littering prohibited – Penalties.

70.160.020    Definitions.

70.160.030    Smoking in public places except designated smoking areas prohibited.

70.160.040    Designation of smoking areas in public places – Exceptions – Restaurant smoking areas – Entire facility or area may be designated as nonsmoking.

70.160.050    Owners, lessees to post signs prohibiting or permitting smoking – Boundaries to be clearly designated.

70.160.060    Intent of chapter as applied to certain private workplaces.

70.160.070    Intentional violation of chapter – Removing, defacing, or destroying required sign – Fine – Notice of infraction – Exceptions – Violations of RCW 70.160.040 or 70.160.050 – Subsequent violations – Fine – Enforcement by fire officials.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 37(1))


70.05.020 Tobacco – Possession/use by minors.*

The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

70.155.080    Purchasing, possessing, or obtaining tobacco by persons under the age of eighteen – Civil infraction – Courts of jurisdiction.

(Ord. O2000-52 § 49)

*See also SMC 26.05.020, Tabocco–Giving/selling to minors.



-----------------------------

The Sammamish Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 02020-508, passed July 28, 2020.

Disclaimer: The City Clerk's Office has the official version of the Sammamish Municipal Code. Users should contact the City Clerk's Office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited above.

City Website: https://www.sammamish.us/ City Telephone: (425) 295-0500

Code Publishing Company 