Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 1.01 Code
    1.01.010     Adoption of Code
    1.01.015     Purpose and Policy Declared
    1.01.020     Copies as Proof of Ordinances
    1.01.030     Adoption of New Material
    1.01.040     Title and Citation of Code
    1.01.050     Purpose of Catchlines
    1.01.060     Continuation of Ordinances
    1.01.070     Reference Applies to Amendments
    1.01.080     Penalties for Violations
Chapter 1.06 City Classification
    1.06.010     Noncharter Code City
Chapter 1.12 Election of Councilmembers
    1.12.010     Candidate Eligibility
    1.12.020     Number of Positions and Term of Office
    1.12.030     Schedule of Positions
Chapter 1.14 Code Enforcement
    1.14.010     Purpose
    1.14.020     Definitions
    1.14.030     Violation Unlawful – Each Day is Separate Violation – Misdemeanor
    1.14.040     Joint and Several Responsibility and Liability
    1.14.050     Interference with Code Enforcement Unlawful – Misdemeanor
    1.14.060     Methods of Service
    1.14.070     Voluntary Correction – Correction Notice
    1.14.080     Notice of Violation
    1.14.090     Stop Work Order – Violation a Misdemeanor
    1.14.100     Stop Use Order – Violation a Misdemeanor
    1.14.110     Removal of Stop Work or Stop Use Order – Misdemeanor
    1.14.120     Response to Notice of Violation
    1.14.130     Failure to Respond
    1.14.140     Scheduling of Hearing to Contest or Mitigate – Correction Prior to Hearing
    1.14.150     Contested Hearing – Procedure
    1.14.160     Contested Hearing – Decision of the Hearing Examiner
    1.14.170     Mitigation Hearing – Procedure
    1.14.180     Mitigation Hearing – Decision of the Hearing Examiner
    1.14.190     Failure to Appear – Default Order
    1.14.200     Monetary Penalty
    1.14.210     Appeal
    1.14.220     Repeat Violation or Failure to Abate – Misdemeanor
    1.14.230     Abatement
    1.14.240     Collection of Penalties and Costs
    1.14.250     Additional Enforcement Procedures
    1.14.260     Conflicting Code Provisions
    1.14.270     Duty not Creating Liability
    1.14.280     Right of Entry

Chapter 1.01 CODE

Sections:
1.01.010     Adoption of Code
1.01.015     Purpose and Policy Declared
1.01.020     Copies as Proof of Ordinances
1.01.030     Adoption of New Material
1.01.040     Title and Citation of Code
1.01.050     Purpose of Catchlines
1.01.060     Continuation of Ordinances
1.01.070     Reference Applies to Amendments
1.01.080     Penalties for Violations

1.01.010 Adoption of Code.
The codification of the ordinances of the City of Snohomish of a general, public, or permanent nature as contained and set forth in a printed copy thereof on file in the office of the City Clerk entitled "Snohomish Municipal Code," is adopted as the official code of the City of Snohomish, as provided by RCW 35.21.500 through 35.21.570. (Ord. 962, 1964)

1.01.015 Purpose and Policy Declared.
All regulatory legislation contained in the Snohomish Municipal Code is enacted as an exercise of the police power of the City to provide for, promote, protect, and preserve the public peace, health, safety and welfare, and such legislation shall be liberally construed for the accomplishment of said purposes. It is expressly the purpose of such legislation to provide for and protect the general public and not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will, or should, be especially protected or benefited by the terms of such legislation.
Nothing contained in any regulatory legislation of the City is intended to be, nor shall be, construed to create or form the basis for any liability on the part of the City or its officers, employees or agents for any injury or damage resulting from the failure of any member of the public to comply with applicable regulations, or from the failure of a structure, utility, road or sidewalk to comply with applicable code requirements, or by reason, or in consequence, of any plan check, inspection, notice, order, certificate, or approval, issued in connection with the implementation or enforcement of regulatory legislation, or by reason of any action, or inaction, on the part of the City, or its officers, employees or agents, in connection with the implementation, or enforcement, of regulatory legislation. (Ord. 1454, 1980)

1.01.020 Copies as Proof of Ordinances.
As provided for by RCW 35.21.550, copies of such code in published form shall be received without further proof as the ordinances of permanent and general effect of the City of Snohomish by all courts and administrative tribunals of the state. (Ord. 962, 1964)

1.01.030 Adoption of New Material.
New material shall be adopted by the City Council as separate ordinances prior to the inclusion thereof in such codification; provided, that any ordinance amending the codification shall set forth in full the section or sections of the codification being amended, and this shall constitute a sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement that no ordinance nor any section thereof shall be revised or amended unless the new ordinance sets forth the revised ordinance or amended section in full. (Ord. 962, 1964)

1.01.040 Title and Citation of Code.
The codification hereby adopted shall be known as the "Snohomish Municipal Code" and may be cited as such. The titles, chapters, and sections as set forth in the codification hereby adopted shall be, and they are, declared to be the titles, chapters and sections by which the provisions of the Snohomish Municipal Code may be designated, and cited. (Ord. 962, 1964)

1.01.050 Purpose of Catchlines.
The catchlines appearing in connection with the titles, chapters and sections of the Snohomish Municipal Code are inserted as a matter of convenience, and they shall be wholly disregarded by any person, officer, court or other tribunal in construing the terms and provisions of the Snohomish Municipal Code. (Ord. 962, 1964)

1.01.060 Continuation of Ordinances.
The provisions of the Snohomish Municipal Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as ordinances heretofore adopted by the City of Snohomish, shall be construed as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. (Ord. 962, 1964)

1.01.070 Reference Applies to Amendments.
Whenever a reference is made to any portion of the Snohomish Municipal Code, or to any ordinances of the City of Snohomish, such reference shall apply to all amendments and additions now or hereafter made. (Ord. 962, 1964)

1.01.080 Penalties for Violations.
A. Any person, firm, corporation, their agents, or servants who shall violate any of the provisions of the following listed Chapters of the Snohomish Municipal Code has committed a civil violation for which penalties may be assessed for each day or part of a day that the violation continues unless otherwise provided: Chapters 3.22, 3.26, 5.02, 5.10, 5.36, 5.44, 5.52, 7.12, 8.12, 8.20, 8.21, 9.94, 12.12, 12.20, 12.40, 13.04, 14.85, 15.04, and 20.04.
B. Civil violations shall be cited and processed in accordance with Chapter 1.14 SMC.
C. Other Remedies Preserved. 
    1. The provisions of this Chapter are not exclusive of other rights and remedies of the City under other provisions of the Snohomish Municipal Code.
    2. In addition to the City’s right to assess costs and penalties against owners as provided in its ordinances, the City shall retain all rights of lien and other rights against the property in question for costs that remain unpaid, in the manner and form provided by state law and City ordinances.
D. Criminal Penalties. Any violation that is required by state law to be prosecuted as a criminal offense shall not be prosecuted as a civil violation under this code.
E. Emergencies. Nothing in this Chapter or in other Chapters of the Snohomish Municipal Code shall prevent the Enforcement Officer or any other officer of the City of Snohomish or other governmental unit from taking any other action, summary or otherwise, necessary to eliminate or minimize an imminent danger to the health or safety of any person or property. The City’s costs of abating any such nuisance or endangerment summarily or otherwise abated shall be recoverable in the same manner and to the same extent as costs of abating nuisances or endangerment under any other provisions of this code, in addition to or as an alternative to any other rights or remedies the City may possess. (Ord. 2155, 2008; Ord. 2360, 2019)

Chapter 1.06 CITY CLASSIFICATION

Sections:
1.06.010     Noncharter Code City

1.06.010 Noncharter Code City.
There is hereby adopted for the City of Snohomish, Washington the classification of noncharter code city retaining the same general plan of government under which the City of Snohomish is currently organized but governed according to Ch. 35A.13 RCW (Council-Manager) of the Optional Municipal Code. (Ord. 1790, 1995)

Chapter 1.12 ELECTION OF COUNCILMEMBERS

Sections:
1.12.010     Candidate Eligibility
1.12.020     Number of Positions and Term of Office
1.12.030     Schedule of Positions

1.12.010 Candidate Eligibility.
Only a resident of the City of Snohomish may be a candidate for the office of City councilmember, in accordance with RCW 35A.13.020 and RCW 35A.12.030. (Ord. 1824, 1997; Ord. 2106, 2006)

1.12.020 Number of Positions and Term of Office.
All persons elected to City councilmember positions one (1) through seven (7) shall serve a 4 year term of office in accordance with RCW 35A.13.020 and RCW 35A.12.040. (Ord. 1824, 1997; Ord. 2106, 2006)

1.12.030 Schedule of Positions.
The schedule of positions to be voted upon at each primary and at general City elections shall be as provided by state law. (Ord. 917, 1961)

Chapter 1.14 CODE ENFORCEMENT

Sections:
1.14.010     Purpose
1.14.020     Definitions
1.14.030     Violation Unlawful – Each Day is Separate Violation – Misdemeanor
1.14.040     Joint and Several Responsibility and Liability
1.14.050     Interference with Code Enforcement Unlawful – Misdemeanor
1.14.060     Methods of Service
1.14.070     Voluntary Correction – Correction Notice
1.14.080     Notice of Violation
1.14.090     Stop Work Order – Violation a Misdemeanor
1.14.100     Stop Use Order – Violation a Misdemeanor
1.14.110     Removal of Stop Work or Stop Use Order – Misdemeanor
1.14.120     Response to Notice of Violation
1.14.130     Failure to Respond
1.14.140     Scheduling of Hearing to Contest or Mitigate – Correction Prior to Hearing
1.14.150     Contested Hearing – Procedure
1.14.160     Contested Hearing – Decision of the Hearing Examiner
1.14.170     Mitigation Hearing – Procedure
1.14.180     Mitigation Hearing – Decision of the Hearing Examiner
1.14.190     Failure to Appear – Default Order
1.14.200     Monetary Penalty
1.14.210     Appeal
1.14.220     Repeat Violation or Failure to Abate – Misdemeanor
1.14.230     Abatement
1.14.240     Collection of Penalties and Costs
1.14.250     Additional Enforcement Procedures
1.14.260     Conflicting Code Provisions
1.14.270     Duty not Creating Liability
1.14.280     Right of Entry

1.14.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish an efficient system of enforcing City regulations that will enable violations to be promptly resolved wherever possible, while providing both appropriate penalties and a full opportunity for alleged violators to have a hearing to contest the violations. This Chapter shall apply to all regulations as defined in SMC 1.01.080; provided that a regulation that provides for criminal penalties in addition to or as an alternative to enforcement under this Chapter may, at the discretion of the City, be prosecuted as a criminal violation. This Chapter shall not apply to enforcement of the Snohomish City Building Code, which is set forth in Ch. 19.04 SMC.

1.14.020 Definitions.
As used in this Chapter, the following words, terms, and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless a different meaning is plainly required:
“Abate” means to act to stop an activity, and/or to repair, replace, remove, or otherwise remedy a condition, where such activity or condition constitutes a violation of a regulation; provided, the actions must resolve the violation to the satisfaction of the City, or the Hearing Examiner if the matter has been mitigated or contested and found committed, and the actions taken and the manner in which they are performed must not endanger the general health, safety, and welfare of the community. For the purposes of this Chapter, the verbs “abate” and “correct” shall be interchangeable and have the same meaning.
“Act” means doing or performing something.
“City” means City of Snohomish, Washington.
“Code Enforcement Officer” means the City’s Code Enforcement Officers; building officials; building inspectors; construction inspectors; the Fire Marshal, or his or her designee; fire inspectors; the Chief of the Snohomish Police Department, or his or her designee; the City Planner, or his or her designee; the director of the Public Works Department, or his or her designee; or any other person or persons assigned or directed by the Mayor, or his or her designee, to enforce the regulations subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions of this Chapter.
“Correction Notice” means a written statement, issued by a Code Enforcement Officer, notifying a person that property under his or her control is in violation of one or more regulations and informing such person that a Notice of Violation may be issued and/or criminal charges filed if the violations are not abated.
“Day” or “Days,” as used in this Chapter, shall mean calendar days unless expressly stated otherwise in a given section or subsection. In addition, any portion of a twenty-four hour day shall constitute a full calendar day.
“Hearing Examiner” means the Snohomish Hearing Examiner and the office thereof established pursuant to Ch. 2.33 SMC.
“Notice of Violation” or “Notice of Civil Violation” means a written statement, issued by a Code Enforcement Officer, which contains the information required under SMC 1.14.080 and which notifies a person that he or she is responsible for one or more violations of the Snohomish Municipal Code.
“Omission” means a failure to act.
“Person” means any individual, firm, business, association, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity, public or private, however organized. Because “person” shall include both human and non-human entities, any of the following pronouns may be used to describe a person: he, she, or it.
“Person Responsible for the Violation” means any of the following: a person who has titled ownership or legal control of the property or structure that is subject to the regulation; an occupant or other person in control of the property or structure that is subject to the regulation; a developer, builder, business operator, or owner who is developing, building, or operating a business on the property or in a structure that is subject to the regulation; or any person who created, caused, or has allowed the violation to occur.
“Regulation” means and includes any of the following, as now enacted or hereafter amended:
    1. All Snohomish Municipal Code provisions making reference to this Chapter;
    2. All standards, regulations, and procedures adopted by the City that make reference to this Chapter; and
    3. The terms and conditions of any permit or approval issued by the City, or any concomitant agreement with the City pursuant to code provisions that make reference to this Chapter.
“Repeat Violation” means, as evidenced by the prior issuance of a correction notice or a notice of violation, that a violation has occurred on the same property within a two-year period, or a person responsible for a violation has committed a violation elsewhere within the City of Snohomish within a two-year period. To constitute a repeat violation, the violation need not be the same violation as the prior violation.
“Violation” or “civil violation” means an act or omission contrary to a regulation as defined in this section. A violation continues to exist until abated to the satisfaction of the City, with each day or portion thereof in which the violation continues constituting a separate violation. (Ord. 2341, 2017)

1.14.030 Violation Unlawful – Each Day is Separate Violation – Misdemeanor.
The violation of any regulation shall be unlawful. Each day or portion thereof in which the violation continues constitutes a separate offense for which separate notices of violation may be issued. In addition, any violation of this Chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor and the City Attorney, or the City Attorney’s designee, shall, at his or her discretion, have authority to file a violation as either a civil violation pursuant to this Chapter or as a criminal misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in jail for a maximum term fixed by the court of not more than ninety (90) days or by a fine in an amount fixed by the court of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000) or by both such imprisonment and fine. All criminal misdemeanor charges filed under this Chapter shall be filed with the Snohomish County District Court. When the City files criminal misdemeanor charges pursuant to this Chapter, the City shall have the burden of proving, beyond a reasonable doubt, that the violation occurred.

1.14.040 Joint and Several Responsibility and Liability.
Responsibility for violations of the codes enforced under this Chapter is joint and several, and the City is not prohibited from taking action against a party where other persons may also be potentially responsible for a violation, nor is the City required to take action against all persons potentially responsible for a violation.

1.14.050 Interference with Code Enforcement Unlawful – Misdemeanor.
Any person who intentionally obstructs, impedes, or interferes with any lawful attempt to serve notice of a violation, stop work or stop use order, or an emergency order, or intentionally obstructs, impedes, or interferes with lawful attempts to correct a violation shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in jail for a maximum term fixed by the court of not more than ninety (90) days or by a fine in an amount fixed by the court of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000), or by both such imprisonment and fine.

1.14.060 Methods of Service.
A. Service by Certified Mail – Return Receipt Requested shall be equal to personal service. Any correction notice, notice of violation, notice of hearing, or other code enforcement document shall be deemed legally served upon a party by use of Certified Mail – Return Receipt Requested as described in subsection (B)(2) below, unless another method of service is expressly required in a particular subsection of this Chapter; provided, at the discretion of the Code Enforcement Officer, the Code Enforcement Officer may personally serve documents or cause documents to be personally served upon a party.
B. Methods of service defined. For purposes of this Chapter, the methods of service of any documents related to code enforcement, such as correction notices, notices of violation, stop work orders, etc. (hereinafter “document”), are defined as follows:
    1. “Personal Service” Personal service shall mean handing the document to the person subject to the document or leaving it at his or her dwelling house or usual place of abode with some person of suitable age and discretion then residing therein, or leaving it at his or her office or place of employment with a person in charge thereof. Personal service shall also be deemed complete when the Hearing Examiner or his or her assistant hands any order, ruling, decision, or other document to a person prior to, during, or after a hearing.
    2. “Mailing” Service by mail shall mean sending the document by Certified Mail – Return Receipt Requested to the last known address of the person subject to the document. The last known address shall be an address provided to the City by the person to whom the document is directed; if an address has not been provided to the City, the last known address shall be any of the following as they appear at the time the document is mailed: the address of the property where the violation is occurring, as reflected on the most recent equalized tax assessment roll of the County Assessor or the taxpayer address appearing for the property on the official property tax information website for Snohomish County; the address appearing in any database used for the payment of utilities for the property at which the violations are occurring; or the address of the person to whom the documents are being sent that appears in the Washington State Department of Licensing database. Where service of the notice of violation is by mail, service shall be deemed complete upon return of receipt requested.
    3. “Posting” Posting shall mean affixing a copy of the document in a conspicuous place on the property, with at least one (1) copy of such document placed at an entryway to the property or structure if an entryway exists.
    4. “Publication” Publication of the document shall mean publication as set forth in RCW 4.28.100 and RCW 4.28.110, as currently enacted or hereafter amended.
C. Proof of service – Due diligence. Proof of service shall be made by written affidavit or declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the person effecting the service, declaring the time and date of service, the manner by which service was made, and if service was made solely by posting or publication, facts showing that due diligence was used in attempting to locate a mailing address for the person at whom the notice of violation is directed.
D. Additional proof of service not necessary. The Hearing Examiner shall not require additional proof of service beyond the requirements in this Chapter.

1.14.070 Voluntary Correction – Correction Notice.
A. General. Prior to the issuance of a notice of violation, the Code Enforcement Officer shall attempt to secure the voluntary correction of a violation by attempting to contact the person responsible for the violation, explaining the violation, and requesting correction. This may be done verbally by the Code Enforcement Officer; provided, a written correction notice shall be served on the person responsible for the violation prior to issuance of a notice of violation; provided further, a written correction notice need not be served nor efforts made to secure voluntary correction where the nature of the violation creates a risk of imminent harm to public health or safety, or where it is a repeat violation as defined in this Chapter.
B. Service of correction notice. Service of a written correction notice may be accomplished by Certified Mail – Return Receipt Requested or by personal service, at the discretion of the CodeEnforcement Officer, or by posting or publishing the correction notice if an address for the person responsible for the violation cannot be ascertained pursuant to SMC 1.14.060(B)(2).
C. Contents of written correction notice. The written correction notice shall be deemed sufficient if it contains the following information:
    1. The name and address of a person responsible for the violation; and
    2. The street address or description sufficient for identification of the building, structure, premises, or land upon or within which the violation has occurred or is occurring; and
    3. A description of the violation and a reference to the code provisions that have been violated; and
    4. A statement indicating what corrective actions are required and a correction deadline stating the date and time by which the corrective actions must be completed to the satisfaction of the Code Enforcement Officer in order for the violator to avoid the issuance of a notice of violation; and
    5. A statement indicating that, pursuant to SMC 1.14.030, a notice of violation may be issued for each day a violation continues, with each violation constituting a separate offense subject to civil and/or criminal penalties.
D. Time period in which to correct or abate the violation. Whenever a person responsible for a violation is served with a written correction notice, he or she shall be given at least ten (10) days from the date of issuance of the notice to correct the violation(s) to the satisfaction of the Code Enforcement Officer; provided, where, in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer, a violation creates a risk of imminent harm to public health or safety, or is a repeat violation as defined in this Chapter, the City can require less than ten (10) days for correction to be completed. In the event the violation is not corrected within the required time period, the City may, at its discretion, issue separate notices of violation for each day, or portion thereof, that the violation has existed or continues to exist.
E. Extension of voluntary correction period or modification of required actions. An extension of the deadline for voluntary correction, or a modification of any required corrective action noted in the written correction notice, may be granted by the Code Enforcement Officer if the person responsible for the violation has, in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer, shown due diligence or made substantial progress in correcting the violations but unforeseen circumstances render correction unattainable within the original deadline.
F. Revocation of deadline for compliance. The original deadline for compliance, or any extension for compliance previously granted by the Code Enforcement Officer, may be revoked and immediate compliance required where, in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer, circumstances make immediate correction necessary to avoid an imminent risk of injury to persons or property.
G. Use of written voluntary correction agreement. 
    1. At the sole discretion of the City, a voluntary correction agreement may be entered into between the person responsible for the violation and the City. The voluntary correction agreement must be in writing.
    2. Contents of voluntary correction agreement. The voluntary correction agreement is a contract between the City and the person responsible for the violation under which that person agrees to abate the violations within a specified time and according to specified conditions. The voluntary correction agreement shall include the following:
        a. The name and address of the person responsible for the violation; and
        b. The street address or a description sufficient for identification of the building, structure, premises, or land upon or within which the violation has occurred or is occurring; and
        c. A description of the violation and a reference to the regulations that have been violated; and
        d. An acknowledgement by the person responsible for the violations that the violations described in the correction agreement exist, and that he or she is waiving the right to contest the existence of the violations or to mitigate the penalties; and
        e. The necessary corrective action to be taken, the date or time by which correction must be completed, and an acknowledgement by the person responsible for the violation that he or she will correct the violations within the time specified in the voluntary correction agreement; and
        f. Acknowledgement by the person responsible for the violation that the City may enter the property and inspect the premises as may be necessary to determine compliance with the voluntary correction agreement; and
        g. Acknowledgement by the person responsible for the violation that if the terms of the voluntary correction agreement are not met, the City may enter the property to abate the violation and may also recover its costs and expenses and/or a monetary penalty pursuant to this Chapter from the person responsible for the violation; and
        h. The signature or official mark of the person responsible for the violation and the signature or official mark of the Code Enforcement Officer.
    3. Failure to comply with voluntary correction agreement. 
        a. Abatement by the City. In addition to any other remedy provided for in this Chapter, the City may abate the violation in accordance with SMC 1.14.230 if the terms of the voluntary correction agreement are not met.
        b. Penalties and costs. If the terms of the voluntary correction agreement are not met, the person responsible for the violation may be assessed a monetary penalty in accordance with SMC 1.14.200, plus all costs and expenses of abatement, as set forth in SMC 1.14.230, in addition to being issued new notices of violation or criminal charges if the violation has not been abated.

1.14.080 Notice of Violation.
A. Issuance of notice of violation. When the City determines that a violation has occurred or is occurring and does not secure voluntary correction pursuant to SMC 1.14.070, the Code Enforcement Officer may issue a notice of violation to any person responsible for the violation.
B. Contents of notice. The notice of violation shall include the following:
    1. The name and address of a person responsible for the violation; and
    2. The street address or description sufficient for identification of the building, structure, premises, or land upon or within which the violation has occurred or is occurring; and
    3. A description of the violation and a reference to the provisions violated; and
    4. A statement indicating that the violator must respond to the notice of violation within fourteen (14) days of the date of issuance by doing one of the following:
        a. Paying the fine and correcting the violation;
        b. Requesting a mitigation hearing and correcting the violation; or
        c. Requesting a hearing to contest the violation; and
    5. A statement indicating that failure to respond shall result in the violation(s) being deemed committed without requiring further action by the City, and that the full fine amount indicated on the notice of violation shall be due and owing to the City by the person or entity to whom the notice of violation was issued; and
    6. A statement indicating that, unless a request to contest the violation or to mitigate the penalty is properly filed, a monetary penalty of five hundred dollars ($500) for each violation listed on the notice of violation is due and owing at the time the notice of violation is issued, and must be paid in full within thirty (30) days or may be assigned to a collection agency; and
    7. A statement indicating that if the person or entity to whom a notice of violation was issued requests a hearing and fails to attend the hearing, a default judgment shall be entered against the person or entity to whom the violation was issued, with the full amount of the fine indicated on the notice of violation immediately due and owing, and that any unpaid fines and any costs may be assigned to a collection agency after thirty (30) days have elapsed from the date the notice of violation was issued; and
    8. A statement indicating that the City may seek to recover from the person to whom the notice of violation was issued the costs to the City of any abatement action taken; and
    9. A statement indicating that separate notices of violation may be issued for each day, or portion thereof, in which a violation continues; and
    10. A statement indicating that payment of a monetary penalty does not relieve the person or entity named in the notice of violation of the duty to abate the violation, and that failure to abate may result in the issuance of additional notices of violation and/or criminal charges, with additional civil and/or criminal penalties.
C. Service of notice of violation. Service of a notice of violation may be accomplished by Certified Mail – Return Receipt Requested or by personal service, at the discretion of the Code Enforcement Officer, or by posting or publication if an address for the person responsible for the violation cannot be ascertained, pursuant to SMC 1.14.060.

1.14.090 Stop Work Order – Violation a Misdemeanor.
A stop work order may be issued pursuant to any of the codes or regulations adopted pursuant to Title 19 of the Snohomish Municipal Code. In addition, the Code Enforcement Officer may issue a stop work order whenever any work that is subject to regulation under the Snohomish Municipal Code is in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer being performed in a manner contrary to the provisions of the Snohomish Municipal Code, or will exacerbate damage that has already been caused to any property, or will materially impair the Code Enforcement Officer’s ability to seek compliance. The stop work order shall state the reasons for the order and may be appended to, or incorporate by reference, a notice of violation. The stop work order shall take effect immediately upon service. Service of the stop work order shall be deemed accomplished upon posting of the notice in the manner described in SMC 1.14.060(B)(3). Violation of a stop work order shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment in jail for a maximum term fixed by the court of not more than ninety (90) days, or by a fine in an amount fixed by the court of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000), or by both such imprisonment and fine.

1.14.100 Stop Use Order – Violation a Misdemeanor.
In addition to any remedy provided for in this Chapter, the Code Enforcement Officer may issue a stop use order when allowing the use to continue creates an imminent threat of injury to the health, safety, or welfare of any member of the public, or creates an imminent threat of harm to neighboring property, or will exacerbate injury already caused to any property. The stop use order shall state the reasons for the order; provided, the stop use order may be appended to, or incorporate by reference, a notice of violation. The stop use order shall take effect immediately upon service. Service of the stop use order shall be deemed accomplished upon posting of the notice in the manner described in SMC 1.14.060(B)(3). Violation of a stop use order shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment in jail for a maximum term fixed by the court of not more than ninety (90) days, or by a fine in an amount fixed by the court of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000), or by both such imprisonment and fine.

1.14.110 Removal of Stop Work or Stop Use Order – Misdemeanor.
Where a stop work order or a stop use order has been posted in conformity with the requirements of this Chapter, removal of such order without the authorization of the City, or the Hearing Examiner if the matter has been heard by the Hearing Examiner, shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment in jail for a maximum term fixed by the court of not more than ninety (90) days, or by a fine in an amount fixed by the court of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000), or by both such imprisonment and fine.

1.14.120 Response to Notice of Violation.
A. Generally. A person who has been served with a notice of violation must respond to the notice within fourteen (14) days of the date the notice is served. A person may respond to the notice of violation by:
    1. Paying the amount of the monetary penalty as set forth in the notice of violation. Partial payment or payment using a check that is rejected for insufficient funds shall not be deemed payment under this subsection. Payment of the fine shall not relieve the person or entity responsible for the violation from the duty to correct or abate the violation. Additional notices of violation may be issued if the violation goes uncorrected.
    2. Contesting the notice of violation by requesting a contested hearing in writing and sending the request and a $100 filing fee to the City as described in subsection (B) below.
    3. Seeking to mitigate the monetary penalty by requesting a mitigation hearing to explain the circumstances surrounding the violation. The request to mitigate must be made in writing and sent to the City with a $100 filing fee as described in subsection (B) below. Requesting to mitigate the penalty shall not relieve the person responsible for the violation from the duty to correct or abate the violation. Additional notices of violation may be issued if the violation goes uncorrected.
B. Method of response. The person or entity to whom a notice of violation has been issued may respond by mailing or hand-delivering the response and the $100 filing fee to the City Clerk. Mailed responses must be postmarked no later than the fourteenth (14th) day from the date of service of the notice of violation; hand-delivered responses must be brought to the City Clerk no later than 4:30 p.m. on the fourteenth (14th) day after service; provided, where the fourteenth day falls on a weekend or holiday, the deadline shall be extended to the next regular business day. Telephone, facsimile, or email responses shall not satisfy the requirements of this section.

1.14.130 Failure to Respond.
If the person to whom the notice of violation is issued fails to respond as required in SMC 1.14.120, the violation(s) shall be deemed committed without requiring further action by the City or the City’s Hearing Examiner and the person to whom the notice of violation was issued shall owe the full fine amount indicated in the notice of violation.

1.14.140 Scheduling of Hearing to Contest or Mitigate – Correction Prior to Hearing.
A. Notice and scheduling of hearing. Upon the timely filing of a request for a hearing to contest a violation or to mitigate the penalty, the matter shall be scheduled to be heard at the next available appearance by the Hearing Examiner that is a minimum of fourteen (14) but no later than sixty (60) calendar days after the date the request was received by the City. Notice of the hearing date and time shall be served by Certified Mail – Return Receipt Requested to the address of the party who requested the hearing. The date and time for any hearing may be rescheduled by the Hearing Examiner for good cause upon the motion of a party or the Hearing Examiner.
B. Correction of violation prior to hearing. The hearing may be cancelled and the party requesting the hearing need not appear only if, at least two (2) business days prior to the scheduled hearing, the Code Enforcement Officer determines that the violation has been satisfactorily corrected or abated and the monetary penalty paid in full. Where the scheduled hearing involves a repeat violation as defined in this Chapter, the hearing shall not be cancelled unless the new violation has been corrected or abated to the satisfaction of the Code Enforcement Officer and the monetary penalty and costs for the new violation(s) and any monetary penalty and costs owing for the previous violation(s) have been paid in full.

1.14.150 Contested Hearing – Procedure.
The Hearing Examiner shall conduct a hearing to contest a violation pursuant to Chapter 2.33 SMC when such hearing is properly and timely requested. The City and the person or entity to whom the notice of civil violation was issued may participate in the hearing and each party, or its legal representatives, may call witnesses and present evidence and rebuttal, subject to the following:
A. The City shall have the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that a violation has occurred.
B. The parties are responsible for securing the appearance of any witnesses they may wish to call; neither the City nor the Hearing Examiner shall have the burden of securing any witnesses on behalf of the person who is contesting the violation(s) or seeking to mitigate the penalties.
C. Because formal rules of evidence shall not apply to any such hearing, the Hearing Examiner shall allow hearsay testimony by the parties and not require proof of chain of custody for evidence that is presented; provided, the Hearing Examiner shall determine the weight to be assigned to any evidence presented.
D. Any notes, reports, summaries, photographs, or other materials prepared by the parties shall be admitted into evidence if requested; provided, the parties are free to argue the weight that should be assigned by the Hearing Examiner to any evidence submitted.

1.14.160 Contested Hearing – Decision of the Hearing Examiner.
A. Contents of Order. Upon the conclusion of a hearing to contest a violation, the Hearing Examiner may issue a verbal decision pending issuance of the written decision; if necessary, the Hearing Examiner may delay issuing the written order for up to ten (10) business days following the hearing. In either event, the verbal decision and written order shall contain findings and conclusions based on the record that includes the following information:
    1. For each alleged violation of the City code, a statement indicating whether the violation has been found committed or not committed;
    2. For violations found committed, the monetary penalties and costs being assessed pursuant to this Chapter;
    3. For violations found committed, any required corrective actions;
    4. For violations found committed, a finding that abatement of the violations by the City is authorized, at the expense of the person responsible for the violations;
    5. A statement notifying the person responsible for the violation that he or she is subject to additional civil and/or criminal penalties if any violation that was the subject of the hearing has not been corrected or abated.
B. Notice of decision. The Hearing Examiner may cause a copy of the decision and order to be served upon the parties at the close of the hearing. When the Hearing Examiner requires more time to prepare a written order, or when a party fails to appear after requesting a contested hearing, the Hearing Examiner shall cause a copy of the decision and order to be served on the parties by mailing a copy to each party’s last known address within ten (10) business days of the hearing.

1.14.170 Mitigation Hearing – Procedure.
The Hearing Examiner shall conduct a hearing to mitigate the penalty on a violation when such hearing is properly and timely requested; provided, that in the event a person has requested a hearing to contest a violation and prior to the start of the hearing indicates to the Hearing Examiner a desire to mitigate rather than contest, the Examiner shall permit the person to seek mitigation of the monetary penalty. The mitigation hearing shall be conducted according to the following general procedures:
A. The person responsible for the violation shall, as a condition of proceeding with the mitigation hearing, agree that he or she has committed the violations as set forth in the notice of the violation. The City shall be relieved of any burden of proving that the violations were committed, and such agreement by the person responsible for the violations shall be sufficient basis for the Hearing Examiner to find the violations committed.
B. If the person who has requested the mitigation hearing decides at the time of the hearing that he or she wishes to contest all or some of the alleged violations, the matters wishing to be contested shall, at the request of the City, be rescheduled.
C. The person responsible for the violations shall be given the opportunity to explain or provide evidence regarding the nature of the violations, why the violations exist, why the violations have not been abated or corrected, and any other information the Hearing Examiner determines is relevant.
D. The City shall be given the opportunity, at its discretion, to provide evidence of the nature of the violation, evidence to rebut assertions made by any party, and any other information or evidence the Hearing Examiner deems is relevant.
E. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Hearing Examiner shall enter an order finding the violations committed pursuant to SMC 1.14.180, and shall assess a monetary penalty in accordance with SMC 1.14.200.

1.14.180 Mitigation Hearing – Decision of the Hearing Examiner.
A. Order to be issued at close of hearing. Upon the conclusion of a penalty mitigation hearing, the Hearing Examiner shall issue, at that time, a written decision and order using a standard form that contains the following findings and conclusions based on the record:
    1. For each alleged violation of the City code, a statement indicating that the violation has been found committed;
    2. The monetary penalties and costs being assessed pursuant to this Chapter;
    3. Any required corrective action;
    4. A statement notifying the person responsible for the violation that he or she is subject to additional civil and/or criminal penalties if any violation that was the subject of the hearing has not been corrected or abated;
    5. A finding that abatement of the violations by the City is authorized, at the expense of the person responsible for the violations.
B. Notice of decision. The City shall provide a copy of the decision and order to the parties at the close of the mitigation hearing. When the City, for good cause shown, requires more time to prepare a written order, or when a party fails to appear after requesting a hearing, the Hearing Examiner shall cause a copy of the decision and order to be served on the parties by mailing a copy to the last known addresses of the parties within ten (10) business days of the hearing.

1.14.190 Failure to Appear – Default Order.
If the person who requests a hearing to contest a violation or mitigate the penalty then fails to appear at the scheduled hearing after having been given notice in the manner provided for by this Chapter, the Hearing Examiner shall use a standard form to immediately issue a default order, which finds committed all the violations set forth in the notice of violation and which assesses a fine in the full amount indicated in the notice of violation. In addition, at the request of the City, the Hearing Examiner shall also impose upon the non-appearing party any costs to the City related to preparation for the hearing. The Hearing Examiner shall cause a copy of the decision to be served upon the non-appearing party by mailing a copy to the last known address of the non-appearing party within ten (10) business days of the hearing. Upon the motion of a party, the Hearing Examiner may rescind a default judgment only upon a showing of good cause to do so and only if such motion has been brought within thirty (30) calendar days of the date of the hearing at which the default judgment was ordered.

1.14.200 Monetary Penalty.
A. Monetary penalty. Each violation of a City regulation deemed committed by the Hearing Examiner is subject to a monetary penalty in an amount of five hundred dollars ($500) unless a different penalty amount for a given violation is expressly authorized or required by a more specific City code provision. Except where the person responsible for the violation has requested mitigation of the monetary penalty pursuant to SMC 1.14.120, the Hearing Examiner shall have no authority to reduce the amount of the monetary penalty. Where the person has requested to mitigate the monetary penalty, the Examiner may reduce the monetary penalty for each violation, but in no case shall the penalty be reduced to an amount less than one hundred dollars ($100) for each violation found committed.
B. Payment of monetary penalty. Any monetary penalties assessed pursuant to this Chapter constitute a personal obligation of the person to whom the notice of civil violation is directed. In addition, the monetary penalties assessed pursuant to this Chapter may be assessed against the property that is the subject of the enforcement action. Any monetary penalty assessed must be paid in full to the City within thirty (30) days from the date of service of an uncontested notice of violation or any order of the Hearing Examiner that assesses monetary penalties.
C. Continuing duty to abate violations. Payment of a monetary penalty pursuant to this Chapter does not relieve the person responsible for the violation of the duty to correct or abate the violation. Additional notices of violation may be issued and/or criminal charges filed for continuing failure to correct or abate a violation.

1.14.210 Appeal.
An appeal of the decision of the Hearing Examiner must be filed with the Snohomish County Superior Court within twenty-one (21) calendar days of service of the decision, which shall be the exclusive means to appeal a decision of the Hearing Examiner rendered under this Chapter.

1.14.220 Repeat Violation or Failure to Abate – Misdemeanor.
Where a person or entity has been found to have committed a violation under this Chapter, regardless of whether the violation was resolved without penalty, the failure to abate the violation, or the commission of a subsequent violation, or the violation of a written order of the Hearing Examiner after having received notice of the order as provided in this Chapter, shall each constitute a repeat violation and shall each be a misdemeanor subject to the penalties and provisions of SMC 1.14.030. The City Attorney, or the City Attorney’s designee, shall, at his or her discretion, have authority to file a repeat violation as either a civil violation or as a misdemeanor.

1.14.230 Abatement.
A. Other abatement proceedings not precluded. Nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit the City from pursuing abatement of a violation pursuant to any other laws of the state of Washington or the City of Snohomish.
B. Costs of abatement. The costs of any abatement action taken by the City shall become a charge to the person responsible for the violation. These charges may be assessed against the person responsible for the violation or the property upon which the violation occurred, or both. The City may use any lawful means to collect these charges.

1.14.240 Collection of Penalties and Costs.
A. Collection of monetary penalty. The monetary penalties assessed pursuant to this Chapter shall constitute a personal obligation of the person to whom the notice of civil violation is directed or the person responsible for the violation. In addition, the monetary penalties assessed pursuant to this Chapter may be assessed against the property that is the subject of the enforcement action. Any monetary penalty assessed must be paid to the City within ten (10) calendar days from the date of mailing of the Hearing Examiner’s decision or a notice from the City that penalties are due. The City Attorney, or his or her designee, is authorized to take legal action to collect the monetary penalty.
B. Use of collection agency. Pursuant to Chapter 19.16 RCW, as currently enacted or hereafter amended, the City may, at its discretion, use a collection agency for the purposes of collecting penalties and costs assessed pursuant to this Chapter. The collection agency may add fees or interest charges to the original amount assigned to collections as allowed by law. No debt may be assigned to a collection agency until at least thirty (30) calendar days have elapsed from the time that the City attempts to notify the person responsible for the debt of the existence of the debt and that the debt may be assigned to a collection agency for collection if the debt is not paid. Notice of potential assignment to collections shall be made by Certified Mail – Return Receipt Requested to the last known address of the person responsible for the violation; provided, inability to ascertain a current mailing address shall not prohibit the debt from being assigned to collections.
C. Costs of abatement as personal obligation. The costs of any abatement action taken by the City shall become a charge to the person responsible for the violation. These charges may be assessed against the person responsible for the violation or the property upon which the violation occurred. The City may use any lawful means to collect charges, including but not limited to those set forth in SMC 1.14.240 A and B.
D. Costs of abatement as real property obligation. The costs of any abatement action taken by the City shall become a charge against the real property upon which the costs were incurred unless paid. Such costs shall be forwarded by the Code Enforcement Officer to the City Support Services Director, who shall certify them to the County Treasurer for assessment on the tax rolls, and to the City Attorney, who shall file a lien for such costs against the real property.
E. Contests of abatement costs. Any challenge to the amount of the abatement costs shall be heard by the City Support Services Director in an informal hearing. The City Support Services Director shall then make a written determination as to whether or not the City’s costs were accurate and necessary for accomplishing the abatement. If the costs are confirmed, then they shall be subject to collection as set forth in this section.

1.14.250 Additional Enforcement Procedures.
The provisions of this Chapter are not exclusive and may be used in addition to other enforcement and penalty provisions authorized by the Snohomish Municipal Code or any other law.

1.14.260 Conflicting Code Provisions.
In the event a conflict exists between the enforcement provisions of this Chapter and the enforcement provisions of any international or uniform code, statute, or regulation that is adopted in the Snohomish Municipal Code and subject to the enforcement provisions of this Chapter, the enforcement provisions of this Chapter will prevail, unless the enforcement provisions of this Chapter are preempted or specifically modified by said code, statute, or regulation.

1.14.270 Duty not Creating Liability.
No provision or term used in this title is intended to impose any duty upon the City or any of its officers or employees which would subject them to damages in a civil action.

1.14.280 Right of Entry.
A. When it is necessary to enforce the provisions of the Snohomish Municipal Code, or when the Code Enforcement Officer has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a building or upon a premises a condition that is contrary to or in violation of this code, the Code Enforcement Officer may enter the building or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this code, provided that if such building or premises be occupied that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such building or premises be unoccupied, the Code Enforcement Officer shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the Code Enforcement Officer shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry.
B. Posted property. (1) Any combination of (a) a "No Trespassing" sign and a gate or chain on private property, or (b) the securing of a gate or chain (other than by a simple latching or closure device) shall be considered controlling. Entry shall not be made upon such property without the express permission of the property owner/resident. (2) No employee shall be required to enter a posted or gated piece of property if the employee feels threatened, intimidated, or otherwise in fear of his or her personal safety.
C. Employee identification. City employees shall carry identification cards while on duty. Any employee, when legitimately requested by the public, shall show the requesting party his/her identification card.
D. Intimidation of employees. It is the policy of the City that threats, intimidation, or other violations of public peace directed against an employee engaged in the lawful action upon private property may subject that person and the owner of the property, as applicable, to legal action. (Ord. 2155, 2008)

Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Chapter 2.04 Council Meetings
    2.04.010     Regular Meetings – Quorum
    2.04.020     Special Meetings – Notice
    2.04.030     Emergency Meetings
    2.04.040     Adjournments
    2.04.050     Executive Sessions
    2.04.060     Attendance – Vacancies
    2.04.070     Participation by Audience – Procedure
    2.04.080     Interference With Official Proceedings
Chapter 2.06 Uniform Policies for Boards and Commissions
    2.06.010     Purpose
    2.06.015     Application
    2.06.020     Attendance Policies – Termination and Replacement
    2.06.030     Residency Requirements
    2.06.035     Exceptions to the Residency Requirements
    2.06.040     Meeting Location
Chapter 2.12 Park and Recreation Board
    2.12.010     Created
    2.12.020     Appointment – Terms – Vacancy – Compensation – Qualifications
    2.12.030     Purpose – Duties of the Board
    2.12.040     Rules, Election of Officers, Records, and Expenses
    2.12.050     Removal
Chapter 2.14 Design Review Board
    2.14.010     Created – Number of Members – Qualifications
    2.14.020     Purpose – Objectives
    2.14.030     Appointment to the Board – Terms – Vacancies – Compensation
    2.14.040     Rules, Election of Officers, Records, and Expenses
    2.14.050     Removal
    2.14.060     Time, Place and Conduct of Meetings
Chapter 2.16 Planning Commission
    2.16.010     Created – Number
    2.16.020     Members – Qualifications
    2.16.030     Appointment to the Commission – Terms – Vacancies – Compensation
    2.16.040     Powers
    2.16.050     Purpose and Objectives
    2.16.060     Officers, Rules, Election of Officers, Records, and Expenses
    2.16.070     Removal
Chapter 2.23 Lodging Tax Advisory Commission
    2.23.010     Commission Created – Appointment and Term
    2.23.020     Duties of the Commission. The trustees shall perform the following duties
    2.23.030     Election of Officers
    2.23.040     Meetings
    2.23.050     Records
    2.23.060     Membership – Vacancy
    2.23.070     Removal from the Commission
Chapter 2.27 Public Safety Commission
    2.27.010     Authority of Police Chief – Written Recommendation/Objection
    2.27.015     Public Safety Commission Established
    2.27.020     Membership – Appointment – Terms
    2.27.030     Membership – Vacancy
    2.27.040     Compensation
    2.27.050     Meetings – Officers – Rules
    2.27.060     Duties of the Commission
    2.27.070     Staff Support
    2.27.080     Public Records
Chapter 2.28 City Clerk
    2.28.010     Office of City Clerk Established
    2.28.020     Appointment
    2.28.030     Powers and Duties
    2.28.040     Deputy City Clerk
Chapter 2.30 City Treasurer
    2.30.010     Office of City Treasurer Established
    2.30.020     Appointment
    2.30.030     Powers and Duties
    2.30.040     Deputy City Treasurer
Chapter 2.32 City Attorney
    2.32.010     Duty to Conduct Suits Defend City
    2.32.020     Appeal Cases
    2.32.030     Preparing Ordinances, Contracts Attending Council Meetings
Chapter 2.33 Hearing Examiner
    2.33.010     Purpose
    2.33.020     Creation of Hearing Examiner
    2.33.030     Appointment
    2.33.040     Qualifications
    2.33.050     Removal
    2.33.060     Freedom from Improper Influence
    2.33.070     Rules
    2.33.080     Duties of the Hearing Examiner
    2.33.090     Conflicting Code Provisions and Rules of Procedure
Chapter 2.34 City Planner
    2.34.010     Office of City Planner Established
    2.34.020     Appointment
    2.34.030     Powers and Duties
Chapter 2.36 City Engineer
    2.36.010     Office of City Engineer Established
    2.36.020     Appointment
    2.36.030     Powers and Duties
Chapter 2.37 City Administrator
    2.37.010     Office Created
    2.37.020     Scope of Authority
    2.37.030     Powers and Duties
Chapter 2.40 Oaths and Bonds of Office
    2.40.010     Oath of Office
    2.40.020     Blanket Bond Coverage
    2.40.030     Individual Faithful Performance Bonds
Chapter 2.64 Compensation of Officers and Employees
    2.64.010     Mayor – Salary
    2.64.020     Councilmember – Salary
    2.64.040     City Officials – Salary
    2.64.050     Effective Date of Increases
    2.64.060     Expense Account
Chapter 2.82 Public Safety Department
    2.82.005     Authority to Contract for Police Services through Interlocal Agreement – Alternative and Exclusion
    2.82.010     Public Safety Department
    2.82.020     Chief of Police
    2.82.030     Classified Personnel
    2.82.040     Commissions
    2.82.050     Rules and Regulations
    2.82.060     Reserve Officers
Chapter 2.86 Emergency Management
    2.86.010     Purpose
    2.86.020     Emergency Management Policy
    2.86.030     Emergency Management Defined
    2.86.040     Emergency or Disaster Defined
    2.86.050     Emergency Management Coordinator Defined
    2.86.060     Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan Annex (SNO-CEMP)
    2.86.061     Snohomish County Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan (SC-CEMP) Adopted by Reference
    2.86.062     Snohomish County Hazard Mitigation Plan (SCHMP) Adopted by Reference
    2.86.063     Snohomish County Department of Public Works, Solid Waste Division, Disaster Debris Management Plan (DDMP) Adopted by Reference
    2.86.070     Emergency Management Organization
    2.86.080     Mayor Duties and Powers
    2.86.090     Mayor Succession
    2.86.100     Emergency Management Coordinator-Power and Duties
    2.86.110     Functions and Duties of Departments and Employees
    2.86.120     Liability – RCW 38.52.180 Adoption by Reference
    2.86.130     Violation-Penalties
    2.86.140     Severability
Chapter 2.90 Legal Action against City Officials, Employees, and Volunteers
    2.90.005     Exclusion
    2.90.010     Definitions
    2.90.020     Legal Representation
    2.90.030     Conditions of Representation or Payment of Claims or Judgments
    2.90.040     Refusal to Cooperate to Render Chapter Inapplicable
    2.90.050     Certain Actions and Occurrences Excluded
    2.90.060     Payment of Claims
    2.90.070     Conflict with Insurance Policies

Chapter 2.04 COUNCIL MEETINGS

Sections:
2.04.010     Regular Meetings – Quorum
2.04.020     Special Meetings – Notice
2.04.030     Emergency Meetings
2.04.040     Adjournments
2.04.050     Executive Sessions
2.04.060     Attendance – Vacancies
2.04.070     Participation by Audience – Procedure
2.04.080     Interference With Official Proceedings

2.04.010 Regular Meetings – Quorum.
The regular meetings of the Snohomish City Council shall be held on the first and third Tuesday of every month at 6:00 p.m. Regular meetings shall be held at the Snohomish School District Administration Building, 1601 Avenue D, Snohomish, Washington, or at such other location as shall be designated by the City Council and published in the meeting agenda.
At all meetings of the City Council, a majority of the Council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, but a lesser number may adjourn the meeting to a time and place certain.
If, at any time, any regular meeting falls on a holiday such regular meeting shall be held the next business day. (Ord. 1737, 1993; Ord. 1752, 1993; Ord. 2107, 2006; Ord. 2345, 2018)

2.04.020 Special Meetings – Notice.
The Clerk shall call special meetings of the Council upon request of the Mayor or any three (3) members of the Council. Notice of special meetings shall be delivered personally or by mailed written notice to the Mayor and each member of the City Council and to each local newspaper of general circulation, to each local radio and/or television station which has on file with the governing body a written request to be notified of such special meetings or of all special meetings, posted on the City’s website and prominently displayed at the main entrance of the Snohomish School District Administration Building and the meeting site if it is not held at the regular meeting location. Such notice shall be delivered personally or by mail at least twenty-four (24) hours before the time of such meeting as specified in the notice. The call and notice shall specify the time and place of the special meeting. Requests for special meetings shall state the subject to be considered and no other subject shall be considered at a special meeting.
Written notice may be dispensed with by any Councilmember who, at or prior to the time the meeting convenes, files with the Clerk a written waiver of notice. Such waiver may be given by telegram, fax, electronic mail, or a member who is actually present at the time the meeting convenes. (Ord. 1873, 1998; Ord. 2345, 2018)

2.04.030 Emergency Meetings.
If, by reason of fire, flood, earthquake or other emergency, it shall be unsafe to meet in the place designated, the meeting may be held for the duration of the emergency at such place as is designated by the Mayor; provided, that the notice requirements shall be suspended during such emergency. (Ord. 2345, 2018)

2.04.040 Adjournments.
The City Council may adjourn any regular, adjourned regular, special or adjourned special meeting to a time and place specified in the order of adjournment. Less than a quorum may so adjourn from time to time. If all members are absent from any regular or adjourned regular meeting, the Clerk may declare the meeting adjourned to a stated time and place. The Clerk shall cause written notice of the adjournment to be given in the same manner as is provided for notice of special meetings unless such notice is waived as provided for with respect to special meetings. Whenever any meeting is adjourned, a copy of the order or notice of adjournment shall be conspicuously posted immediately after the time of adjournment on or near the door of the place where the regular, adjourned regular, special or adjourned special meeting was held. (Ord. 2345, 2018)

2.04.050 Executive Sessions.
The Council may, at the request of the Mayor, any Councilmember, or the City Attorney, hold an executive session which excludes the public. Before convening an executive session, the Mayor shall publicly announce the purpose for excluding the public from the meeting and the time when the executive session will be concluded. Executive sessions shall be held only for the purposes stated in RCW 42.30.110, as amended, or such other statutes that provide exemptions from the Open Public Meetings Act. (Ord. 2341, 2017; Ord. 2345, 2018)

2.04.060 Attendance – Vacancies.
A majority of the Council may excuse a Councilmember from attendance at a regular meeting. The Council may compel the attendance of a Councilmember by notice, should a Councilmember have three (3) or more consecutive unexcused absences or six (6) or more unexcused absences in a calendar year. Should a Councilmember fail to resume regular attendance after such notice, the Councilmember’s position may be declared vacant by the vote of not less than five (5) members of the Council. (Ord. 2345, 2018)

2.04.070 Participation by Audience – Procedure.
Public participation in the meetings of the City Council shall occur during discussion, public hearing and action items on the agenda and during the “citizen’s comments” agenda item of the meeting. Every regular meeting of the council shall have a “citizen’s comments” agenda item. Citizen comments should be to address items that are not on the agenda. Any person desiring to address the Council shall be requested to rise and address the Mayor, state his or her name, address and the subject matter to be addressed. When recognized by the Mayor, the person recognized shall address the Council for a period as set forth in the Council Rules of Procedure adopted by resolution not to exceed three (3) minutes; provided, however, that the Mayor may, in the Mayor’s sole discretion, extend the time for addressing the Council. (Ord. 2345, 2018)

2.04.080 Interference With Official Proceedings.
Persons in attendance at meetings of the City Council shall conduct themselves so as to not be in criminal contempt as prohibited by SMC 9.72.010. (Ord. 1642, 1988; Ord. 2345, 2018)

Chapter 2.06 UNIFORM POLICIES FOR BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS

Sections:
2.06.010     Purpose
2.06.015     Application
2.06.020     Attendance Policies – Termination and Replacement
2.06.030     Residency Requirements
2.06.035     Exceptions to the Residency Requirements
2.06.040     Meeting Location

2.06.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish uniform policies for city boards and commissions and to establish a process for review to insure that the organization is efficient and non-bureaucratic. It is further to assure public access to all meetings of such boards and commissions.
It shall also be a statement of the Council that all committees are creatures of the legislative body and shall not be deemed independent or autonomous to the legislative body.
A. All committees of the City of Snohomish shall be created by Ordinance of the City Council and shall contain a statement of purpose and need.
B. There shall be only four types of committees in the City of Snohomish and they shall have following purposes:
    1. Standing Committees. Such Committees are established to conduct business delegated by the legislative body (City Council) and may be authorized by separate state statue or City ordinance. Examples of standing committees are the planning commission and civil service commission.
    2. Special Committees. Such Committees are to investigate a special subject and report back to the City Council. An example is the Commission on Arts and Culture.
    3. Citizen Advisory Committees. Such Committees are to promote citizen participation on a particular subject or function. An example is the Citizens Police Advisory Board.
    4. Council Committees. A Councilmember shall chair Council Committees and serve the purposes established by Title 35A, RCW.

2.06.015 Application.
This chapter shall apply to all boards and Commissions created and/or regulated by the City. (Ord. 1809, 1996; Ord. 1836, 1997)
A. Every odd numbered year, unless prohibited by state statue, the City Council shall discuss and reauthorize committees of the city, as it deems appropriate. A reauthorization resolution shall state the current purpose and need for the committee and may include termination of or changes in the purpose and need as contained in the original authorizing ordinance.
B. The City Council may determine that a committee no longer is needed to provide advice to the Council, or to provide for an operational need of the organization and in such case, the City Council may choose to not reauthorize the committee. An ordinance repealing the original authorizing ordinance shall be placed on the Council agenda for formal action.
C. The City Council may exempt specific standing committees from provisions of this Chapter.
D. For the purpose of implementing this chapter, the review schedule should be every two years beginning with 1999 and then on each successive odd numbered year:
+------------------------------+-----------+
| Arts Commission              | January 1 |
+------------------------------+-----------+
| Board of Appeals             | January 1 |
+------------------------------+-----------+
| Civil Service Commission     | March 1   |
+------------------------------+-----------+
| Planning Commission          | March 1   |
+------------------------------+-----------+
| Design Review Board          | March 1   |
+------------------------------+-----------+
| Park and Recreation Board    | July 1    |
+------------------------------+-----------+
| Citizens Police Advisory Bd. | July 1    |
+------------------------------+-----------+
| Library Board of Trustees    | July 1    |
+------------------------------+-----------+

2.06.020 Attendance Policies – Termination and Replacement.
The Clerk’s Office will publish an annual list of regular meetings for each Board and Commission member and a list of available meeting locations by first of January each year. All board and commission members shall attend at least 75 percent of all regularly scheduled meetings in any calendar year. The only exception to this attendance policy is for the Board of Appeals, which meets only when there is an appeal filed with the City. No differentiation shall be made between excused and unexcused absences of board or commission members. Members who do not attend at least 75 percent of all regularly scheduled meetings in any calendar year will be notified by the Mayor in writing. Such failure to attend meetings may be deemed neglect of duty, malfeasance, or interruption or interference with the performance of official duty, and may subject the offending board or commission member to replacement or termination, at the discretion of the City Council. City Staff representatives to each board and commission will be responsible for preparing the annual attendance reports which will be submitted to the City Clerk by September 1 each year. Board and commission members who do not attend at least 75 percent of all regularly scheduled meetings in any calendar year will be notified by the Mayor in writing by September 15 of each year. (Ord. 1809, 1996; Ord. 1825, 1997)

2.06.030 Residency Requirements.
The majority of all board and commission members must live within the city limits. Members of the Civil Service Commission are required to be City residents as set forth in RCW 41.12.030. These residency requirements shall commence immediately. Current Board and Commission members who do not fulfill the residency requirements shall be allowed to finish their current terms but will not be eligible for reappointment. If a board or commission member moves out of the area, that member is no longer eligible to serve. Exceptions to the above regulations are listed in section 2.06.035. (Ord. 1825, 1997)

2.06.035 Exceptions to the Residency Requirements.
A. Members of the Planning Commission and the Parks and Recreation Board must live within the City’s urban growth boundary as defined by the most current adopted Community Development Plan Map; and
B. The majority of the Library Board of Trustee members must live with the City’s Library Capital Facilities Area;
D. The members of the Board of Appeals will have no residency requirements, but are eligible for membership based on their knowledge, experience and ability to provide informed and impartial decisions.
E. Membership on the Design Review Board, because of the expertise required to perform the duties of the Board, shall be limited to those with an interest in the City as a result of either living, working, owning property or business, and/or belonging to one of the City’s civic organizations. (Ord. 1837, 1997; Ord. 2233, 2012)

2.06.040 Meeting Location.
The City Council will designate meeting locations for its boards and commissions at the beginning of each year. (Ord. 1809, 1996)

Chapter 2.12 PARK AND RECREATION BOARD

Sections:
2.12.010     Created
2.12.020     Appointment – Terms – Vacancy – Compensation – Qualifications
2.12.030     Purpose – Duties of the Board
2.12.040     Rules, Election of Officers, Records, and Expenses
2.12.050     Removal

2.12.010 Created.
There is created a Park and Recreation Board consisting of five (5) members to serve in an advisory capacity to the Snohomish City Council. (Ord. 1895, 1999; Ord. 2334, 2018)

2.12.020 Appointment – Terms – Vacancy – Compensation – Qualifications.
A. The members of the Park and Recreation Board shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the City Council to three (3) year terms consistent with the requirements of SMC 2.06.030 and 2.06.035. Appointments made to fill vacancies caused by any reason shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term.
B. Members shall serve without compensation.
C. In addition, in making appointments to the Board, the appointing authority shall seek to appoint persons who are knowledgeable in matters of Park and Recreation and who possess qualities of impartiality and broad judgment, and an ability to reconcile conflicting viewpoints. Desired qualifications for Board members include an expertise in the fields of parks, sports, recreation programs and environmental preservation.
D. The Mayor shall strive to maintain a diverse representation of membership. (Ord. 1895, 1999; Ord. 2334, 2018)

2.12.030 Purpose – Duties of the Board.
A. The Park and Recreation Board shall advise and recommend to the Snohomish City Council rules and regulations for the government and management of all parks and shall advise the appointing power on policy and fiscal matters relating to parks and recreation programs within the City of Snohomish.
B. The Park and Recreation Board shall write an annual report to the City Council on its activities for the previous year and make special reports as necessary in response to specific Council requests. (Ord. 1895, 1999; Ord. 2334, 2018)

2.12.040 Rules, Election of Officers, Records, and Expenses.
A. The Board may adopt rules and regulations for the conduct of its business, subject to the approval of the City Council. A majority of the membership shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of transacting business. Action by the Board shall be by majority vote. A tie vote on a motion to approve shall constitute a failure of the motion.
B. The Park and Recreation Board shall elect a chairman and such other officers as it may deem necessary. Such officers shall occupy their respective offices for a period of one (1) year.
C. The Mayor, or his/her duly authorized representative, shall serve as Executive Secretary of the Board, and shall be responsible for all records. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings and such minutes and a copy of its rules shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk and open to inspection by the public. The City shall provide the Board with necessary administrative support and expense budget as needed to perform the functions described by this chapter.
D. No member of the Park and Recreation Board shall participate in discussion or vote on any matter involving any client he or she is serving or any business for which he or she is owner, corporate officer or employee. (Ord. 1895, 1999; Ord. 2334, 2018)

2.12.050 Removal.
Park and Recreation Board members may be removed after public hearing by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council for inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office. (Ord. 529, 1924; Ord. 1164, 1972; Ord. 1895, 1999; Ord. 2334, 2018)

Chapter 2.14 DESIGN REVIEW BOARD

Sections:
2.14.010     Created – Number of Members – Qualifications
2.14.020     Purpose – Objectives
2.14.030     Appointment to the Board – Terms – Vacancies – Compensation
2.14.040     Rules, Election of Officers, Records, and Expenses
2.14.050     Removal
2.14.060     Time, Place and Conduct of Meetings

2.14.010 Created – Number of Members – Qualifications.
There is created a Design Review Board for the City that shall have the powers, duties and functions as provided in this chapter. The Design Review Board shall consist of five members. All members shall be appointed consistent with SMC 2.06.030 and 2.06.035 by the Mayor with confirmation of the City Council.
In addition, in making appointments to the Board, the appointing authority shall seek to appoint persons who are knowledgeable in matters of design and aesthetic judgment by virtue of training, education, and/or experience, who possess qualities of impartiality and broad judgment, and an ability to review two-dimensional plans. Desired qualifications for Board members include an expertise in the fields of architecture, history, building trades, landscape architecture, graphic, interior and industrial design, and/or land development.

2.14.020 Purpose – Objectives.
The Design Review Board is created for the purpose of protecting investment in rehabilitation and restoration of historic structures and to encourage better design and site planning. The Historic District represents an economic and cultural asset to the City of Snohomish and design review helps preserve this asset by keeping its character intact. The City’s vision statement establishes the framework for design review.

2.14.030 Appointment to the Board – Terms – Vacancies – Compensation.
The initial appointment of members to the Board shall be for the following respective terms: two for two years, two for three years, and remaining members for four years. Thereafter, all appointments shall be for a term of four years. A person appointed to fill vacancy shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term.
Members shall serve without compensation.

2.14.040 Rules, Election of Officers, Records, and Expenses.
The Board shall adopt rules and regulations for the conduct of its business, subject to the approval of the City Council. A majority of the membership shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of transacting business. Action by the Board shall be by majority vote, provided no action may be taken without affirmative vote of at least three members. A tie vote on a motion to approve shall constitute a failure of the motion.
The Design Review Board shall elect a chairman and such other officers as it may deem necessary. Such officers shall occupy their respective offices for a period of one year.
The City Planner, or his duly authorized representative, shall serve as executive secretary of the Board, and shall be responsible for all records. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings and such minutes and a copy of its rules shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk and open to inspection by the public. The City shall provide the Board with necessary administrative support and expense budget as needed to perform the function described by this chapter.
No member of the Design Review Board shall participate in discussion or vote on any matter involving any client he or she is serving or any business for which he or she is owner, corporate officer or employee.

2.14.050 Removal.
The Mayor, with the concurrence of a majority of the City Council, shall have the authority to remove, replace or terminate any Board member without cause, including without limitation in conformance with provisions of SMC 2.06.020. (Ord. 1891, 1999)

2.14.060 Time, Place and Conduct of Meetings.
Meeting times of the Design Review Board shall be established by the City Council, except that the Mayor may schedule special meetings to accommodate workload or to ensure that the cost to applicants and the City are as low as possible. Generally, meeting times shall be at the same time and place from month to month. The Design Review Board shall comply with the provisions of the State Open Meetings Act. (Ord. 1978, 2001; Ord. 2341, 2017)

Chapter 2.16 PLANNING COMMISSION

Sections:
2.16.010     Created – Number
2.16.020     Members – Qualifications
2.16.030     Appointment to the Commission – Terms – Vacancies – Compensation
2.16.040     Powers
2.16.050     Purpose and Objectives
2.16.060     Officers, Rules, Election of Officers, Records, and Expenses
2.16.070     Removal

2.16.010 Created – Number.
A City Planning Commission is created to serve in an advisory capacity to the Snohomish City Council pursuant to RCW 35A.63.020 and shall consist of seven members.

2.16.020 Members – Qualifications.
The members of the Planning Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the City Council, consistent with the requirements of SMC 2.06.030 and 2.06.035. The Mayor shall strive to maintain a diverse representation of membership.

2.16.030 Appointment to the Commission – Terms – Vacancies – Compensation.
Terms of appointment for the appointive members shall be in such manner as to provide that the fewest possible terms expire in any one year. The term of office for all Planning Commissioners is six years. If a Planning Commissioner resigns prior to the normal end of his term, an appointment will be made for completion of the unexpired term.
Members shall serve without compensation.

2.16.040 Powers.
The powers of the Planning Commission shall be as provided by City Ordinance and RCW Chapter 35A.63, as amended.

2.16.050 Purpose and Objectives.
The Planning Commission is created for the purpose of considering land-use, regional and comprehensive plan issues, and making recommendations to the City Council. The Planning Commission may recommend moratoria and/or interim land-use controls and hold public hearings as deemed necessary by the City Council. The City’s vision statement establishes the framework for Planning Commission review.

2.16.060 Officers, Rules, Election of Officers, Records, and Expenses.
The Commission shall adopt rules and regulations for the conduct of its business, subject to the approval of the City Council. A majority of the membership shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of transacting business. Action by the Commission shall be by majority vote. A tie vote on a motion to approve shall constitute a failure of the motion.
Each December, the Planning Commission shall elect from among its members a chair and vice chair. Such officers shall occupy their respective offices beginning January 1st of the following year. Members serving part or all of a one-year term as chair or vice chair shall be eligible for election to one additional consecutive one-year term at that officer position, for a maximum of two consecutive one-year terms.
A commissioner elected to serve two, consecutive one-year terms as vice chair or chair would, the following year, be ineligible for election to that same officer position. Following one year of ineligibility, the commissioner would again be eligible for election to that same position.
A commissioner elected to serve two, consecutive one-year terms as vice chair or chair and then two, consecutive one-year terms in the other officer position (four consecutive years total) would, the following year, be ineligible for election to any officer position. Following one year of ineligibility, the commissioner would again be eligible for election to either officer position.)
The City Planner, or his duly authorized representative, shall serve as executive secretary of the Commission, and shall be responsible for all records. All meetings of the Board shall be subject to the Open Public Meetings Act. The Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings and such minutes shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk.
The Planning Commission shall provide an annual report to the City Council on its activities for the previous year and make special reports as necessary in response to specific Council requests. (Ord. 2227, 2011)
The City shall provide the Commission with necessary administrative support and expense budget as needed to perform the function described by this chapter.

2.16.070 Removal.
Planning Commissioners may be removed after public hearing by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council for inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office.

Chapter 2.23 LODGING TAX ADVISORY COMMISSION

Sections:
2.23.010     Commission Created – Appointment and Term
2.23.020     Duties of the Commission. The trustees shall perform the following duties
2.23.030     Election of Officers
2.23.040     Meetings
2.23.050     Records
2.23.060     Membership – Vacancy
2.23.070     Removal from the Commission

2.23.010 Commission Created – Appointment and Term.
There is created for the review and recommendation of changes to the Hotel Motel Tax, a Lodging Tax Advisory Commission to consist of five members appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council and consistent with SMC 2.06.030. Two members of the committee shall be appointed from businesses that collect Hotel Motel Tax. One City Council member shall be appointed to chair the Lodging Tax Advisory Commission. Two members of the commission shall be appointed from organizations that use the Hotel Motel Tax. Each commission member shall be appointed to serve an annual term, effective from September 1 to August 31 of the current year. Commission members shall receive no salary or other compensation

2.23.020 Duties of the Commission. The trustees shall perform the following duties.
To review and make recommendations on proposed changes to the Hotel Motel Tax rates and uses to the City Council pursuant to RCW 87.28.

2.23.030 Election of Officers.
A Councilmember shall act as Chair of the Commission and the Commission shall elect officers including a secretary and as may deem necessary by the majority of the Commission. Such officers shall occupy their respective offices for a period of one year

2.23.040 Meetings.
The Lodging Tax Advisory Commission shall hold at least one meeting annually, as part of the City’s regular budget process, or at the call of the City Council. Three or more members shall constitute a quorum. Action taken by the quorum shall be deemed and taken as action by the commission

2.23.050 Records.
The secretary of the Commission shall record the minutes of the Lodging Tax Advisory Commission’s proceedings and these shall be maintained as public record

2.23.060 Membership – Vacancy.
Vacancies on the Lodging Tax Advisory Commission on shall be filled in the same manner as original appointments described in Section 2.23.010. Appointments made to fill vacancies caused by any reason shall be for the unexpired term of the member being replaced

2.23.070 Removal from the Commission.
A member of the commission may be removed from the Board only by a majority vote of the City Council

Chapter 2.27 PUBLIC SAFETY COMMISSION

Sections:
2.27.010     Authority of Police Chief – Written Recommendation/Objection
2.27.015     Public Safety Commission Established
2.27.020     Membership – Appointment – Terms
2.27.030     Membership – Vacancy
2.27.040     Compensation
2.27.050     Meetings – Officers – Rules
2.27.060     Duties of the Commission
2.27.070     Staff Support
2.27.080     Public Records

2.27.010 Authority of Police Chief – Written Recommendation/Objection.
The City Council hereby delegates to the Snohomish Police Chief or his/her designee authority to make written recommendations and objections regarding liquor license applications, following review and approval by the City Administrator, and as appropriate and necessary, to request a hearing before the Liquor and Cannabis Board. The Council delegates to the Chief of Police, following review and approval by the City Administrator, final authority regarding submittal to the Liquor and Cannabis Board of the City’s recommended approval or objection to a liquor license application or renewal thereof. (Ord. 2340, 2018)

2.27.015 Public Safety Commission Established.
There is hereby established an advisory commission that shall be known as the “Public Safety Commission.”

2.27.020 Membership – Appointment – Terms.
The Public Safety Commission shall consist of seven (7) adult members who shall be qualified consistent with SMC 2.06.030 and 2.06.035 and appointed by the Mayor subject to confirmation by the City Council.
The Commission’s membership shall consist of residents of the City of Snohomish or owners of businesses which are located within the corporate City limits of the City of Snohomish. Among the seven (7) adult Commission members, the Mayor shall endeavor, but shall not be required to appoint one person who owns or manages a business that possesses a liquor license within the corporate City limits of Snohomish.
Initial appointments shall be made for terms of from one (1) to four (4) years so that the terms of not more than two (2) members shall expire in any one year. All subsequent appointments shall be for a term of four (4) years.

2.27.030 Membership – Vacancy.
Vacancies on the Commission shall be filled in the same manner as original appointments and shall be made for the remainder of the term of the member being replaced. All members shall conform to the attendance requirements set fourth in SMC 2.06.020, and may be replaced or terminated in accordance with that section.

2.27.040 Compensation.
No member of the Commission shall receive compensation for services performed.

2.27.050 Meetings – Officers – Rules.
The Commission shall make its own rules for the election of officers and for time and place of meetings, PROVIDED, the Commission must be prepared to meet quickly and timely when the Liquor Control Board provides notice of application or renewal. Action on any recommendation of the Commission shall require a majority of the members be present.

2.27.060 Duties of the Commission.
A. The Commission shall act in an advisory capacity to the Chief of Police or his/her designee.
B. The Commission, at the request of the Chief of Police or Mayor, shall review the Police Chief’s written recommendations to the Liquor and Cannabis Board for new applications or for renewal of liquor licenses, make recommendations, and either approve or disapprove the Police Chief’s written recommendations. The Police Chief may consider the Commission’s recommendations and comments but the Chief of Police has final authority regarding submittal to the Liquor and Cannabis Board of approval or objection to a liquor license or renewal thereof.
C. The Commission may, but shall not be required to, take public comment.
D. In addition to review of recommendations on liquor licenses, the Commission shall focus on public safety issues and problems specifically or generally in the following areas of public interest: whether the liquor license at the proposed location or to the applicant business will detrimentally impact the safety, health, or welfare of the community; review and discussion of law enforcement priorities; review and coordination of Neighborhood Watch, Snohomish Police Foundation, or similar programs; review and coordination of the Fire District’s Community Emergency Response Team or similar programs; review and discussion of emergency fire and medical response priorities; and related matters.
E. With the assistance of the Chief of Police or his/her designee, the Commission shall write an annual report to the City Council on its activities for the previous year and make special reports as necessary in response to specific Council requests. (Ord. 2341, 2017)

2.27.070 Staff Support.
The City of Snohomish shall provide staff support for the Commission, subject to the approval of the Mayor. (Ord. 2341, 2017)

2.27.080 Public Records.
The Commission shall keep a public record of its rules, procedures, and minutes of meetings conducted by the Commission. (Ord. 2235, 2012)

Chapter 2.28 CITY CLERK

Sections:
2.28.010     Office of City Clerk Established
2.28.020     Appointment
2.28.030     Powers and Duties
2.28.040     Deputy City Clerk

2.28.010 Office of City Clerk Established.
There is established the Office of City Clerk in and for the City of Snohomish.

2.28.020 Appointment.
The Mayor [with confirmation by the City Council] shall have the power of appointment and removal of the City Clerk. A person may be eligible for such appointment concurrently with service in the position of City Treasurer pursuant to RCW 35.23.142. (Ord. 2339, 2017)

2.28.030 Powers and Duties.
The powers, duties and responsibilities of the City Clerk shall be subject to the direction, authority and supervision of the Mayor, and shall include without limitation the following:
A. Keep a full and true record of every act and proceeding of the City Council;
B. Record all ordinances passed by the City Council, annexing thereto the clerk's certificate giving the number and title of the ordinance, stating the ordinance was published and posted according to law and that the record is a true and correct copy thereof;
C. Act as custodian of the seal of the City of Snohomish, and exercise the authority to acknowledge the execution of all instruments by the City requiring such acknowledgment;
D. Perform all duties specified in RCW 35.23.120, as applicable;
E. Perform such other duties as may be required by the Mayor and as shall be enumerated in a written job description to be adopted by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 2341, 2017)

2.28.040 Deputy City Clerk.
The Mayor [with confirmation by the City Council] may appoint one or more Deputy City Clerks. In the absence of the City Clerk, the Deputy shall have all of the powers, duties and authorities of the City Clerk. (Ord. 1642, 1988; Ord. 1873, 1998; Ord. 2339, 2017)

Chapter 2.30 CITY TREASURER

Sections:
2.30.010     Office of City Treasurer Established
2.30.020     Appointment
2.30.030     Powers and Duties
2.30.040     Deputy City Treasurer

2.30.010 Office of City Treasurer Established.
There is hereby established the Office of City Treasurer in and for the City of Snohomish.

2.30.020 Appointment.
The Mayor, with confirmation by the City Council, shall have the power of appointment and removal of the City Treasurer. A person may be eligible to serve in the position of City Treasurer concurrently with the position of City Clerk pursuant to RCW 35.23.142. (Ord. 2339, 2017)

2.30.030 Powers and Duties.
The powers, duties and responsibilities of the City Treasurer shall be subject to the direction, authority and supervision of the Mayor, and shall include, without limitation, the following:
A. Receive and safely keep all money which comes into the City treasury, and follow all laws of the State of Washington regarding the accountability therefor;
B. Keep such books, accounts, and make such reports as may be required by the Division of Municipal Corporations of the Office of the State Auditor;
C. Exercise the duties and authority of the City Treasurer as provided in RCW 35.23.131, as applicable to the City;
D. Exercise the duties and authority of Auditing Officer as provided in RCW 42.24.080, as applicable to the City;
E. Perform such other duties as may be required by the Mayor and as shall be enumerated in a written job description to be adopted by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 1873, 1998; Ord. 2341, 2017)

2.30.040 Deputy City Treasurer.
A Deputy City Treasurer may be appointed by the Mayor, with confirmation by the City Council. In the absence of the City Treasurer, the Deputy shall have all of the powers, duties and authority of the City Treasurer. (Ord. 1873, 1998; Ord. 2339, 2017)

Chapter 2.32 CITY ATTORNEY

Sections:
2.32.010     Duty to Conduct Suits Defend City
2.32.020     Appeal Cases
2.32.030     Preparing Ordinances, Contracts Attending Council Meetings

2.32.010 Duty to Conduct Suits Defend City.
In addition to the duties of the City Attorney, as now prescribed by law, he shall appear in all courts and conduct all suits, either at law or in equity, in which the City is either the complainant or the defendant; and he shall prepare all informations and complaints against all persons charged with violating any of the ordinances of the City of Snohomish and he shall appear before the court having jurisdiction of the offense charged and conduct the prosecution of said cause on the part of the City. (Ord. 97, 1893)

2.32.020 Appeal Cases.
In all cases appealed, whether civil or criminal, the City Attorney shall appear and represent said city before the appellate court and prosecute or defend the action as the case may demand, before said court. (Ord. 97, 1893)

2.32.030 Preparing Ordinances, Contracts Attending Council Meetings.
It shall be the duty of the City Attorney to prepare all ordinances as well as all conveyances, contracts, and bonds to which the City may be a party; to prepare all notices which the law or ordinances require the city to make and publish; to attend all regular and special meetings of the City Council and do and perform all such other duties as are required of him by the ordinances of the City and the laws of the State of Washington. (Ord. 97, 1893)

Chapter 2.33 HEARING EXAMINER

Sections:
2.33.010     Purpose
2.33.020     Creation of Hearing Examiner
2.33.030     Appointment
2.33.040     Qualifications
2.33.050     Removal
2.33.060     Freedom from Improper Influence
2.33.070     Rules
2.33.080     Duties of the Hearing Examiner
2.33.090     Conflicting Code Provisions and Rules of Procedure

2.33.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a quasi-judicial hearing system, which will ensure procedural due process and appearance of fairness in regulatory hearings and will provide an efficient and effective hearing process for quasi-judicial matters.

2.33.020 Creation of Hearing Examiner.
The Office of Hearing Examiner, hereinafter referred to as “Examiner,” is created. The Examiner shall perform the duties and functions specified in this chapter, together with such other quasi-judicial duties and functions as may be delegated by the Mayor and City Council. Unless the context requires otherwise, the term “Examiner” as used herein shall include any examiner pro tem who may be appointed.

2.33.030 Appointment.
The Examiner shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to confirmation by a majority vote of the City Council. The terms of the Examiner's employment shall be specified by a professional service contract. An Examiner pro tem may also be appointed by the mayor subject to confirmation by majority vote of the City Council. An Examiner pro tem shall serve in the event of absence or disqualification of the Examiner.

2.33.040 Qualifications.
The Examiner shall be appointed solely with regard to his or her qualification for the duties of the office, and will have such training and experience as will qualify the examiner to conduct administrative and quasi-judicial hearings on regulatory enactments and to discharge such other functions conferred upon the examiner by the Mayor and City Council. The Examiner shall hold no other elective or appointive office or position in City government.

2.33.050 Removal.
The Examiner may be removed from office for cause by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by a majority vote of the City Council.

2.33.060 Freedom from Improper Influence.
No Councilmember, City official or any other person shall attempt to interfere with or improperly influence the Examiner in the performance of his or her designated duties.

2.33.070 Rules.
The Examiner shall have the power to prescribe written rules and regulations for the scheduling and conduct of hearings and other procedural matters related to the duties of the office.

2.33.080 Duties of the Hearing Examiner.
The Examiner is vested with the duty and authority to hold public hearings and render decisions as specified in Title 14.

2.33.090 Conflicting Code Provisions and Rules of Procedure.
Any and all provisions of this code, and any and all provisions of the rules of procedure adopted by the examiner, which are in conflict with this chapter are superseded. (Ord. 1801, 1996; Ord. 1872, 1998; Ord. 1873, 1998)

Chapter 2.34 CITY PLANNER

Sections:
2.34.010     Office of City Planner Established
2.34.020     Appointment
2.34.030     Powers and Duties

2.34.010 Office of City Planner Established.
There is established the Office of City Planner in and for the City of Snohomish.

2.34.020 Appointment.
The Mayor, with confirmation by the City Council, shall have the power of appointment and removal of the City Planner. (Ord. 2339, 2017)

2.34.030 Powers and Duties.
The powers, duties and responsibilities of the City Planner shall be subject to the direction, authority and supervision of the Mayor, and shall be enumerated in a written job description to be adopted by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 2341, 2017)

Chapter 2.36 CITY ENGINEER

Sections:
2.36.010     Office of City Engineer Established
2.36.020     Appointment
2.36.030     Powers and Duties

2.36.010 Office of City Engineer Established.
There is created the Office of City Engineer in and for the City of Snohomish.

2.36.020 Appointment.
The Mayor, with confirmation by the City Council, shall have the power of appointment and removal of the City Engineer. (Ord. 2339, 2017)

2.36.030 Powers and Duties.
The powers, duties and responsibilities of the City Engineer shall be subject to the direction, authority and supervision of the Mayor, and shall be enumerated in a written job description to be adopted by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 2341, 2017)

Chapter 2.37 CITY ADMINISTRATOR

Sections:
2.37.010     Office Created
2.37.020     Scope of Authority
2.37.030     Powers and Duties

2.37.010 Office Created.
There is created the office of City Administrator, which office shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the City Council. The City Administrator shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor pursuant to an employment contract proposed by the Mayor and approved by the City Council. (Ord. 2323, 2016)

2.37.020 Scope of Authority.
Under the direction and authority of the Mayor, the City Administrator shall supervise, administer and coordinate the activities and functions of all City officers, departments, commissions and boards to implement City ordinances and policies through the effective use of City employees, funds, grants, materials, facilities and time, and shall control the overall operations of the City to ensure optimum service to the community. (Ord. 2323, 2016)

2.37.030 Powers and Duties.
Under the direction and authority of the Mayor, the City Administrator shall have the following powers and duties:
A. Plan and direct all administrative activities of the City, develop and implement internal policies and procedures, evaluate City employees, and take necessary actions to improve operations;
B. Provide information and advice to the Mayor, City Council, other public officials and the general public regarding City operations;
C. Act as the City representative in such areas as labor relations, intergovernmental relations, conferences, conventions and seminars related to public management;
D. Delegate responsibility as necessary to accomplish the desired objectives;
E. Attend meetings of the City Council, and other boards and commissions as necessary, to coordinate and satisfy the administrative needs of the City;
F. Act to resolve operational conflicts, decide and implement alternate courses of action, formulate administrative policies and otherwise make decisions in the best interest of the City’s operation; and
G. Coordinate and supervise the preparation of the preliminary budget for submittal to the Mayor, and administer the entire budget after its adoption. (Ord. 2323, 2016)

Chapter 2.40 OATHS AND BONDS OF OFFICE

Sections:
2.40.010     Oath of Office
2.40.020     Blanket Bond Coverage
2.40.030     Individual Faithful Performance Bonds

2.40.010 Oath of Office.
The Mayor, City Administrator, City Attorney, City Clerk, City Treasurer, any Deputy City Treasurer, and the Chief of Police, before entering upon the discharge of their official duties, shall take and subscribe an oath of office. (Ord. 2341, 2017)

2.40.020 Blanket Bond Coverage.
If available, the City shall subscribe to and maintain blanket bond coverage by and through the Washington Cities Insurance Authority. Such coverage shall be bound for the Mayor, City Administrator, City Attorney, City Clerk, City Treasurer, and Deputy City Treasurer, the Chief of Police, and the Utility Accountant before any said officers shall enter upon the discharge of their official duties. (Ord. 2341, 2017)

2.40.030 Individual Faithful Performance Bonds.
Should blanket bond coverage not be available through the Washington Cities Insurance Authority, the Mayor, City Administrator, the City Attorney, the City Clerk, the City Treasurer, and Deputy City Treasurer, the Chief of Police and the Utility Clerk, before entering upon the discharge of their official duties, shall enter into an individual faithful performance bond with a surety approved by the City Council in the following amounts:
+--------------------+-------------+
|       Office       | Bond Amount |
+--------------------+-------------+
| Mayor              | $100,000    |
+--------------------+-------------+
| City Administrator | $100,000    |
+--------------------+-------------+
| City Attorney      | $100,000    |
+--------------------+-------------+
| City Clerk         | $100,000    |
+--------------------+-------------+
| City Treasurer     | $100,000    |
+--------------------+-------------+
| Chief of Police    | $100,000    |
+--------------------+-------------+
| Utility Clerk      | $100,000    |
+--------------------+-------------+
The premium on each such individual faithful performance bond shall be paid by the City. (Ord. 1833, 1997; Ord. 2341, 2017)

Chapter 2.64 COMPENSATION OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES

Sections:
2.64.010     Mayor – Salary
2.64.020     Councilmember – Salary
2.64.040     City Officials – Salary
2.64.050     Effective Date of Increases
2.64.060     Expense Account

2.64.010 Mayor – Salary.
The salary of the position of Mayor is fixed at $18,000 per year, payable at $1,500 per month. (Ord. 1828, 1997; Ord. 2041, 2003; Ord. 2278, 2014; Ord. 2324, 2017)

2.64.020 Councilmember – Salary.
The salary of each Councilmember is fixed at $6,156 per year, payable at $513 per month. (Ord. 1828, 1997; Ord. 2041, 2003; Ord. 2278, 2014)

2.64.040 City Officials – Salary.
The salaries of the City Planner, City Engineer, City Clerk, and City Treasurer shall be in such amount as the Mayor will determine with the concurrence of the City Council. (Ord. 2233, 2012; Ord. 2339, 2017)

2.64.050 Effective Date of Increases.
Section 2.64.020 shall be effective as to increases of present salaries of each such office only following expiration of the present term of office. (Ord. 920, 1962; Ord. 2041, 2003; Ord. 2278, 2014; Ord. 2324, 2017)

2.64.060 Expense Account.
The mayor and members of the City Council shall be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in the discharge of their official duties upon presentation of a claim therefor, after allowance and approval thereof by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 712, 1942)

Chapter 2.82 PUBLIC SAFETY DEPARTMENT

Sections:
2.82.005     Authority to Contract for Police Services through Interlocal Agreement – Alternative and Exclusion
2.82.010     Public Safety Department
2.82.020     Chief of Police
2.82.030     Classified Personnel
2.82.040     Commissions
2.82.050     Rules and Regulations
2.82.060     Reserve Officers

2.82.005 Authority to Contract for Police Services through Interlocal Agreement – Alternative and Exclusion.
A. As an alternative to providing City employed Police Services, the City of Snohomish is authorized to contract for Police Services through an Interlocal Agreement with other County or Municipal law enforcement agencies (Contract Agency). (Ord. 2233, 2012)
B. In the event the City Contracts for Police Services, the following provisions shall apply:
    1. All references in the Snohomish Municipal Code (SMC) to the “Public Safety Department,” “Police Department,” “Department,” “Police Department Chain of Command,” “Police Department Chain of Command Protocol,” “Chief’s designee,” “Police Officer,” “Law Enforcement Officer,” “Officer,” or “Police” – its authority, duties, and responsibilities as set forth in this chapter and in the entire Snohomish Municipal Code (SMC), shall apply, unless provided otherwise, to the Contract Agency. (Ord. 2233, 2012)
    2. All references in the Snohomish Municipal Code (SMC) to the “Chief of Police,” “Police Chief,” or “Chief” and the authority, duties, and responsibilities as set forth in this chapter and in the entire Snohomish Municipal Code (SMC) shall apply, unless provided otherwise, to the “Chief of Police” employed and provided by the Contract Agency and approved and appointed by the City. (Ord. 2233, 2012)
C. EXCLUSION. The provisions of SMC Chapter 2.90 entitled “LEGAL ACTION AGAINST CITY OFFICIALS, EMPLOYEES AND VOLUNTEERS” shall not apply to the Employees, Officers, or Police Chief provided by the Contract Agency. (Ord. 2233, 2012)

2.82.010 Public Safety Department.
The Public Safety Department of the City of Snohomish shall be the law enforcement agency of the jurisdiction. Its primary function shall be the detection and apprehension of persons committing infractions or violating traffic or criminal laws duly enacted by the City, state, and federal governments. The Department may operate a City jail and shall enforce parking, animal control, and nuisance laws. The Department shall further perform such other duties and functions as may be delegated to it by the Mayor and City Council, consistent with law. (Ord. 2341, 2017)

2.82.020 Chief of Police.
The Chief of Police shall be the commander and administrative head of the Public Safety Department, and shall also be responsible for the City’s contract for fire protection and emergency medical services with Snohomish County Fire District #4. The Chief shall be responsible to the Mayor and City Council. Eligibility requirements for the position shall generally be established by contract, written job description, and by direction of the Mayor and City Council, and shall be consistent with the criteria specified in RCW 35.21.333. In the absence of the Chief of Police, the command of the Department shall be assumed by the next highest ranking officer of the Department unless otherwise specified by written directive from the Chief of Police. (Ord. 2341, 2017)

2.82.030 Classified Personnel.
All full-time, paid, uniformed and commissioned employees of the Public Safety Department, excluding clerical employees and the Chief of Police, shall be in the classified service, and under the jurisdiction of the Civil Service Commission. (This section shall not apply if the City chooses to contract for Police Services as authorized in Section 2.82.005). (Ord. 2233, 2012)

2.82.040 Commissions.
The Chief of Police is authorized to issue the following commissions of law enforcement authority:
A. Full commissions shall be issued to all general authority police officers in the police department who are employed on a full time, fully compensated basis.
B. In the event the City employs officers to enforce parking, animal control, and nuisance laws, limited commissions shall be issued to such officers who are employed on a full time, fully compensated basis. Said commissions shall authorize such officers to enforce the parking, animal control, and nuisance laws of the City.
C. In the event the City employs custody officers, limited commissions shall be issued to such custody officers authorizing them to enforce all criminal laws relevant to the safe and secure operation of the City jail and the control of prisoners. Said commissions shall be effective only during the hours that a custody officer is on duty for the City.
D. Reserve commissions shall be issued to reserve officers as defined in Section 2.82.060. Said commissions shall be equivalent to full commissions whenever a reserve officer is called into active service. Said commissions shall be effective only during the hours that a reserve officer is on duty for the City.
E. Special commissions may be issued to peace officers of other jurisdictions pursuant to RCW Chapter 10.93.
F. A limited commission to volunteers to issue notices of infractions for violations of the City’s parking regulations pursuant to SMC 11.08. All such volunteers must be at least 21 years of age. In appointing volunteers, the Chief of Police may establish any other qualifications he deems desirable.

2.82.050 Rules and Regulations.
The Police Chief is authorized to make and enforce such rules and regulations for the administration, implementation and enforcement of the duties, functions and responsibilities of the department as may be necessary from time to time. A copy of such rules and regulations shall be on file in the department, and shall be accessible to all employees and the public during all business hours of the City.

2.82.060 Reserve Officers.
Eligibility, training requirements, certification procedures and ranks of reserve officers shall be established by the Chief of Police. Reserve officers shall not be employees of the City, and shall be paid no compensation by the City, except to the extent that reserve officers may be hired under special circumstances as temporary employees of the City. The authority of reserve officers shall be specified by the commission issued by the Chief of Police. All authorized duties, services and functions performed by reserve officers shall be specified, directed and supervised by the Chief of Police or his designee. The Chief of Police may revoke a reserve commission, and terminate a reserve officer’s position at any time with or without cause. (Ord. 1870, 1998)

Chapter 2.86 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT

Sections:
2.86.010     Purpose
2.86.020     Emergency Management Policy
2.86.030     Emergency Management Defined
2.86.040     Emergency or Disaster Defined
2.86.050     Emergency Management Coordinator Defined
2.86.060     Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan Annex (SNO-CEMP)
2.86.061     Snohomish County Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan (SC-CEMP) Adopted by Reference
2.86.062     Snohomish County Hazard Mitigation Plan (SCHMP) Adopted by Reference
2.86.063     Snohomish County Department of Public Works, Solid Waste Division, Disaster Debris Management Plan (DDMP) Adopted by Reference
2.86.070     Emergency Management Organization
2.86.080     Mayor Duties and Powers
2.86.090     Mayor Succession
2.86.100     Emergency Management Coordinator-Power and Duties
2.86.110     Functions and Duties of Departments and Employees
2.86.120     Liability – RCW 38.52.180 Adoption by Reference
2.86.130     Violation-Penalties
2.86.140     Severability

2.86.010 Purpose.
This chapter provides for the preparation for mitigation, preparedness, response, and recovery for persons and property within the City of Snohomish in the event of an emergency or disaster; to provide for the coordination of emergency functions and services of the City of Snohomish; and with those of other public agencies and affected private persons, corporations, and organizations. Any expenditure made in connection with such emergency management activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property within the City of Snohomish. (Ord. 2026, 2003; Ord. 2306, 2016)

2.86.020 Emergency Management Policy.
A. It is the policy of the City of Snohomish to make the best possible preparation and use of manpower, resources, and facilities for dealing with any emergency or disaster that may occur, and to cooperate to the extent possible with adjacent jurisdictions in order to make maximum use of local emergency response and recovery resources.
B. All personnel of the City of Snohomish are directed to support the emergency and disaster preparedness, response and recovery activities of the emergency management organization as defined in the approved Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan.
C. Because the demands of the emergency may prevent the City from meeting all of the immediate needs of the community, each citizen is encouraged to prepare for at least seven (7) days without outside help. (Ord. 2026, 2003; Ord. 2306, 2016)

2.86.030 Emergency Management Defined.
“Emergency Management” or “comprehensive emergency management” shall mean the preparations for, and the carrying out of, all emergency functions, other than functions for which the military forces are primarily responsible, to mitigate, prepare for, respond to, and recover from emergencies and disasters, and to aid victims suffering from injury or damage resulting from disasters caused by all hazards, whether natural, technological, or human-caused, and to provide support for search and rescue operations for persons and property in distress. However, “emergency management” or “comprehensive emergency management” does not mean preparation for emergency evacuation or relocation of residences in anticipation of nuclear attack. (Ord. 2026, 2003; Ord. 2306, 2016)

2.86.040 Emergency or Disaster Defined.
“Emergency or Disaster” as used in this chapter shall mean an event or set of circumstances which: (a) demands immediate action to preserve public health, protect life, protect property, protect public property, or to provide relief to any stricken neighborhood overtaken by such occurrences, or (b) reaches such a dimension or degree of destructiveness as to warrant the City Council or Mayor proclaiming the existence of a disaster or emergency or the Governor declaring a state of emergency in accordance with appropriate local and State statute. (Ord. 2026, 2003; Ord. 2220, 2011; Ord. 2306, 2016; Ord. 2341, 2017)

2.86.050 Emergency Management Coordinator Defined.
Under the direction of the Mayor, performs administrative and technical work in the development, implementation and coordination of the City’s Emergency Management Program; the City’s Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan; coordinates and acts as liaison for the City’s disaster recovery efforts; oversees the disaster training, exercises and public awareness programs; and performs related duties as assigned. The Chief of Police, or their designee, shall be the Emergency Management Coordinator for the City of Snohomish. Where the Chief of Police, or their designee is unavailable to act as the Emergency Management Coordinator during an event, the Mayor may designate City Staff to act in the Emergency Management Coordinator capacity. (Ord. 2026, 2003; Ord. 2220, 2011; Ord. 2306, 2016; Ord. 2341, 2017)

2.86.060 Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan Annex (SNO-CEMP).
A. The City of Snohomish Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan Annex (SNO-CEMP) provides the framework for mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery activities that establishes functions and responsibilities to save lives, protect public health, safety, property, the economy and the environment and foster a return to a normal way of life.
B. The SNO-CEMP is developed as an annex of the Snohomish County Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan (SC-CEMP).
C. The City of Snohomish Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan Annex (SNO-CEMP) is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as though fully set forth in this Chapter, as now or hereafter amended.
D. A copy of the SNO-CEMP shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk. (Ord. 2026, 2003; Ord. 2220, 2011; Ord. 2306, 2016)

2.86.061 Snohomish County Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan (SC-CEMP) Adopted by Reference.
The current edition of the Snohomish County Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan (SC-CEMP) as promulgated by the Snohomish County Department of Emergency Management and adopted by the Snohomish County Council, is adopted and incorporated by reference as though fully set forth in this Chapter, as now or hereafter amended.

2.86.062 Snohomish County Hazard Mitigation Plan (SCHMP) Adopted by Reference.
The current edition of the Snohomish County Hazard Mitigation Plan (SCHMP) as approved by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and adopted by the Snohomish City Council, is adopted and incorporated by reference as though fully set forth in this Chapter, as now or hereafter amended.

2.86.063 Snohomish County Department of Public Works, Solid Waste Division, Disaster Debris Management Plan (DDMP) Adopted by Reference.
The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) requires that municipalities adopt a disaster debris management plan. As an emergency management partner with Snohomish County, the City of Snohomish utilizes the current edition of the Snohomish County Department of Public Works, Solid Waste Division, Disaster Debris Management Plan (DDMP). The current edition of the Snohomish County Department of Public Works, Solid Waste Division, Disaster Debris Management Plan (DDMP) is adopted and incorporated by reference as though fully set forth in this Chapter, as now or hereafter amended. (Ord. 2306, 2016)

2.86.070 Emergency Management Organization.
The Emergency Management Organization of the City of Snohomish is hereby created, and shall consist of:
A. The City of Snohomish has the authority and responsibility to respond and direct disaster operations within its borders pursuant to the adopted Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan Annex (SNO-CEMP).
B. The Mayor shall be the administrative head of, and have direct responsibility for, the organization, administration, and operation of the Emergency Management Organization and Program for the City of Snohomish and for the emergency operations of the City.
C. The Emergency Management Coordinator shall develop and maintain the Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan Annex (SNO-CEMP), and shall have such other duties as may be assigned by the Mayor or as provided in the approved SNO-CEMP.
D. The City Council, during emergency operations, provides guidance to the Mayor on matters of public policy, budget authorizations and emergency declarations and other matters as they may arise. (Ord. 2306, 2016; Ord. 2340, 2018)

2.86.080 Mayor Duties and Powers.
The Mayor is hereby empowered to:
A. Request the City Council to proclaim or declare the existence, or threatened existence, of a disaster or emergency and the termination thereof, or if the City Council is not in session or unavailable, the Mayor may issue such proclamation or declaration of disaster or emergency, subject to confirmation by the City Council at the earliest practicable time if necessary;
B. Direct coordination and cooperation between departments and staff in carrying out the provisions of the Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan Annex (SNO-CEMP), and to resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise;
C. Preserve and provide the continuity of the administrative and executive branch of government pursuant to RCW 35A.12.100;
D. Prepare amendments and revisions to the SNO- mutual aid plans and agreements and other matters that require City Council authorization, approval and/or adoption;
E. In the event of the proclamation of a disaster as herein provided, or the proclamation of a state of extreme emergency by the Governor or the State Director of Emergency Management, the Mayor is hereby empowered:
    1. To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such disaster; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be reported at the earliest practicable time to the City Council;
    2. To obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of the life and property of the people and where applicable to bind the City for the fair value thereof, and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use:
        a. To control and direct the efforts of the Emergency Management organization of this City for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter;
        b. To require emergency services of any City officer or employee, and in the event of the proclamation of a state of extreme emergency by the Governor in the region in which their city is located, to command the aid of as many citizens of the City as may be deemed necessary in the execution of the Mayor duties; such persons to be entitled to all privileges, benefits, and immunities as are provided by state law for registered emergency workers, pursuant to Chapter 38.52 RCW;
        c. To requisition necessary personnel or material of any City department or agency;
        d. To execute all of the special powers conferred upon the Mayor by this chapter, or by any other statute, agreement, or lawful authority, as necessary. (Ord. 2026, 2003; Ord. 2220, 2011; Ord. 2306, 2016; Ord. 2340, 2018)

2.86.090 Mayor Succession.
For the purpose of the City of Snohomish Emergency Management Program, the issuance of emergency proclamations, and the performance of duties as outlined in SMC 2.86.080, the order of succession shall be:
A. Mayor, if incapacitated or unavailable; then
B. Council President, if incapacitated or unavailable; then
C. City Administrator, if incapacitated or unavailable; then
D. Finance Director, if incapacitated or unavailable; then
E. Planning Director. (Ord. 2026, 2003; Ord. 2220, 2011; Ord. 2306, 2016; Ord. 2340, 2018)

2.86.100 Emergency Management Coordinator-Power and Duties.
The Emergency Management Coordinator is hereby empowered to:
A. Represent the City of Snohomish in dealing with issues pertaining to emergency management; (Ord. 2026, 2003)
B. Prepare, maintain, and implement the City of Snohomish Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan Annex (SNO-CEMP). (Ord. 2026, 2003; Ord. 2220, 2011; Ord. 2306, 2016)

2.86.110 Functions and Duties of Departments and Employees.
The City hereby assigns to the various departments, and to the officers and employees thereof, the functions, duties, and powers set forth in the City of Snohomish Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan Annex (SNO-CEMP) referenced in Section 2.86.070 of this chapter. (Ord. 2026, 2003; Ord. 2306, 2016)

2.86.120 Liability – RCW 38.52.180 Adoption by Reference.
The City of Snohomish hereby adopts and incorporates by reference RCW 38.52.180 “Liability for property damage, bodily injury, death—Immunity—Assumption by state—Indemnification—Immunity from liability for covered volunteers,” as though fully set forth in this Chapter, as now or hereafter amended. (Ord. 2026, 2003; Ord. 2306, 2016)

2.86.130 Violation-Penalties.
Any person who:
A. Willfully obstructs, hinders, or delays any member of the Emergency Management organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter or in the performance of any duty imposed upon such member by virtue of this chapter;
B. Performs any act forbidden by any lawful rules or regulations issued pursuant to this chapter if such act is of such a nature as to give, or be likely to give, assistance to the enemy, or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of this city, or to prevent, hinder, or delay the defense of protection thereof;
C. Wears, carries, or displays, without authority, any means of identification specified by the Emergency Management agency of the State; shall be in violation of the provisions of this ordinance and shall be a misdemeanor, and any person found guilty thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000) or imprisonment in jail, not to exceed ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court. (Ord. 2026, 2003)

2.86.140 Severability.
If any portion of this ordinance is now or hereafter amended, or its application to any person or circumstances, is held invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole, or any section, provision or part thereof not adjudged to be invalid or unconstitutional and its application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. (Ord. 2026, 2003)

Chapter 2.90 LEGAL ACTION AGAINST CITY OFFICIALS, EMPLOYEES, AND VOLUNTEERS

Sections:
2.90.005     Exclusion
2.90.010     Definitions
2.90.020     Legal Representation
2.90.030     Conditions of Representation or Payment of Claims or Judgments
2.90.040     Refusal to Cooperate to Render Chapter Inapplicable
2.90.050     Certain Actions and Occurrences Excluded
2.90.060     Payment of Claims
2.90.070     Conflict with Insurance Policies

2.90.005 Exclusion.
The provisions of SMC Chapter 2.90 entitled “LEGAL ACTION AGAINST CITY OFFICIALS, EMPLOYEES, AND VOLUNTEERS” shall not apply to the Employees, Officers, or Police Chief provided by the Contract Agency for Police Services pursuant to SMC 2.82.005 entitled “Authority to Contract for Police Services through Interlocal Agreement – Alternative and Exclusion.” (Ord. 2233, 2012)

2.90.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following definition shall apply:
“Officials and employees” means all present or former elected City officials, including the Mayor and members of the City Council, together with the City Administrator, the City Attorney, the Director of Public Works, the City Clerk, the Police Chief, and all full-time and part-time employees of the City.
“Volunteers” means all present or former duly appointed members of the boards and commissions listed in Chapters 2.12, 2.14, 2.16 and 19.04 SMC, and part-time or reserve officers of the Snohomish Police Department. (Ord. 1830, 1997; Ord. 2105, 2006; Ord. 2341, 2017)

2.90.020 Legal Representation.
As a condition of their service and employment for and on behalf of the City of Snohomish, the City shall provide to all past and present officials, employees and volunteers such legal representation as may be reasonably necessary to defend any claims and/or litigation resulting from acts or omissions of such officials, employees or volunteers while performing or in good faith purporting to perform his or her official duties for the City of Snohomish. (Ord. 1830, 1997)

2.90.030 Conditions of Representation or Payment of Claims or Judgments.
Except as may be provided in any applicable municipal policy of insurance, the City Attorney, or an attorney designated by the City Attorney, at the request and on behalf of any official, employee or volunteer of the City, shall investigate and defend such claims or litigation, and, if a claim is deemed by the City to be a proper claim, or if judgment is rendered against such an official, employee or volunteer, such claim or judgment shall be paid by the City; provided, that:
A. In the event of any incident or course of conduct giving rise to a claim for damage and/or litigation, the official, employee or volunteer involved, as soon as practicable, shall give the City Clerk and City Attorney written notice thereof, identifying the official, employee or volunteer involved, and containing all information known to the official, employee or volunteer with respect to the date, time, place and circumstances surrounding the incident or conduct, as well as the names addresses of all persons allegedly injured or otherwise damaged thereby, and the names and addresses of all witnesses;
B. Upon receipt thereof, the official, employee or volunteer shall forthwith deliver any demand, notice, summons or other process relating to any such incident or conduct to the City Clerk and City Attorney, and shall cooperate with the City Attorney or an attorney designated by the City Attorney, and upon request, shall assist in making settlements of any suits and in enforcing any claim for any right of subrogation against any persons or organization that may be liable to the City because of any damage claim of loss arising from said incident or course of conduct;
C. Such officials, employees, or volunteers shall attend interviews, depositions, hearings and trials, and shall assist in securing and giving evidence and obtaining the attendance of witnesses;
D. Such officials, employees, or volunteers shall not accept nor voluntarily make any payment, assume any obligation or incur any expense other than for first aid to others at the time of any incident or course of conduct giving rise to any such claim, loss or damage; and
E. In the case of any award or judgment against a City official, employee, or volunteer for punitive damages, the City Council, in conjunction with the City Attorney, shall review the matter and make a determination as to whether the City shall defend against such claims for punitive damages or pay any claim or judgment for punitive damages for such official, employee, or volunteer. In making such determination, the City Council shall consider the following:
    1. Whether the official, employee, or volunteer was performing or in good faith purporting to perform his or here official duties for the City of Snohomish.
    2. Whether the official, employee, or volunteer acted in a manner that was dishonest, fraudulent, criminal, or malicious.
    3. Whether the official, employee, or volunteer violated any federal, state, or local laws or City policies.
    4. Whether the acts of the official, employee, or volunteer subjected the City of Snohomish to an unreasonable risk of exposure to liability.
    5. Any decision, directive, or opinion rendered by the court.
    6. Such other and further information as is relevant to the issue of whether the official, employee, or volunteer should be personally punished for his or her acts or omissions. (Ord. 1830, 1997)

2.90.040 Refusal to Cooperate to Render Chapter Inapplicable.
In the event that any official, employee or volunteer covered by this chapter fails or refuses to cooperate as provided in SMC 2.90.030, or elects to provide his own representation with respect to any such claim and/or litigation, then the provisions of this chapter shall be inapplicable and of no force and effect with respect to any such claim and/or litigation. (Ord. 1830, 1997)

2.90.050 Certain Actions and Occurrences Excluded.
The obligations assumed under this chapter by the City shall not apply to any dishonest, fraudulent, criminal or malicious act of an official, employee or volunteer, or to any act of an official, employee or volunteer which is outside of the scope and course of his or her duties and employment with the City. Further, the provisions of this chapter shall have no force and effect with respect to any accident, occurrence or circumstance in which the City or the officials, employees or volunteers are insured against loss or damages under the terms of any valid insurance or self-insurance policy. (Ord. 1830, 1997)

2.90.060 Payment of Claims.
The provisions of this chapter shall not modify existing procedures or requirements of law for processing and payment of claims against the City, or of judgments in those cases in which the City is a party defendant. (Ord. 1830, 1997)

2.90.070 Conflict with Insurance Policies.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to modify or amend any provision of any policy of insurance wherein the City of Snohomish or any official, employee or volunteer thereof is the named insured. In the event of any conflict between this chapter and the provisions of any such policy of insurance, the policy provision shall be controlling. (Ord. 1830, 1997)

Title 3 FINANCE
Chapter 3.04 Biennial Budget
    3.04.010     Establishment of Biennial Budget
    3.04.020     Budget Process
    3.04.030     Prior Acts
    3.04.040     References to “Budget” or “Annual Budget”
Chapter 3.16 Occupation Tax
    3.16.010     Generally
    3.16.020     Accounting Requirement
    3.16.030     Telephone Business – Levy of Tax
    3.16.031     Telephone Business – Defined
    3.16.032     Telephone Business – Competitive Telephone Service Defined
    3.16.040     Sale of Gases
    3.16.050     Electrical Utilities
    3.16.060     Public Utilities
    3.16.070     Franchise Fee – Water and Sewer Utility
    3.16.080     Late Payment Fee
Chapter 3.18 Admissions Tax
    3.18.010     Definitions
    3.18.020     Imposition of Admissions Tax
    3.18.030     Collection and Remittance of Tax
    3.18.040     Accounting Requirement
    3.18.050     Payment of Tax
    3.18.060     Late Payment Fee
Chapter 3.20 Open Space Taxation
    3.20.010     Application fee
Chapter 3.22 Leasehold Excise Tax
    3.22.010     Imposition of Tax
    3.22.020     Rate of Tax
    3.22.030     Administration and Collection
    3.22.040     Exemptions
    3.22.050     Inspection of Records
    3.22.060     Contract with Department of Revenue
    3.22.070     Severability
    3.22.080     Violations – Penalties
Chapter 3.26 Transient Occupancy Tax
    3.26.010     Imposition of Special Excise Tax
    3.26.020     Definitions
    3.26.030     Administration and Collection of Tax
    3.26.040     Establishment of Special Fund
    3.26.050     Violation – Penalties
Chapter 3.27 Sales and Use Tax
    3.27.010     Imposition of Tax
    3.27.020     Rate
    3.27.030     Initiative Procedure
    3.27.040     Department of Revenue Designated as Agent
    3.27.050     Administration and Collection of Tax
    3.27.060     Effective Date
Chapter 3.28 Sale and Lease of Real Property
    3.28.010     Authority to Sell Real Property
    3.28.020     Minimum Price of Real Property
    3.28.030     Competitive Bids for Sale of Real Property – Exception
    3.28.040     Advertisement for Sale – Publication – Posting
    3.28.050     Advertisement for Sale – Contents
    3.28.055     Notice of Pending Sale
    3.28.060     Opening Bids for Sale – Rejection
    3.28.070     Deed to Real Property
    3.28.080     Lease of City Real Property
Chapter 3.32 City Warrants
    3.32.010     Signature Requirements
Chapter 3.36 Bond and Obligation Registration
    3.36.010     Findings
    3.36.020     Definitions
    3.36.030     Adoption of Registration System
    3.36.040     Registration Requirement
    3.36.050     Method of Registration
    3.36.060     Denominations
    3.36.070     Registrar Appointment
    3.36.080     Registrar Duties
    3.36.090     Statement of Transfer Restrictions
Chapter 3.40 Real Estate Excise Tax
    3.40.010     Taxes Imposed
    3.40.020     Lien
    3.40.030     Seller’s Obligation
    3.40.040     Collection
    3.40.050     Distribution of Tax Proceeds
    3.40.060     Capital Improvement Funds
Chapter 3.45 Finance Charges
    3.45.010     Audio Tape
    3.45.020     Copying fees
    3.45.030     CD/DVD
    3.45.040     Returned Check Fee
    3.45.050     Staff Charge-out Rates
Chapter 3.50 Multifamily Housing Property Tax Deferral
    3.50.010     Findings
    3.50.020     Purpose
    3.50.030     Definitions
    3.50.040     Director’s Authority
    3.50.050     Residential Targeted Areas
    3.50.060     Tax Exemption for Multifamily Housing in Residential Targeted Areas
    3.50.070     Project Eligibility
    3.50.080     Application Procedures
    3.50.090     Application Review and Issuance of Conditional Certificate
    3.50.100     Final Certificate
    3.50.110     Annual Reporting
    3.50.120     Cancellation of Tax Exemption
    3.50.130     Appeals to Hearing Examiner
    3.50.140     Severability
    3.50.150     Effective Date of Tax Exemption
    3.50.160     Administrative Forms

Chapter 3.04 BIENNIAL BUDGET

Sections:
3.04.010     Establishment of Biennial Budget
3.04.020     Budget Process
3.04.030     Prior Acts
3.04.040     References to “Budget” or “Annual Budget”

3.04.010 Establishment of Biennial Budget.
Pursuant to Chapter 35A.34 RCW, beginning with the biennium starting January 1, 2019, and/or all subsequent bienniums there shall be one (1) budget covering a two (2) year period for the City of Snohomish. The 2019-2020 biennial budget and all subsequent budgets shall be prepared, considered, and adopted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 35A.34 RCW. (Ord. 2349, 2018)

3.04.020 Budget Process.
Pursuant to RCW 35A.34.130, the City Council hereby provides for a mid-biennial review and modification of the biennial budget, no sooner than eight (8) months after the start of the first year of the fiscal biennium, nor later than the conclusion of the first year of the biennium. The Mayor shall prepare a proposed budget or budget modification and shall provide for publication of notice of hearings consistent with publication of notices for adoption of other City ordinances. Such proposal shall be filed with the City Clerk and be submitted to the City Council and shall be a public record and be available to the public. A public hearing shall be advertised at least once and shall be held no later than the first regular council meeting in December and may be continued from time to time. At such a hearing or thereafter, the Council may consider a proposed ordinance to carry out such budget or modifications. Such ordinance shall be subject to other provisions of Chapter 35A.34 RCW. (Ord. 2349, 2018)

3.04.030 Prior Acts.
Acts pursuant to the ordinance codified in this chapter, but prior to its passage or effective date, are hereby ratified and confirmed. (Ord. 2349, 2018)

3.04.040 References to “Budget” or “Annual Budget.”
All references to “budget” or “annual budget” contained in the Snohomish Municipal Code or in the ordinances or resolutions of the City of Snohomish shall be interpreted as referring to the “biennial budget.” (Ord. 2349, 2018)

Chapter 3.16 OCCUPATION TAX

Sections:
3.16.010     Generally
3.16.020     Accounting Requirement
3.16.030     Telephone Business – Levy of Tax
3.16.031     Telephone Business – Defined
3.16.032     Telephone Business – Competitive Telephone Service Defined
3.16.040     Sale of Gases
3.16.050     Electrical Utilities
3.16.060     Public Utilities
3.16.070     Franchise Fee – Water and Sewer Utility
3.16.080     Late Payment Fee

3.16.010 Generally.
There are levied and shall be collected annual license fees or occupation taxes, against the persons on account of the business activities, and in the amounts to be determined by the application of the rates against gross income, as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1011, 1966)

3.16.020 Accounting Requirement.
Businesses subject to taxation pursuant to this chapter shall account to the City not less often than quarterly showing the revenue derived within the City on a month by month basis in each category of revenue and/or tax bracket subject to taxation under this chapter. The City shall have the right, at its expense, to conduct such audit procedures as may be necessary to confirm such accounting and shall have the right, at the expense of the business subject to taxation, to conduct such audit procedures as are necessary to establish or account for the taxable revenue should the business subject to taxation fail or refuse to provide an accounting as provided by this section. (Ord. 1386, 1978)

3.16.030 Telephone Business – Levy of Tax.
Upon any telephone business there shall be levied a tax equal to 6 percent of the total gross operating revenues, including revenues from intrastate toll, derived from the operation of such businesses from the City of Snohomish. Gross operating revenues, for this purpose, shall not include charges which are passed on to the subscribers by a telephone company pursuant to tariffs required by regulatory order to compensate for the cost to the company of the tax imposed by this section. (Ord. 1630, 1987)

3.16.031 Telephone Business – Defined.
“Telephone business” means the business of providing access to a local telephone network, local telephone network switching service, toll service, or coin telephone services, telephonic, video, data, or similar communication or transmission for hire, via a local telephone network, toll line or channel, cable, microwave, or similar communication or transmission system. The terms include cooperative or farmer line telephone companies or associations operating an exchange. “Telephone business” does not include the providing of competitive telephone service, or providing of cable television service, or other providing of broadcast services by radio or television stations. (Ord. 1738, 1993)

3.16.032 Telephone Business – Competitive Telephone Service Defined.
“Competitive telephone service” means the providing by person of telecommunications equipment or apparatus, directory advertising and lease of telephone street directories, or service related to that equipment or apparatus such as repair or maintenance service, if the equipment or apparatus is of a type which may be provided by persons not subject to regulation as telephone companies under Title 80 RCW, and for which a separate charge is made. Transmission of communication through cellular telephones is classified as “telephone business” rather than “competitive telephone service”. (Ord. 1738, 1993)

3.16.040 Sale of Gases.
There shall be levied upon every person engaged within the city of Snohomish in the sale of natural, artificial or mixed gases a fee or tax equal to six percent (6%) of the first $1,000 per month of revenue derived from each customer consuming gas in the city of Snohomish, and three percent (3%) on all additional revenues per month derived from each customer consuming gas in the city of Snohomish. All fees or taxes shall be paid monthly on or before the 20th day of the following month. “Customer” means any person, firm or corporation purchasing gas from a company at a single location. In computing the tax, there shall be deducted from the revenues only amounts derived from any business which the City is prohibited from taxing under the Constitution of the United States and the State of Washington. (Ord. 1808, 1996)

3.16.050 Electrical Utilities.
There shall be levied upon every electrical utility district engaged in the sale of electricity within the city of Snohomish a tax of six percent (6%) of the first $1,000 per month of revenue derived from each customer consuming electricity in the city of Snohomish, and four percent (4%) on all additional revenue per month derived from each customer consuming electricity in the city of Snohomish, exclusive of revenue derived from the sale of electricity for purposes of resale. “Customer” means any person, firm or corporation purchasing electricity from a company at a single location. The tax shall be paid monthly upon the 20th day of the month next succeeding the month upon which the same is delivered. In computing the tax, there shall be deducted from the revenues only amounts derived from any business which the City is prohibited from taxing under the Constitution of the United States and the State of Washington. (Ord. 1011, 1966; Ord. 1386, 1978; Ord. 1808, 1996)

3.16.060 Public Utilities.
There shall be levied upon every person engaged in the sale of water, sewer service, or solid waste service within the City of Snohomish, except special purpose districts and municipalities other than the City of Snohomish, a tax of five and 33/100 percent (5.33%) on the revenue derived from each customer’s monthly service charges for water, sewer, and solid waste service within the City of Snohomish. Likewise, there shall be levied upon the City of Snohomish, a tax of five and 33/100 percent (5.33%) on the revenue derived from each customer’s monthly service charges for water, sewer, and solid waste service outside the City of Snohomish, but supplied by the City. “Customer” means any person, firm or corporation purchasing water, sewer service, or solid waste service at a single location from the City of Snohomish or from persons and supplied within the City of Snohomish. The tax shall be paid monthly on or before the 20th day of the following month. In computing the tax, there shall be deducted from the revenues only amounts derived from any business which the City is prohibited from taxing under the Constitution of the United States and the State of Washington. (Ord. 1808, 1996; Ord. 1849, 1997; Ord. 1932, 1999; Ord. 1968, 2000; Ord. 2025, 2003; Ord. 2147, 2008)

3.16.070 Franchise Fee – Water and Sewer Utility.
A. Franchise right. The City Sewer and Water Utility is hereby granted a franchise as provided herein.
B. Duration. the franchise granted herein shall be perpetual.
C. Rights granted. The Sewer and Water Utility of the City of Snohomish is hereby granted the right to install, maintain, repair, replace and operate pipelines under the surfaces of the streets, alleys and other public ways of the City at locations approved by the City Engineer.
D. Construction Specifications. The pipelines shall be laid according to specifications provided by the City Engineer.
E. Indemnification and Hold Harmless Agreement. The City Sewer and Water Utility shall indemnify the City and hold the City harmless from any loss or costs due to any claim or liability resulting from the construction or maintenance of the system or the operation of the pipelines in any way. (Ord. 1802, 1996)

3.16.080 Late Payment Fee.
As to all taxes due under this chapter, beginning with tax to be paid for the month of October, 1996, if said tax is not paid on or before the date specified in the various sections of this chapter, a late payment penalty shall accrue and be added to the tax due as follows:
If any tax is not paid within 45 days of its due date, a penalty shall be added and the City Council shall set the fee under this section by resolution. (Ord. 1808, 1996; Ord. 2299, 2016)

Chapter 3.18 ADMISSIONS TAX

Sections:
3.18.010     Definitions
3.18.020     Imposition of Admissions Tax
3.18.030     Collection and Remittance of Tax
3.18.040     Accounting Requirement
3.18.050     Payment of Tax
3.18.060     Late Payment Fee

3.18.010 Definitions.
Adult motion picture theater, adult drive-in theater, and adult cabarets shall be those businesses as defined by Chapter 5.60 SMC. An adult panoram shall be that business defined by Chapter 5.62 SMC. (Ord. 2255, 2013)

3.18.020 Imposition of Admissions Tax.
There is hereby levied and fixed a tax of one cent (1¢) on twenty cents (20¢) or fraction thereof to be paid by the person who pays an admissions charge to an adult motion picture theater, adult drive-in theater, adult cabaret, adult panoram, or similar adult use for which admission is charged. An admission charge shall be such charge as is defined as an “admission charge” by RCW 35.21.280 as said section exists or may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 2255, 2013)

3.18.030 Collection and Remittance of Tax.
Each and all adult motion picture theaters, adult drive-in theaters, adult cabarets, adult panorams, and similar adult uses that receive payment of an admission charge shall collect the tax due from the persons paying the admission charge, and shall remit payment of the tax to the City of Snohomish. () (Ord. 2255, 2013)

3.18.040 Accounting Requirement.
Businesses subject to collection and remittance of taxation pursuant to this chapter shall account to the City not less often than quarterly showing the admissions charges received within the City on a month by month basis and the taxation collected and to be remitted. The City shall have the right, at its expense, to conduct such audit procedures as may be necessary to confirm such accounting and shall have the right, at the expense of the business subject to the obligation to collect and remit taxation, to conduct such audit procedures as are necessary to establish or account for the taxable revenue should the business subject to taxation fail or refuse to provide an accounting as provided by this section

3.18.050 Payment of Tax.
The tax to be collected and remitted pursuant to this chapter shall be paid monthly upon the 20th day of the month next succeeding the month in which admissions charges were collected by the businesses subject to this chapter

3.18.060 Late Payment Fee.
As to all taxes due under this chapter, beginning with the tax to be paid on the 20th day of the month following the effective date of imposition of a tax on admissions, if said tax is not collected and remitted by said 20th day, a late payment penalty shall accrue, be fixed, levied and added to the tax collection due from the business as follows
If any tax is not collected and remitted within forty-five (45) days of its due date, a penalty shall be added and the City Council shall set the fee under this section by resolution. (Ord. 1898, 1999; Ord. 2299, 2016)

Chapter 3.20 OPEN SPACE TAXATION

Sections:
3.20.010     Application fee

3.20.010 Application fee.
The application fee for applications under the Open Space Taxation Act shall be set by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 1120, 1970; Ord. 2299, 2016)

Chapter 3.22 LEASEHOLD EXCISE TAX

Sections:
3.22.010     Imposition of Tax
3.22.020     Rate of Tax
3.22.030     Administration and Collection
3.22.040     Exemptions
3.22.050     Inspection of Records
3.22.060     Contract with Department of Revenue
3.22.070     Severability
3.22.080     Violations – Penalties

3.22.010 Imposition of Tax.
There is hereby levied and shall be collected a leasehold excise tax on and after the effective date of this ordinance upon the act or privilege of occupying or using publicly owned real or personal property within the City of Snohomish through a leasehold interest as the same is defined by Chapter 82.29A RCW. The tax shall be paid, collected, and remitted to the Department of Revenue of the State of Washington at the time and in the manner prescribed by Chapter 82.29A RCW. (Ord. 1804, 1996)

3.22.020 Rate of Tax.
The rate of tax imposed by Section 3.22.010 shall be four percent (4%) of the taxable rent, as the same is defined by Chapter 82.29A RCW. (Ord. 1804, 1996)

3.22.030 Administration and Collection.
The administration and collection of the tax imposed by this ordinance shall be in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 82.29A RCW. (Ord. 1804, 1996)

3.22.040 Exemptions.
Leasehold interests exempted by RCW 82.29A.130, as it now exists or may hereafter be amended, shall be exempt from the tax imposed pursuant to Section 3.22.010 of this chapter. (Ord. 1804, 1996)

3.22.050 Inspection of Records.
The City consents to the inspection of such records as are necessary to qualify the City for inspection of records of the Department of Revenue pursuant to RCW 82.32.330. (Ord. 1804, 1996)

3.22.060 Contract with Department of Revenue.
The Mayor is hereby authorized to execute a contract with the Department of Revenue with the state of Washington for the administration and collection of the tax imposed by SMC 3.22.010; provided, that the City Attorney shall first approve the form and content of said contract. (Ord. 1804, 1996; Ord. 2340, 2018)

3.22.070 Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or word of this ordinance should be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality thereof shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of any other section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or word of this ordinance. (Ord. 1804, 1996)

3.22.080 Violations – Penalties.
Violation of this Chapter shall be considered a civil violation pursuant to SMC 1.01.080 and Chapter 1.14 SMC, except as otherwise provided therein. (Ord. 1804, 1996; Ord. 1927, 1999; Ord. 2155, 2008)

Chapter 3.26 TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX

Sections:
3.26.010     Imposition of Special Excise Tax
3.26.020     Definitions
3.26.030     Administration and Collection of Tax
3.26.040     Establishment of Special Fund
3.26.050     Violation – Penalties

3.26.010 Imposition of Special Excise Tax.
For the purposes set forth in Chapter 34, Laws of 1973, 2nd. Ex. Sess. of the Legislature of the State of Washington, there is imposed and levied a special excise tax of two percent on the sale of, or charge made for, the furnishing of lodging by a hotel, rooming house, tourist court, motel, trailer camp, and the granting of any similar license to use real property, as distinguished from renting or leasing real property; provided, that it shall be presumed that the occupancy of real property for a continuous period of one month or more constitutes a rental or lease of real property and not a mere license to use or to enjoy the same. (Ord. 1480, 1981)

3.26.020 Definitions.
The definitions of the terms “selling price,” “seller,” “buyer,” “consumer,” and all other definitions as are now contained in RCW 82.08.010, and subsequent amendments thereto, as those definitions may have application to the tax imposed by this chapter, are adopted by this reference as the definitions for the tax levied in this chapter. (Ord. 1480, 1981)

3.26.030 Administration and Collection of Tax.
For the purposes of the tax levied in this chapter:
A. The Department of Revenue of the state of Washington is designated as the agent of the City of Snohomish for the purposes of collection and administration.
B. The administrative provisions contained in RCW 82.08.050 through 82.08.070 and those administrative provisions contained in RCW 82.32 shall apply with respect to administration and collection of the tax by the Department of Revenue.
C. All rules and regulations adopted by the Department of Revenue for the administration of RCW Chapter 82.08 are adopted.
D. The State of Washington, Department of Revenue, is hereby empowered on behalf of the City of Snohomish to prescribe such special forms and reporting procedures as the Department of Revenue may deem necessary. (Ord. 1480, 1981)

3.26.040 Establishment of Special Fund.
There is created a special fund in the City of Snohomish, to be known as the tourism promotion fund. All taxes levied and collected under the provisions of this chapter shall be credited to the tourism promotion fund. Such taxes shall be levied only for the purposes authorized by the general laws of the state of Washington, including but not limited to attracting visitors and encouraging tourist expansion, and until withdrawn for use, the moneys accumulated in such fund may be invested in interest bearing securities by the City Treasurer in any manner authorized by law. (Ord. 1480, 1981)

3.26.050 Violation – Penalties.
Violation of this Chapter shall be considered a civil violation pursuant to SMC 1.01.080 and Chapter 1.14 SMC, except as otherwise provided therein. (Ord. 1927, 1999; Ord. 2155, 2008)

Chapter 3.27 SALES AND USE TAX

Sections:
3.27.010     Imposition of Tax
3.27.020     Rate
3.27.030     Initiative Procedure
3.27.040     Department of Revenue Designated as Agent
3.27.050     Administration and Collection of Tax
3.27.060     Effective Date

3.27.010 Imposition of Tax.
Pursuant to Section 17 of Engrossed Senate Bill No. 4972, amending RCW 82.14.030, a sales and use tax is hereby fixed and imposed by the City. The tax shall be collected from those persons who are taxable by the state of Washington pursuant to RCW Chapters 82.08 and 82.12 upon the occurrence of any taxable event within the city. (Ord. 1505, 1982)

3.27.020 Rate.
The rate of such tax imposed shall be as follows:
A. Five tenths of one percent of the selling price, in the case of a sales tax, or value of the article used, in the case of a use tax; provided, however, that during such period as there is in effect a sales or use tax imposed by Snohomish County under subsection 17(1) of Engrossed Senate Bill No. 4972, amending RCW 82.14.030, the city tax shall be four hundred twenty-five one thousandths of one percent; and
B. Five tenths of one percent of the selling price, in the case of a sales tax, or value of the article used, in the case of a use tax; provided, that during such period as there is in effect a sales or use tax imposed by Snohomish County under subsection 17(2) of Engrossed Senate Bill No. 4972, adopting RCW 82.14.030(2), the county shall receive fifteen percent of the City tax so imposed, or fifteen percent of the rate of tax imposed by the county, whichever is less. (Ord. 1505, 1982)

3.27.030 Initiative Procedure.
The fixing and imposition of tax pursuant to Section 3.27.020(B) shall be subject to approval or rejection by the voters by a special initiative procedure hereby provided. If the voters of the city otherwise possess the general power of initiative on City matters, this special initiative procedure shall conform to the requirements of that procedure. If the voters of the City do not otherwise possess the general power of initiative on City matters, this special initiative procedure shall conform to the requirements and procedures for initiative petitions provided for code cities in RCW 35A.11.100, which incorporates RCW 35.17.240 through 35.17.360, as now or hereafter amended, by reference, all as specified in Section 19 of Engrossed Senate Bill No. 4972. (Ord. 1505, 1982)

3.27.040 Department of Revenue Designated as Agent.
The Washington State Department of Revenue is designated as the agent for the City for the purposes of collection and administration of the tax levied in this chapter. (Ord. 1505, 1982)

3.27.050 Administration and Collection of Tax.
All definitions, rules, forms, recording procedures and regulations adopted by the Department of Revenue for the administration of RCW Chapters 82.08 and 82.32 are adopted for the purposes of administration and collection of the tax levied in this chapter. The administrative provisions contained in said Chapters shall apply with respect to the administration and collection of the tax by the Department of Revenue. (Ord. 1505, 1982)

3.27.060 Effective Date.
This chapter is necessary for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health, and safety, the support of the City government and its existing public institutions, and shall take effect immediately, except Section 3.27.020(B) shall take effect July 1, 1982, unless earlier rejected. (Ord. 1505, 1982)

Chapter 3.28 SALE AND LEASE OF REAL PROPERTY

Sections:
3.28.010     Authority to Sell Real Property
3.28.020     Minimum Price of Real Property
3.28.030     Competitive Bids for Sale of Real Property – Exception
3.28.040     Advertisement for Sale – Publication – Posting
3.28.050     Advertisement for Sale – Contents
3.28.055     Notice of Pending Sale
3.28.060     Opening Bids for Sale – Rejection
3.28.070     Deed to Real Property
3.28.080     Lease of City Real Property

3.28.010 Authority to Sell Real Property.
Whenever it appears to the City Council that it is for the best interest of the City and the people thereof that real property belonging to the City should be sold, the City Council shall sell and convey such property under the limitations and restrictions and in the manner hereinafter provided. In making such sales, the City Council may sell timber, mineral, or other resources on any land owned by the City separate and apart from the land in the same manner and upon the same terms and conditions as provided for the sale of real property. The City Council may reserve mineral rights and such other interests in such land as it deems appropriate and necessary. (Ord. 1353, 1977; Ord. 2124, 2007)

3.28.020 Minimum Price of Real Property.
The City Council shall fix a minimum price at which property may be sold. No sale shall be made unless at least the minimum price fixed by the Council is bid. The City Council shall, prior to setting the minimum price, obtain a professional appraisal of all parcels, the minimum price of which is five thousand dollars or more. (Ord. 1353, 1977; Ord. 2124, 2007)

3.28.030 Competitive Bids for Sale of Real Property – Exception.
The City Clerk shall advertise for written competitive bids on any sale of real property except:
A. When selling to a government agency in which event the transfer shall be approved by the court or as otherwise provided by law;
B. When the value of the property to be sold is less than two hundred dollars;
C. When the real property is being traded or exchanged for real property and the appraised value of real property received by the City is equal to or greater than the appraised value of real property relinquished by the City, after compliance with the procedures in F below;
D. When the real property is City real property owned in fee that was acquired for or used for street purposes and the property is being traded, transferred or sold and equal value can be obtained, the real property is not subject to vacation under Chapter 12.48 SMC, and compliance with the procedures in F below occurs; and
E. When the Council setting forth the facts by resolution has declared an emergency to exist.
F. A trade or exchange under C, or a trade, exchange or sale under D, shall be commenced by an application by the proposed transferee, exchangee or purchaser. Fees for such application shall be set by Council resolution. The proposed trade, exchange or sale shall be placed on a Council agenda for preliminary Council consideration and authority to proceed. If authority to proceed is approved, the properties shall be surveyed, and appraisals shall be obtained to determine the value of the real properties. The costs of such surveying and appraisals shall be borne by the applicant unless the Council authority to proceed specifies otherwise. Upon completion of surveying and appraisal, if at least equal value to the City is demonstrated, the City Council may approve a trade, exchange or sale and authorize the Mayor to sign such documents as are necessary to close the trade, exchange or sale subject to compliance with RCW 58.17 and Chapter 14.215 SMC. Property exchanged, traded, or sold under D that has no zoning or land use designation at the time of the transaction shall be regulated according to the same zoning or land use designation(s) as adopted for the abutting parcel. (Ord. 1353, 1977; Ord. 2285, 2015; Ord. 2341, 2017)

3.28.040 Advertisement for Sale – Publication – Posting.
The City Clerk shall publish an advertisement for bids once each week for two successive weeks in the official City newspaper. The notice and posting as required by SMC 3.28.055 and dates of last publication must be at least ten calendar days before the final date for submitting bids. (Ord. 1353, 1977; Ord. 2124, 2007)

3.28.050 Advertisement for Sale – Contents.
The advertisement for bids shall particularly describe the property or portion thereof proposed to be sold, shall designate the place and the time that the bids will be opened, shall set forth the minimum price established by the Council, and shall set forth the terms of sale. (Ord. 1353, 1977)

3.28.055 Notice of Pending Sale.
All pending sales shall be advertised by notice posted on a public bulletin board in a conspicuous place at the City Hall. In addition the notice of pending sale shall be mailed by first-class mail to all owners of property within 300 feet of the property to be sold according to the County Assessor’s current records, and posted on the property at location(s) which the City Planner deems suitable to reach the attention of the public, on a sign(s) at least two feet by three feet in size. (Ord. 2124, 2007)

3.28.060 Opening Bids for Sale – Rejection.
The bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the newspaper publication. The City Council may reject any or all bids, or the bid for any one or more of the parcels of realty included in the advertisement for bids. (Ord. 1353, 1977)

3.28.070 Deed to Real Property.
Upon the sale of any property, the City Clerk shall have the necessary instruments issued and executed as required by law. (Ord. 1353, 1977; Ord. 2124, 2007)

3.28.080 Lease of City Real Property.
Real property belonging to and controlled by the City may be leased by the City; provided, that the following procedure shall be adhered to and followed:
A. Land to be leased for a period of more than one year shall be appraised by an independent qualified appraiser to determine its market value.
B. To further ensure lease conditions most favorable to the City and in conformity with the objectives of this chapter, a public offering shall be made prior to the time of entering into a lease agreement. Such public offering shall be made in a manner and mode which, under the circumstances of the particular parcel of land, would most reasonably ensure that a large percentage of potential lessees will be reached.
C. The notice and posting requirements of SMC 3.28.055.
D. The City shall enter into a lease with the bidder offering the most favorable combination of leased revenue and development benefits.
E. The term of the lease shall be limited to the term of any first mortgage which may issue as security for the cost of development of the property, together with one option to renew the lease for the same, or a lesser period of time. In the event no mortgage is involved, the term of the lease shall be a maximum of fifteen years, with one option to renew the lease for the same or a lesser period of time.
F. At the discretion of the City Council, the requirements of paragraphs (A) through (E) above may be waived in the case of leases of City-owned real property to nonprofit organizations or corporations for the purposes deemed by the City Council to be in the public interest.
G. In the case of ground leases of less than 250 square feet, or where there is a combination of ground space lease of less than 250 square feet together with an air space lease, at the sole discretion of the City Council, any or all of the requirements of paragraphs (A) through (E) above may be waived by the City Council in its sole discretion. (Ord. 1353, 1977; Ord. 1792, 1995; Ord. 2124, 2007; Ord. 2206, 2011)

Chapter 3.32 CITY WARRANTS

Sections:
3.32.010     Signature Requirements

3.32.010 Signature Requirements.
All City warrants shall be signed by the City Treasurer and the Mayor of the City of Snohomish. Should either the office of the Mayor or the Office of the City Treasurer be vacant, City warrants shall be signed by the person properly temporarily appointed to the vacant position; or, in the absence of such temporary appointment, City warrants shall be signed by the person designated in writing by the Mayor to act in that capacity. (Ord. 1397, 1979; Ord. 2298, 2016; Ord. 2339, 2017)

Chapter 3.36 BOND AND OBLIGATION REGISTRATION

Sections:
3.36.010     Findings
3.36.020     Definitions
3.36.030     Adoption of Registration System
3.36.040     Registration Requirement
3.36.050     Method of Registration
3.36.060     Denominations
3.36.070     Registrar Appointment
3.36.080     Registrar Duties
3.36.090     Statement of Transfer Restrictions

3.36.010 Findings.
The City Council finds that it is in the City’s best interest to establish a system of registering the ownership of the City’s bonds and obligations in the manner permitted by law. (Ord. 1556, 1985)

3.36.020 Definitions.
The following words shall have the following meanings when used in this chapter:
A. “Bond” or “bonds” shall have the meaning defined in RCW 39.46.020(1), as the same may be from time to time amended.
B. “City” means the City of Snohomish, Washington.
C. “Fiscal agencies” means the duly appointed fiscal agencies of the state of Washington serving as such at any given time.
D. “Obligation” or “obligations” shall have the meaning defined in RCW 39.46.020(3), as the same from time to time may be amended.
E. “Registrar” shall mean the person or persons designated by the City to register ownership of bonds or obligations under this chapter. (Ord. 1556, 1985)

3.36.030 Adoption of Registration System.
The City adopts the system of registering the ownership of its bonds and obligations set out in Sections 3.36.040 through 3.36.080. (Ord. 1556, 1985)

3.36.040 Registration Requirement.
All bonds and obligations offered to the public, having a maturity of more than one year and issued by the City after June 30, 1933, on which the interest is intended to be exempt from federal income taxation, shall be registered as to both principal and interest as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 1556, 1985)

3.36.050 Method of Registration.
A. The registration of all city bonds and obligations required to be registered shall be carried out either by:
    1. A book entry system of recording the ownership of the bond or obligation on the books of the city or the fiscal agencies, whether or not a physical instrument is issued; or
    2. Recording the ownership of the bond or obligation and requiring as a condition of the transfer of ownership of any bond or obligation the surrender of the old bond or obligation and either the re-issuance of the old bond or obligation or the issuance of a new bond or obligation to the new owners.
B. No transfer of any bond or obligation subject to registration requirements shall be effective until the name of the new owner and the new owner’s mailing address, together with such other information deemed appropriate by the registrar, shall be recorded on the books of the registrar. (Ord. 1556, 1985)

3.36.060 Denominations.
Except as may be provided otherwise by the ordinance authorizing their issuance, registered bonds or obligations may be issued and reissued in any denomination up to the outstanding principal amount of the bonds or obligations of which they are a part. Such denominations may represent all or a part of a maturity or several maturities and on re-issuance may be in smaller amounts than the individual denominations for which they are reissued. (Ord. 1556, 1985)

3.36.070 Registrar Appointment.
Unless otherwise provided in the ordinance authorizing the issuance of registered bonds or obligations, the City Clerk Treasurer shall be the registrar for all registered interest bearing warrants, installment contracts, interest bearing leases and other registered bonds or obligations not usually subject to trading without a fixed maturity date or maturing one year or more after issuance and the fiscal agencies shall be the registrar for all other City bonds and obligations without a fixed maturity date or maturing one year or more after issuance. (Ord. 1556, 1985)

3.36.080 Registrar Duties.
A. The registrar shall serve as the City’s authenticating trustee, transfer agent, registrar and paying agent for all registered bonds and obligations for which he, she or it serves as registrar and shall comply fully with all applicable federal and state laws and regulations respecting the carrying out of those duties.
B. The rights, duties, responsibilities and compensation of the registrar shall be prescribed in each ordinance authorizing the issuance of the bonds or obligations, which rights, duties, responsibilities and compensation shall be embodied in a contract executed by the City Clerk Treasurer and the registrar, except in the instances when the fiscal agencies between the State Finance Committee of the state of Washington and the fiscal agencies in lieu of executing a separate contract shall be required.
C. In all cases when the registrar is not the fiscal agencies and the obligation is assignable, the ordinance authorizing the issuance of the registered bonds or obligations shall specify the terms and conditions of:
    1. Making payments of principal and interest;
    2. Printing and physical instruments, including the use of identifying numbers or other designation;
    3. Specifying record and payment dates;
    4. Determining denominations;
    5. Establishing the manner of communicating with the owners of the bonds or obligations;
    6. Establishing the methods of receipting for the physical instruments for payment of principal, the destruction of such instruments and the certification of such destruction;
    7. Registering or releasing security interests, if any; and
    8. Such other matters pertaining to the registration of the bonds or obligations authorized by such ordinance as the City may deem to be necessary or appropriate. (Ord. 1556, 1985)

3.36.090 Statement of Transfer Restrictions.
Any physical instrument issued or executed by the City subject to registration under this chapter shall state on its face that the principal of and interest on the bonds or obligations shall be paid only to the owner thereof registered as such on the books of the registrar as of the record date defined in the instrument and to no other person, and that such instrument, either principal or interest, may not be assigned except on the books of the registrar. (Ord. 1556, 1985)

Chapter 3.40 REAL ESTATE EXCISE TAX

Sections:
3.40.010     Taxes Imposed
3.40.020     Lien
3.40.030     Seller’s Obligation
3.40.040     Collection
3.40.050     Distribution of Tax Proceeds
3.40.060     Capital Improvement Funds

3.40.010 Taxes Imposed.
A. Pursuant to RCW 82.46.010, there is levied and imposed an excise tax on each sale of real property within the corporate limits of the City at a rate of one quarter of one percent of the selling price of the property.
B. Pursuant to Section 38 of Chapter 17, Laws of 1990, First Extraordinary Session, there is levied and imposed an additional excise tax on each sale of real property within the corporate limits of the City at a rate of one quarter of one percent of the selling price of the property. This tax shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, the tax imposed in Subsection A above.
C. The excise taxes imposed in this section shall be collected from those persons who are taxable by the state under RCW Chapter 82.45 upon the occurrence of any sale of real property within the corporate limits of the City and which is taxable under RCW 82.45.010.
D. The excise taxes imposed in this section shall comply with all applicable rules, regulations, laws and court decisions regarding real estate excise taxes as imposed by the state under RCW Chapter 82.45. (Ord. 1704, 1991)

3.40.020 Lien.
The real estate excise tax and interest or penalties thereon shall constitute a specific lien upon each piece of real property sold from the time of sale until the tax is paid, which lien may be enforced in the manner prescribed for the foreclosure of mortgages. (Ord. 1561, 1985)

3.40.030 Seller’s Obligation.
The excise tax shall be the obligation of the seller of the real property and may be enforced through an action of debt against the seller or in the manner prescribed for the foreclosure of mortgages. Resort to one course of enforcement is not an election not to pursue the other. (Ord. 1561, 1985)

3.40.040 Collection.
The excise tax shall be paid to and collected by the Snohomish County Treasurer. The Treasurer shall act as agent for the City. The
Treasurer shall cause a stamp evidencing satisfaction of the lien to be affixed to the instrument of sale or conveyance prior to its recording, or to the real estate excise tax affidavit in the case of used mobile home sales. A receipt issued by the Treasurer for the payment of the tax shall be evidence of the satisfaction of the lien imposed by Section 3.40.020, and may be recorded in the manner prescribed for recording satisfactions of mortgages. No instrument of sale or conveyance evidencing a sale subject to the tax may be accepted by the county auditor for filing or recording until the tax is paid and the stamp affixed thereto; in case the tax is not due on the transfer, the instrument shall not be accepted until a suitable notation of this fact is made on the instrument by the treasurer. (Ord. 1561, 1985)

3.40.050 Distribution of Tax Proceeds.
A. The Snohomish County Treasurer shall deposit one percent of the proceeds of the excise tax imposed in Section 3.40.010(A) into the Snohomish County current expense fund to defray the cost of collection.
B. The remaining proceeds from the excise taxes imposed under this Chapter shall be distributed to the City on a monthly basis. (Ord. 1704, 1991)

3.40.060 Capital Improvement Funds.
A. There is established a City of Snohomish Municipal Capital Improvements Fund. All proceeds of the excise tax imposed under Section 3.40.010(A) and which are disbursed to the City shall be deposited into the fund. Monies in the fund shall be accumulated from year to year, and may be expended at such times as the City Council shall by ordinance direct for the purposes of making capital improvements for the benefit, including, but not limited to, those capital improvements listed in RCW 35.43.040 Revenues generated from the tax imposed in Section 3.40.010(A) shall be used primarily for financing capital projects specified in a capital facilities plan element of a comprehensive plan and housing relocation assistance under Sections 49 and 50 of chapter 17, Laws of 1990, First Extraordinary Session. However, revenues
    1. Pledged by the City to debt retirement prior to July 1, 1990 may continue to be used for that purpose until all outstanding debt is retired; or
    2. Committed prior to July 1, 1990 to a capital project may continue to be used for that purpose until the project is completed.
B. Revenues generated from the taxes imposed by 3.40.010(B) shall be deposited into the municipal capital improvements fund and used solely for the financing of capital projects specified in a capital facilities plan element of a comprehensive plan approved by the City Council. (Ord. 1704, 1991)

Chapter 3.45 FINANCE CHARGES

Sections:
3.45.010     Audio Tape
3.45.020     Copying fees
3.45.030     CD/DVD
3.45.040     Returned Check Fee
3.45.050     Staff Charge-out Rates

3.45.010 Audio Tape.
Any person that requests an audio tape copy from the City shall pay the fee as set by resolution of the City Council.

3.45.020 Copying fees.
Any person that requests copies from the City shall pay the appropriate fees as set by resolution of the City Council. Copying fees for public records requests are charged in accordance with state law.

3.45.030 CD/DVD.
Any person that requests a CD/DVD copy from the City shall pay the fee as set by resolution of the City Council.

3.45.040 Returned Check Fee.
Any check that is paid to the City and returned for non-sufficient funds (“NSF”) shall pay the fee as set by resolution of the City Council.

3.45.050 Staff Charge-out Rates.
Other reimbursements required by City shall be set by resolution of the City Council.

Chapter 3.50 MULTIFAMILY HOUSING PROPERTY TAX DEFERRAL

Sections:
3.50.010     Findings
3.50.020     Purpose
3.50.030     Definitions
3.50.040     Director’s Authority
3.50.050     Residential Targeted Areas
3.50.060     Tax Exemption for Multifamily Housing in Residential Targeted Areas
3.50.070     Project Eligibility
3.50.080     Application Procedures
3.50.090     Application Review and Issuance of Conditional Certificate
3.50.100     Final Certificate
3.50.110     Annual Reporting
3.50.120     Cancellation of Tax Exemption
3.50.130     Appeals to Hearing Examiner
3.50.140     Severability
3.50.150     Effective Date of Tax Exemption
3.50.160     Administrative Forms

3.50.010 Findings.
A. The urban center, as defined in this chapter, of the City of Snohomish lacks sufficient available, desirable and convenient residential housing to meet the needs of the public, and more current and future residents of Snohomish would be likely to live in the City’s urban center if additional desirable, convenient, attractive and livable places to live were available.
B. The development of such housing units in the urban center of the City will attract and maintain a significant increase in the number of residents, thus making the area more vibrant, and will help to stimulate business, entertainment and cultural activities. Accordingly, development of additional housing within the urban center of the City of Snohomish will help to achieve the planning goals mandated by the Growth Management Act under RCW 36.70A.020.
C. The tax incentive provided by Chapter 84.14 RCW will stimulate the creation of new and enhanced residential structures within the City’s urban center, benefiting and promoting the public health, safety and welfare by encouraging residential redevelopment.
D. This housing tax incentive program also would promote further economic development and enhanced public safety in the City’s urban center by creating an influx of new residents who will utilize urban services, stimulate redevelopment consistent with the policies of the Snohomish growth management comprehensive plan, and encourage increased residential opportunities.
E. The providing of additional housing opportunities in the residential targeted area described in SMC 3.50.050 meets the requirements of Chapter 84.14 RCW.
F. The notice of hearing given for the designation of the residential targeted area and the adoption of this chapter meet the requirements of RCW 84.14.040. (Ord. 2366, 2019)

3.50.020 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to increase the amount of residential housing units, including affordable housing opportunities, in keeping with the goals and mandates of the Growth Management Act (Chapter 36.70A RCW), by stimulating the construction of new multifamily housing and the rehabilitation of existing vacant and underutilized buildings for multifamily housing in residential target areas within urban centers located in the City. (Ord. 2366, 2019)

3.50.030 Definitions.
A. “Affordable housing” means residential housing that is rented by a person or household whose monthly housing costs, including utilities other than telephone, do not exceed thirty (30) percent of the household’s monthly income. For the purposes of housing intended for owner occupancy, “affordable housing” means residential housing that is within the means of low-income households.
B. “City” means the City of Snohomish, a municipal corporation and political subdivision.
C. “Director” means the Director of the City of Snohomish’s Department of Planning and Development Services or authorized designee. The Director is authorized by the Snohomish City Council to approve or deny applications filed under this chapter.
D. “Household” means a single person, family, or unrelated persons living together.
E. “Low-income household” means a single person, family, or unrelated persons living together whose adjusted income is at or below eighty (80) percent of the median family income adjusted for family size for Snohomish County, as reported by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.
F. “Moderate-income household” means a single person, family, or unrelated persons living together whose adjusted income is at or below one hundred fifteen (115) percent of the median family income adjusted for family size for Snohomish County, as reported by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.
G. “Owner” means the property owner of record.
H. “Multifamily housing” and “multiple-unit housing” are used synonymously in this chapter and mean a building having four (4) or more dwelling units that are not designed or used as transient accommodations and designed for permanent residential occupancy resulting from new construction, rehabilitation or conversion of a vacant, underutilized or substandard building to multifamily housing.
I. “Multifamily housing contract” means the agreement between the property owner and the City regarding the terms and conditions of the project and eligibility for exemption under this chapter.
J. “Multifamily housing covenant” means the agreement that is in a form acceptable to the City Attorney that addresses price restrictions, eligible household qualifications, long-term affordability, and any other applicable topics of the affordable housing units as referenced in SMC 3.50.070(K).
K. “Permanent residential occupancy” means multifamily housing that provides either owner-occupant housing or rental accommodations that are leased for a period of at least one (1) month on a nontransient basis. Accommodations that offer occupancy on a transient basis such as hotels and motels that predominately offer rental accommodations on a daily or weekly basis do not qualify as permanent residential occupancies.
L. “Rehabilitation improvements” means modifications to existing structures that are vacant for twelve (12) months or longer that are made to achieve a condition of substantial compliance with existing building codes or modifications to existing occupied structures which increase the number of multifamily housing units by at least four (4) units.
M. “Residential targeted area” means an area within an urban center as defined by RCW 84.14.010, that has been designated by the City Council as lacking sufficient available, desirable, and convenient residential housing to meet the needs of the public.
N. “Urban center” means a compact identifiable district designated by the City Council where residents may obtain a variety of products and services. Urban centers shall contain several existing or previous businesses, adequate public facilities, and a mixture of land uses and activities. (Ord. 2366, 2019)

3.50.040 Director’s Authority.
A. General Authority. The Director of the Department of Planning and Development Services is charged with the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
B. Recording. The Director is authorized to cause to be recorded, or to require the owner to record, in the real property records of the Snohomish County Auditor, the multifamily housing covenant which the City required under SMC 3.50.070, and such other document(s) as will identify such terms and conditions of eligibility for exemption under this chapter as the Director deems appropriate for recording, including requirements under this chapter relating to affordability of units.
C. Power to Correct Errors. The Director may amend an administrative decision to correct errors clearly identifiable from the public record. Such a correction does not affect any time limit provided for in this chapter.
D. Power to Clarify. The Director may clarify a statement in a written administrative decision.
E. Power to Adopt Procedures. The Director may develop, adopt, and carry out procedures as needed to implement this code.
F. Power to Modify Fees. The Director is also delegated authority to modify fees for the multifamily housing application and other related procedures in order to cover the costs incurred by the City and the Assessor in administering this chapter; provided, that the increase shall not exceed the most recently published Consumer Price Index (CPI) – Wage Earners and Clerical Workers for the Seattle-Tacoma area, as published by the U.S. Department of Labor – Bureau of Labor Statistics. If an increase greater than the CPI is necessary to cover the City’s costs, the Director shall submit the increase to the City Council for approval.
G. Interpretation. 
    1. Responsibility. The Director of the City’s Department of Planning and Community Development or his/her designee shall be responsible for interpreting the provisions of this chapter, except where expressly provided otherwise.
    2. Request for Interpretation. Any interested person may apply for an interpretation of this chapter where this chapter, or its application to specific circumstances, is ambiguous, i.e., where this chapter is susceptible to two (2) or more reasonable interpretations. Interpretations of this chapter shall not be considered land use decisions, however, and shall not be subject to appeal to the Superior Court under the Land Use Petition Act (“LUPA”). (Ord. 2366, 2019)

3.50.050 Residential Targeted Areas.
A. Designation. By ordinance or resolution, the City Council may, in its sole discretion, designate a residential targeted area. As required by RCW 84.14.040, adoption of a resolution designating a residential targeted area shall follow a public hearing noticed once each week for two (2) consecutive weeks in a newspaper with general circulation within the City, not less than seven (7) nor more than thirty (30) days before the date of the hearing.
B. Criteria. Residential target areas shall satisfy, at a minimum, the following criteria:
    1. The targeted area shall be located within an urban center as determined by the City Council;
    2. The targeted area shall lack, as determined by the City Council, sufficient available, attractive, convenient, desirable, and livable residential housing to meet the needs of the public who would be likely to live in the urban center, if such places to live were available; and
    3. The providing of additional housing opportunities in the targeted area should assist in achieving the stated purposes of RCW 84.14.007, namely:
        a. Encourage increased residential opportunities within the targeted area; or
        b. Stimulate the construction of new multifamily housing and the rehabilitation of existing vacant and underutilized buildings for multifamily housing that will increase and improve residential opportunities within the City’s urban centers.
C. Other Factors. In designating the residential targeted area, the City Council may also consider other factors, including, but not limited to, whether additional housing in the targeted area will attract and maintain a significant increase in the number of permanent residents, whether additional housing in the targeted area will help revitalize the City’s urban center, whether an increased residential population will help improve the targeted area and whether an increased residential population in the targeted area will help to achieve the planning goals mandated by the Growth Management Act under RCW 36.70A.020.
D. Portion of Lot in Designated Area. If any portion of a lot is within a residential targeted area, the entire lot shall be deemed to lie within the residential targeted area.
E. Amending or Rescinding Designation. At any time the City Council may, by ordinance or resolution, in its sole discretion, amend or rescind the designation of a residential targeted area pursuant to the same procedural requirements as set forth in this chapter for the original designation.
F. The following area(s) meet the criteria of this chapter for residential targeted areas and are designated as such:
    1. Pilchuck District Land Use Designation Area. 
    [IMAGE: <3.50.050.jpg>]
(Ord. 2366, 2019)

3.50.060 Tax Exemption for Multifamily Housing in Residential Targeted Areas.
A. Intent. Limited exemptions from ad valorem property taxation for multifamily housing are intended to:
    1. Encourage increased residential opportunities within the residential target area as designated by the City Council;
    2. Increase the number of affordable residential housing units within the residential target area as designated by the City Council;
    3. Stimulate new construction or rehabilitation of existing vacant and underutilized buildings for multifamily housing in the residential targeted area to increase and improve housing opportunities;
    4. Assist in directing future population growth in the designated urban center, thereby reducing development pressure on single-family residential neighborhoods; and
    5. Achieve development densities that are more conducive to transit use in the designated urban center.
B. Duration of Exemption. The value of new construction, conversion, and rehabilitation improvements qualifying under this chapter is exempt from ad valorem property taxation for either eight (8) or twelve (12) successive years, in accordance with RCW 84.14.020, beginning January 1st of the year immediately following the calendar year after issuance of the final certificate of tax exemption.
    1. A project qualifies for an eight (8) year exemption if it meets all of the eligibility requirements described in SMC 3.50.070.
    2. A project qualifies for a twelve (12) year exemption if it meets all of the eligibility requirements described in SMC 3.50.070 and if the owner records a covenant running with the land requiring at least twenty (20) percent of the multifamily housing units to be affordable to low- and moderate-income households as defined in this chapter. In the case of projects intended exclusively for owner occupancy, one hundred (100) percent of the housing units shall be affordable to low-income households.
C. Limits on Exemption. The exemption does not apply to the value of the land or to the value of improvements not qualifying under this chapter, nor does the exemption apply to increases in assessed valuation of land or nonqualifying improvements. In the case of rehabilitation of existing buildings, the exemption does not include the value of improvements constructed prior to submission of the completed application required under this chapter.
D. End of Exemption. At the conclusion of the exemption period, any new housing costs shall be considered as new construction for the purposes of Chapter 84.55 RCW. (Ord. 2366, 2019)

3.50.070 Project Eligibility.
To qualify for temporary exemption from property taxation under this chapter, the property shall satisfy all of the following requirements:
A. Location. The project shall be located within a residential targeted area as designated pursuant to SMC 3.50.050.
B. Size. The project shall include a minimum of four (4) units of multifamily housing within a residential structure or part of a mixed-use development. A minimum of four (4) new units shall be constructed or at least four (4) additional multifamily units shall be added to existing occupied multifamily housing. Existing multifamily housing that has been vacant for twelve (12) months or more does not have to provide additional units so long as the project provides at least four (4) units of new, converted, or rehabilitated multifamily housing.
C. Permanent Residential Housing. At least fifty (50) percent of the space designated for multifamily housing shall be provided for permanent residential occupancy, as defined in this chapter.
D. Proposed Completion Date. New construction multifamily housing and rehabilitation improvements shall be completed within three (3) years from the date of approval of the application, plus any extension of time granted under SMC 3.50.090(F).
E. Compliance with Guidelines and Standards. The project shall comply with:
    1. All applicable requirements of the Snohomish Municipal Code, including but not limited to SMC Titles 14, Land Use Development Code; 15, Sewer, Water, and Stormwater; and 19, Buildings and Construction;
    2. The City’s Comprehensive Plan;
    3. All relevant design standards adopted by City Council ordinance or resolution; and
    4. Any other applicable regulations in effect at the time the owner/applicant submits a fully completed application to the Director.
F. The property shall be used or developed in a way that increases or preserves property valuation, and the use or development of the property shall represent an increased investment in the property and property maintenance that results in an increase in the overall property values in the target area.
G. For the duration of the exemption granted under this chapter, the property shall have no violations of applicable zoning requirements, land use regulations, or building and housing ordinance requirements for which a notice of violation has been issued and is not resolved by compliance, withdrawal or other final resolution. Failure to meet this requirement could result in cancellation of the tax exemption as provided for in SMC 3.50.120.
H. Rehabilitation Requirements. Property proposed to be rehabilitated must fail to comply with one (1) or more standards of the applicable state or local building or housing codes on or after July 23, 1995. If the property proposed to be rehabilitated is not vacant, the owner/applicant shall provide each existing tenant housing of comparable size, quality, and price and a reasonable opportunity to relocate.
I. Tenant Displacement Prohibited. The project shall not displace existing residential tenants of structures that are proposed for redevelopment. Existing dwelling units proposed for rehabilitation shall have been unoccupied for a minimum of twelve (12) months prior to submission of an application and must fail to comply with one (1) or more requirements of the City’s building code, as now in effect or as amended. Applications for new construction cannot be submitted for vacant property upon which an occupied residential rental structure previously stood, unless a minimum of twelve (12) months has elapsed from the time of most recent occupancy.
J. Contract with the City. The owner shall enter into a contract with the City, as approved by the Director, under which the owner agrees to the implementation of the development on terms and conditions satisfactory to the City.
K. Prior to issuing a certificate of occupancy, a multifamily housing covenant in a form acceptable to the City Attorney that addresses price restrictions, eligible household qualifications, long-term affordability, and any other applicable topics of the affordable housing units shall be recorded with the Snohomish County Auditor. This multifamily housing covenant shall be a covenant running with the land and shall be binding on the assigns, heirs and successors of the owner. Affordable units that are provided under this section shall remain as affordable housing for the life of the project from the date of initial occupancy. (Ord. 2366, 2019)

3.50.080 Application Procedures.
A. Application. Prior to the application for any building permit therefor, a property owner who wishes to propose a project for a tax exemption shall submit an application to the Director, on a form established by the Director along with the required fees as established by City Council resolution.
B. Complete Application. A complete application shall contain such information as the Director may deem necessary or useful, and shall include, at a minimum:
    1. A brief written narrative statement:
        a. Describing the project;
        b. Preliminary schematic site and floor plans of the multifamily units and the structure(s) in which they are proposed to be located; and
        c. Argument setting forth the grounds for how the project qualifies for the exemption;
    2. A statement from the owner/applicant acknowledging the potential tax liability when the project ceases to be eligible under this chapter;
    3. For applications for the twelve (12) year exemption, a proposed form of covenant for review and approval by the City Attorney limiting rental of the dwelling units to low- and/or moderate-income households;
    4. Verification of the correctness of the information submitted by the owner’s/applicant’s signature and affirmation made under penalty of perjury under the laws of the state of Washington; and
    5. For rehabilitation projects, the owner/applicant shall also submit an affidavit that existing dwelling units have been unoccupied for a period of twelve (12) months prior to filing the application. (Ord. 2366, 2019)

3.50.090 Application Review and Issuance of Conditional Certificate.
A. Decision Time Frame. A decision to approve or deny an application shall be made within ninety (90) days of receipt of a complete application. An application may be approved subject to such terms and conditions as deemed appropriate by the Director to ensure the project meets the requirements of this chapter and is consistent with SMC Title 14, Land Use Development Code.
B. Approval of Application. The Director may approve an application for a conditional certificate of acceptance of temporary property tax exemption if it is determined that:
    1. A minimum of four (4) new multifamily residential units are being constructed, converted or rehabilitated.
    2. The proposed project is or will be, at the time of completion, in conformance with all approved plans and all applicable requirements of the City’s municipal code and adopted standards.
    3. The project site is planned and located to meet the project eligibility requirements contained in SMC 3.50.070.
    4. If applicable, the proposed multi-unit housing project meets the affordable housing requirements as described in RCW 84.14.020.
    5. The owner/applicant has complied with applicable requirements of this chapter, including but not limited to application requirements contained in SMC 3.50.080.
C. Denial of Application. The Director shall deny an application if any of the criteria in subsection B of this section is not met. The Director shall state in writing the reasons for denial and shall send notice to the owner/applicant at the owner’s/applicant’s last known address within ten (10) days of the denial. An owner/applicant may appeal a denial to the City Council by filing a written appeal with the City Clerk within thirty (30) days of notification by the City to the owner/applicant the application is denied. The appeal will be based upon the record made before the Director with the burden of proof on the owner/applicant to show that there is no substantial evidence on the record to support the Director’s decision. The decision of the City Council in denying or approving the application is final. All other appeals of the Director’s decisions related to this chapter shall be made to the Hearing Examiner as directed herein.
D. Execution of Conditional Certificate. If the application is approved, the owner/applicant shall enter into a contract with the City in order to establish the property tax exemption. When the contract is executed, the Director shall issue the owner a conditional certificate of acceptance of property tax exemption. The conditional certificate expires three (3) years from the date of approval unless an extension is granted as provided in subsection F of this section.
E. Amendment of Conditional Certificate. The owner/applicant may request an amendment to the executed contract by filing a request with the Director. The contract amendment request shall contain such information as deemed necessary by the Director and at a minimum shall include a description of the status of the project, proposed language for a contract amendment, and the reason(s) for amending the contract. The request shall be accompanied by the fee as established by City Council resolution.
F. Extension of Conditional Certificate. The conditional certificate may be extended by the Director for a period not to exceed twenty-four (24) consecutive months. The owner/applicant shall submit a written request at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the conditional certificate, stating the grounds for the extension, accompanied by a processing fee as established by City Council resolution. An extension may be granted if the Director determines that:
    1. The anticipated failure to complete construction or rehabilitation within the required time period is due to circumstances beyond the control of the owner/applicant;
    2. The owner/applicant has been acting and could reasonably be expected to continue to act in good faith and with due diligence; and
    3. All the conditions of the original contract between the owner/applicant and the City will be satisfied upon completion of the project. (Ord. 2366, 2019)

3.50.100 Final Certificate.
A. Final Certificate Request. Upon completion of the improvements provided in the contract between the owner and the City and upon issuance of a temporary or permanent certificate of occupancy, the owner may request a final certificate of tax exemption.
B. Procedure to Request Final Certificate. The owner shall file with Director such information as the Director may deem necessary or useful to evaluate eligibility for the final certificate and shall include, at a minimum:
    1. A statement of expenditures made with respect to each multifamily housing unit and the total expenditures made with respect to the entire property;
    2. A description of the completed work and a statement of qualification for the exemption;
    3. Any additional information requested by the City pursuant to meeting any reporting requirements under Chapter 84.14 RCW;
    4. A statement that the work was completed within the required three (3) year period or any authorized extension;
    5. If applicable, a statement that the project meets the affordable housing requirements as described in RCW 84.14.020;
    6. If applicable, an executed covenant in recordable form as approved by the City Attorney limiting rental of the dwelling units to low- and/or moderate-income households.
C. Final Certificate Decision. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of all materials required for a final certificate, the Director shall determine whether the improvements satisfy the requirements of this chapter.
    1. If the Director determines that the project has been completed in accordance with the contract between the owner and the City and has been completed within the authorized time period, the City shall, within ten (10) days following the expiration of the thirty (30) day period specified in subsection C of this section, file a final certificate of tax exemption with the Snohomish County Assessor.
    2. Within ten (10) days following the expiration of the thirty (30) day period specified in subsection C of this section, the City shall notify the owner in writing that a final certificate will not be filed if the Director determines that:
        a. The improvements were not completed within the authorized time period;
        b. The improvements were not completed in accordance with the contract between the owner/applicant and the City;
        c. The owner’s property is otherwise not qualified under this chapter;
        d. The owner and the Director cannot come to an agreement on the allocation of the value of the improvements allocated to the exempt portion of rehabilitation improvements, new construction and multi-use new construction;
        e. If applicable, the project does not meet the affordable housing requirements as described in RCW 84.14.020.
D. Appeal of Denial. Within thirty (30) days of notification by the City to the owner of the Director’s denial of a final certificate of tax exemption, the owner may file with the City Clerk a written appeal specifying the factual and legal basis for the appeal along with the appropriate fee as established by City Council resolution. Said appeal shall be heard by the City’s Hearing Examiner. (Ord. 2366, 2019)

3.50.110 Annual Reporting.
A. Property Owner Report. Within thirty (30) days after the first anniversary of the date of filing the final certificate of tax exemption and each year thereafter for the tax exemption period, the property owner shall file a notarized declaration with the Director.
    1. The report shall indicate the following:
        a. A statement of occupancy and vacancy of the multifamily units during the previous year;
        b. A certification that the property continues to be in compliance with the contract with the City;
        c. A description of any subsequent improvements or changes to the property; and
        d. If applicable, that the property has been in compliance with the affordable housing requirements of RCW 84.14.020.
    2. Failure to submit the annual declaration may result in the tax exemption being canceled pursuant to SMC 3.50.120.
    3. The property owner shall allow City staff to conduct on-site verification of the declaration.
B. City Report. The City shall annually report by December 31st of each year to the Washington State Department of Commerce the following information:
    1. The number of tax exemption certificates granted;
    2. The total number and type of units produced or to be produced;
    3. The number and type of units produced or to be produced meeting affordable housing requirements;
    4. The actual development cost of each unit produced;
    5. The total monthly rent or total sale amount of each unit produced;
    6. The income of each renter household at the time of initial occupancy and the income of each initial purchaser of owner-occupied units at the time of purchase for each of the units receiving a tax exemption and a summary of these figures for the City; and
    7. The value of the tax exemption for each project receiving a tax exemption and the total value of tax exemptions granted.
C. Director Report. The Director shall annually report to the City Council each January indicating the status of applications for the multiple-family housing property tax exemption filed in the preceding year, the number of projects and dwelling units that have been completed under the program in the preceding year, identifying changes to the state law affecting the City’s program, and other relevant matters. (Ord. 2366, 2019)

3.50.120 Cancellation of Tax Exemption.
A. Involuntary Cancellation. Pursuant to RCW 84.14.110, if at any time the Director determines the owner/applicant has not complied with the terms of the contract or with the requirements of this chapter, or that the property no longer complies with the terms of the contract or with the requirements of this chapter, or for any reason no longer qualifies for the tax exemption, the tax exemption shall be canceled and additional taxes, interest and penalties imposed pursuant to state law. This cancellation may occur in conjunction with the annual review or at any other time when noncompliance has been determined.
B. Voluntary Cancellation. If the owner intends to convert the multifamily housing to another use, or, if applicable, the owner intends to discontinue compliance with the affordable housing requirements as described in RCW 84.14.020, or any other condition to exemption, the owner shall notify the Director and the Snohomish County Assessor within sixty (60) days of the change in use or intended discontinuance. Upon such change in use or discontinuance, the tax exemption shall be canceled and additional taxes, interest and penalties imposed pursuant to state law.
C. Effect of Cancellation. If a tax exemption is canceled due to a change in use or other noncompliance, the Snohomish County Assessor shall comply with applicable state law to impose additional taxes, interest and penalties on the property, and a priority lien may be placed on the land, pursuant to state law.
D. Notice and Appeal. Upon determining that a tax exemption is to be canceled, the Director shall notify the property owner by certified mail, return receipt requested. The property owner may appeal the determination by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within thirty (30) days, specifying the factual and legal basis for the appeal. The Hearing Examiner shall conduct a hearing at which the owner and the City will be heard and all competent evidence received. The Hearing Examiner shall affirm, modify, or repeal the decision to cancel the exemption based on the evidence received. (Ord. 2366, 2019)

3.50.130 Appeals to Hearing Examiner.
A. Hearing Examiner’s Authority. The City’s land use Hearing Examiner is hereby provided jurisdiction to hear appeals of the decisions of the Director under this chapter. Said appeals shall be as follows:
    1. Appeal of a decision of the Director that the owner/applicant is not entitled to a final certificate of tax exemption, filed with the City Clerk within thirty (30) days of notification by the City to the owner/applicant of denial of a final certificate of tax exemption.
    2. Appeal of a cancellation of tax exemption, filed with the City Clerk within thirty (30) days of the notification by the City to the owner/applicant of cancellation.
B. Appeal Hearing Procedures. The Hearing Examiner’s procedures shall apply to hearings under this chapter to the extent they are consistent with the requirement of this chapter and Chapter 84.14 RCW. The Hearing Examiner shall give substantial weight to the Director’s decision and the burden of overcoming the weight shall be on the appellant. The decision of the Examiner constitutes the final decision of the City. An aggrieved party may appeal the decision to Superior Court under RCW  34.05.510 through 34.05.598  if the appeal is properly filed within thirty (30) days of notification by the City to the appellant of that decision. (Ord. 2366, 2019)

3.50.140 Severability.
Should any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter or its applications to any person or situation be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, such decisions shall not affect that validity of the remaining portions of this chapter or its application to any other person or situation. The City Council hereby declares that it would have adopted the ordinance codified in this chapter and each section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase or portion thereof irrespective of the fact that any one (1) or more sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases or portions thereof be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 2366, 2019)

3.50.150 Effective Date of Tax Exemption.
This chapter is applicable only to new construction multiple-unit housing and rehabilitation improvements the commencement of development of which is implemented after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 2366, 2019)

3.50.160 Administrative Forms.
The Director is authorized to prepare application and other forms to implement and administer this chapter. (Ord. 2366, 2019)

Title 4 (RESERVED)

Title 5 BUSINESS REGULATIONS AND LICENSING
Chapter 5.02 Business Licenses
    5.02.010     Definitions
    5.02.015     Engaging in Business
    5.02.020     Business License Required
    5.02.030     Exempt Businesses
    5.02.040     Application Procedure
    5.02.050     Term of License
    5.02.060     Procedure for Renewing Licenses
    5.02.070     Fees – Transfer Fee – Late Payment Fee
    5.02.080     Ineligible Activities
    5.02.090     Standards of Conduct
    5.02.100     New Location
    5.02.110     Revocation or Suspension of License – Grounds
    5.02.120     Hearing Required
    5.02.130     Sale or Transfer of Business – New License Required
    5.02.140     Penalties for Violation
Chapter 5.06 Franchise Regulations
    5.06.010     Short Title
    5.06.020     Definitions
    5.06.030     Franchise Grant
    5.06.040     Franchise Purposes
    5.06.050     Nonexclusive Franchise
    5.06.060     Application
    5.06.070     Duration
    5.06.080     Police Powers
    5.06.090     Use of Rights-of-Way
    5.06.100     Franchise Fees
    5.06.110     Taxes
    5.06.120     Other Authorizations
    5.06.130     Rules and Regulations of the City
    5.06.140     Delegation of Powers
    5.06.150     Right-of-Way Disturbance Permit
    5.06.160     Street Cut or Repair
    5.06.170     Safety Requirements
    5.06.180     Regulation of Rates and Charges
    5.06.190     Discriminatory Practices Prohibited
    5.06.200     Equal Employment Opportunity
    5.06.210     Reimbursement and Fees
    5.06.220     Franchise Renewal
    5.06.230     Franchise Revocation
    5.06.240     Miscellaneous Provisions
    5.06.250     Severability
Chapter 5.08 Cable System Regulations
    5.08.010     Short Title
    5.08.020     Definitions
    5.08.030     Franchise Grant
    5.08.040     Franchise Purposes
    5.08.050     Nonexclusive Franchise
    5.08.060     Application
    5.08.070     Duration
    5.08.080     Police Powers
    5.08.090     Use of Rights-of-Way
    5.08.100     Pole or Conduit Agreements
    5.08.110     Franchise Fees
    5.08.120     Taxes
    5.08.130     Customer Service Standards
    5.08.140     Other Authorizations
    5.08.150     Rules and Regulations of the City
    5.08.160     Delegation of Powers
    5.08.170     Technical Standards
    5.08.180     Construction Standards
    5.08.190     Street Cut or Repair
    5.08.200     Safety Requirements
    5.08.210     Regulation of Rates and Charges
    5.08.220     Discriminatory Practices Prohibited
    5.08.230     Equal Employment Opportunity
    5.08.240     Reimbursement
    5.08.250     Franchise Renewal
    5.08.260     Franchise Revocation
    5.08.270     Miscellaneous Provisions
    5.08.280     Severability
Chapter 5.10 Special Event Permits and Contracts
    5.10.010     Definition
    5.10.020     Permit and Contract Requirements
    5.10.030     Permit Application
    5.10.040     Staff Review
    5.10.060     Approval
    5.10.070     Business License Required
    5.10.080     Insurance/Performance Bond Required
    5.10.085     Cleaning/Damage Deposit
    5.10.087     Exemptions from Fees, Special Events Contract, and Insurance
    5.10.090     Denial of Permit
    5.10.095     Penalties
    5.10.100     Notification
    5.10.110     No Special Duty Created
    5.10.120     Severability
Chapter 5.28 Pawnbrokers
    5.28.010     Definitions
    5.28.020     Fixed Place of Business
    5.28.030     License Requirements
    5.28.040     License Issuance, Renewal, Denials, Suspension and Revocation
    5.28.050     Exceptions
    5.28.060     Duty to Record Information
    5.28.070     Retention of Records
    5.28.080     Identification of Property within Business
    5.28.090     Inspections
    5.28.100     Seller or Consignee to Give Truthful Information to the Dealer
    5.28.110     Duty to Report to Chief of Police
    5.28.120     Stolen Goods
    5.28.130     Police Hold and Police Property Seizure Hearings
    5.28.140     Consignment Selling
    5.28.150     Dealers Removal of Property from Place of Business
    5.28.160     Pawnbrokers Interest
    5.28.170     Dealers Sale of Property
    5.28.180     Acts of Employees Deemed Act of Dealer
    5.28.190     City Non-liability
    5.28.200     Violation Penalty
    5.28.210     Repealer
    5.28.220     Rules and Regulations
    5.28.230     Title Gender
    5.28.240     Conflicting Provisions
    5.28.250     Severability
Chapter 5.30 Mobile Food Vendors
    5.30.010     Purpose
    5.30.020     Mobile food vendor defined
    5.30.030     Restrictions
    5.30.040     License renewal
    5.30.050     License permit required – application contents
    5.30.060     Conflicting provisions
    5.30.070     Severability
Chapter 5.36 Solicitors and Canvassers
    5.36.010     License and Permit Required
    5.36.020     Definitions
    5.36.030     Application for Permit and License
    5.36.040     Investigation of Applicant – Denial or Issuance of License
    5.36.050     License Fees
    5.36.060     Display of License
    5.36.070     Police Enforcement Duties
    5.36.075     Denial of Permit – Appeal
    5.36.080     Revocation of License – Hearing
    5.36.090     Exemptions
    5.36.100     Penalty for Violations
    5.36.110     City Posting of Signage
Chapter 5.44 Taxicabs
    5.44.010     Definitions
    5.44.020     Taxicab Operator’s Permit
    5.44.030     Taxicab Operator’s Permit Fee
    5.44.040     Taxicab Operator’s Permit – Issuance and Display
    5.44.050     Insurance
    5.44.060     Taxicab Driver’s License
    5.44.070     Taxicab Driver’s License Fee
    5.44.080     Taxicab Driver’s License – Display
    5.44.090     Posting Rates
    5.44.100     Taxicab Inspection
    5.44.110     Taxicab Stands
    5.44.120     Duties of the Licensing Officer
    5.44.130     Suspension or Revocation of Permits or Licenses
    5.44.140     Appeal
    5.44.150     Availability and Inspection of Records
    5.44.160     Penalties
Chapter 5.52 Gambling, Bingo, Raffles and Games of Amusement
    5.52.010     Misdemeanor – Exception
    5.52.020     Definitions
    5.52.030     Bingo – Restrictions
    5.52.040     Bingo – Tax
    5.52.050     Tax on Punchboards and Pull-Tabs
    5.52.060     Tax Payments
    5.52.070     Taxpayer to Keep Records
    5.52.080     City Finance Officer to Investigate Returns
    5.52.090     Extension of Time Penalties
    5.52.100     Over or Under Payment of Tax
    5.52.110     Failure to Make Return
    5.52.120     Appeal to City Council
    5.52.130     Mayor to Make Rules
    5.52.140     False Returns – Unlawful
    5.52.150     License Fee – Additional to Others
    5.52.160     Tax Constitutes Debt
    5.52.170     Violations – Penalty
    5.52.180     Severability
Chapter 5.53 Social Card Games
    5.53.010     Applicable State Law
    5.53.020     Non-house-banked Card Games and Social Card Games by Nonprofit and Charitable Organizations Specifically Permitted
    5.53.030     Tax Rate Imposed on Social Card Games
    5.53.040     Tax Payments
    5.53.050     Taxpayer to Keep Records
    5.53.060     City Finance Officer to Investigate Returns
    5.53.070     Extension of Time Penalties
    5.53.080     Over or Under Payment of Tax
    5.53.090     Failure to Make Return
    5.53.100     Appeal to City Council
    5.53.110     Mayor to Make Rules
    5.53.120     False Returns – Unlawful
    5.53.130     License Fee – Additional to Others
    5.53.140     Violation
Chapter 5.54 Fireworks
    5.54.010     Definitions Incorporated by Reference
    5.54.020     Permit Required
    5.54.030     Permit Procedure
    5.54.040     Action by City Council or Designee
    5.54.050     Issuance of Permit--Non-transferable
    5.54.060     Dates for Sale and Use of Consumer Fireworks
    5.54.070     Storage of Unsold Stocks of Fireworks
    5.54.080     Discharge of Display Fireworks
    5.54.090     Restriction on Sale of Common Fireworks
    5.54.100     Specifications for Fireworks Stands
    5.54.110     Operation of Fireworks Stands
    5.54.120     Fees
    5.54.130     Enforcement Revocation of Permit
    5.54.140     Seizure of Fireworks
    5.54.150     Seizure Proceedings
    5.54.160     Penalty for Violation
    5.54.170     Purpose and Intent Liability
    5.54.180     Severability
Chapter 5.60 Adult Motion Picture Theaters, Adult Drive-In Theaters and Adult Cabarets
    5.60.010     Definitions
    5.60.020     License Required
    5.60.030     Adult Cabaret, Adult Drive-In Theater, Adult Motion Picture Theater Licenses
    5.60.040     Adult Motion Picture Theater or Adult Drive-In Theater Manager, Projectionist, Usher and Security Personnel Licenses
    5.60.050     Adult Cabaret Manager, Assistant Manager, Security Personnel and Entertainer Licenses
    5.60.060     Denials of License
    5.60.070     Suspension or Revocation of Licenses--Notice Summary Suspension or Revocation
    5.60.080     Standards of Conduct and Operation--Adult Cabarets
    5.60.090     Standards of Conduct and Operation--Adult Motion Picture Theaters and Adult Drive-In Theaters
    5.60.100     Record Keeping
    5.60.110     Inspections
    5.60.120     Misdemeanor
    5.60.130     Severability
Chapter 5.62 Adult Panorams
    5.62.010     Definitions
    5.62.020     License Required
    5.62.030     Adult Panoram License
    5.62.040     Adult Panoram Manager and Assistant Manager Licenses
    5.62.050     Panoram Device License
    5.62.060     Denials of License
    5.62.070     Suspension or Revocation of Licenses--Notice Summary Suspension or Revocation
    5.62.080     Standards of Conduct and Operation--Adult Panorams
    5.62.090     Record Keeping
    5.62.100     Inspections
    5.62.110     Misdemeanor
    5.62.120     Severability
Chapter 5.65 Body Art, Body Piercing, and Tattooing
    5.65.010     Definitions
    5.65.020     Licensing
    5.65.030     Work Unlawful
Chapter 5.68 Body Studios
    5.68.010     Definitions
    5.68.020     Prohibited
    5.68.030     Misdemeanor
Chapter 5.70 Wayfinding Signs
    5.70.010     Fees

Chapter 5.02 BUSINESS LICENSES

Sections:
5.02.010     Definitions
5.02.015     Engaging in Business
5.02.020     Business License Required
5.02.030     Exempt Businesses
5.02.040     Application Procedure
5.02.050     Term of License
5.02.060     Procedure for Renewing Licenses
5.02.070     Fees – Transfer Fee – Late Payment Fee
5.02.080     Ineligible Activities
5.02.090     Standards of Conduct
5.02.100     New Location
5.02.110     Revocation or Suspension of License – Grounds
5.02.120     Hearing Required
5.02.130     Sale or Transfer of Business – New License Required
5.02.140     Penalties for Violation

5.02.010 Definitions.
Except as otherwise expressly declared or clearly apparent from the context in which used, the following definitions shall be applied in construing the provisions of this chapter:
A. “Person” means one or more natural persons of either sex, corporations, partnerships, associations, or other entities capable of having an action at law brought against such entity, but shall not include employees of persons licensed pursuant to this chapter.
B. “Business,” notwithstanding the definition of “engaging in business” found within this chapter, means all services, activities, occupations, pursuits, or professions located and/or performed within the City with the object of pecuniary gain, benefit, or advantage to the person, or to another person or class, directly or indirectly, whether part-time or full-time. This definition includes, without limitation, home occupations, peddlers, hawkers, and the rental of commercial and residential real property. It also includes the activities of businesses that are located outside the City where sales or services are performed by the physical presence of business representatives inside the City. Businesses which are exempt from this chapter are specified in SMC 5.02.030. See also “engaging in business” in subsection L of this section and SMC 5.02.015.
C. “Employee” means an individual who is paid a salary, commission, or hourly wage for service rendered on behalf of or for the benefit of a business. For the purpose of determining the business license fee due, “employee” means all individuals involved in the business, whether on a wage or salary paid basis or not, whether considered full-time or part-time, and includes owners of the business.
D. “Full-time employee” means any employee who engages in business within the City for thirty (30) or more hours per week with the expectation of such employment for twenty-five (25) or more weeks per year.
E. “Part-time employee” means any employee who engages in business within the City for fewer than thirty (30) hours per week or with the expectation of employment for fewer than twenty-five (25) weeks per year.
F. “Full-time self-employed” means any full-time employee or employees who owns the business in which he and/or she is employed and the business has no other employees.
G. “Part-time self-employed” means any part-time employee or employees who owns the business in which he and/or she is employed and the business has no other employees.
H. “Consignor” means a person whose only business in the City is the consignment of goods for sale, i.e., the consignor is paid only when and if the consigned goods are sold and the goods remain the property of the consignor.
I. “Start-up business” means a person who is engaging in a business for the first time. Said status shall commence on the date the start-up business first transacts business and shall continue for the remainder of that calendar year.
J. “Second year business” means the calendar year following the calendar year during which a business was a start-up business.
K. Rental of four (4) or more rooms or apartments for residential use shall be considered a business activity.
L. “Engaging in business” is defined as provided in SMC 5.02.015. (Ord. 1681, 1989; Ord. 2027, 2003; Ord. 2357, 2018; Ord. 2373, 2019)

5.02.015 Engaging in Business.
A. The term “engaging in business” means commencing, conducting, or continuing in business, and also the exercise of corporate or franchise powers, as well as liquidating a business when the liquidators thereof hold themselves out to the public as conducting such business.
B. This section sets forth examples of activities that constitute engaging in business in the City, and establishes safe harbors for certain of those activities so that a person who meets the criteria may engage in de minimis business activities in the City without having to pay a business license fee. The activities listed in this section are illustrative only and are not intended to narrow the definition of “engaging in business” in subsection A of this section. If an activity is not listed, whether it constitutes engaging in business in the City shall be determined by considering all the facts and circumstances and applicable law.
C. Without being all-inclusive, any one of the following activities conducted within the City by a person, or its employee, agent, representative, independent contractor, broker, or another acting on its behalf constitutes engaging in business and requires a person to register and obtain a business license:
    1. Owning, renting, leasing, maintaining, or having the right to use, or using, tangible personal property, intangible personal property, or real property permanently or temporarily located in the City.
    2. Owning, renting, leasing, using, or maintaining an office, place of business, or other establishment in the City.
    3. Soliciting sales.
    4. Making repairs or providing maintenance or service to real or tangible personal property, including warranty work and property maintenance.
    5. Providing technical assistance or service, including quality control, product inspections, warranty work, or similar services on or in connection with tangible personal property sold by the person or on its behalf.
    6. Installing, constructing, or supervising installation or construction of real or tangible personal property.
    7. Soliciting, negotiating, or approving franchise, license, or other similar agreements.
    8. Collecting current or delinquent accounts.
    9. Picking up and transporting tangible personal property, solid waste, construction debris, or excavated materials.
    10. Providing disinfecting and pest control services, employment and labor pool services, home nursing care, janitorial services, appraising, landscape architectural services, security system services, surveying, and real estate services, including the listing of homes and managing real property.
    11. Rendering professional services such as those provided by accountants, architects, attorneys, auctioneers, consultants, engineers, professional athletes, barbers, baseball clubs and other sports organizations, chemists, psychologists, court reporters, dentists, doctors, detectives, laboratory operators, teachers, veterinarians.
    12. Meeting with customers or potential customers, even when no sales or orders are solicited at the meetings.
    13. Training or recruiting agents, representatives, independent contractors, brokers or others, domiciled or operating on a job in the City, acting on its behalf, or for customers or potential customers.
    14. Investigating, resolving, or otherwise assisting in resolving customer complaints.
    15. In-store stocking or manipulating products or goods, sold to and owned by a customer, regardless of where sale and delivery of the goods took place.
    16. Delivering goods in vehicles owned, rented, leased, used, or maintained by the person or another acting on its behalf.
D. If a person, or its employee, agent, representative, independent contractor, broker or another acting on the person’s behalf, engages in no other activities in or with the City but the following, it need not register and obtain a business license:
    1. Meeting with suppliers of goods and services as a customer.
    2. Meeting with government representatives in their official capacity, other than those performing contracting or purchasing functions.
    3. Attending meetings, such as board meetings, retreats, seminars, and conferences, or other meetings wherein the person does not provide training in connection with tangible personal property sold by the person or on its behalf. This provision does not apply to any board of directors member or attendee engaging in business such as a member of a board of directors who attends a board meeting.
    4. Renting tangible or intangible property as a customer when the property is not used in the City.
    5. Attending, but not participating in, a trade show or multiple vendor events. Persons participating at a trade show shall review the City’s trade show or multiple vendor event ordinances.
    6. Conducting advertising through the mail.
    7. Soliciting sales by phone from a location outside the City.
E. A seller located outside the City merely delivering goods into the City by means of common carrier is not required to register and obtain a business license; provided, that it engages in no other business activities in the City. Such activities do not include those in subsection D of this section. The City expressly intends that engaging in business include any activity sufficient to establish nexus for purposes of applying the license fee under the law and the constitutions of the United States and the state of Washington. Nexus is presumed to continue as long as the taxpayer benefits from the activity that constituted the original nexus generating contact or subsequent contacts. (Ord. 2357, 2018; Ord. 2373, 2019)

5.02.020 Business License Required.
It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to engage in any business, occupation or pursuit, as defined in SMC 5.02.010, in the City without first having obtained a business license therefor as provided in this chapter. The business license provided for in this chapter shall be posted in a conspicuous location at the place of the business. Such business license is not transferable. (Ord. 1660, 1988; Ord. 1800, 1996; Ord. 2357, 2018; Ord. 2373, 2019)

5.02.030 Exempt Businesses.
A. The following businesses shall be exempt from the licensing provisions of this chapter:
    1. Nonprofit activities carried on by religious, charitable, benevolent, fraternal, or social organizations.
    2. Public utility companies.
    3. Any instrumentality of the United States, state of Washington, or political subdivision thereof with respect to the exercise of governmental functions.
    4. Garage sales conducted on residential premises in compliance with the City zoning code.
    5. Businesses which are specifically licensed pursuant to other chapters in the Snohomish Municipal Code.
    6. Businesses where the sale or contract for goods occurred on business premises outside of the City, and the only event occurring within the City was the mere delivery of the goods to the customer or client.
    7. Consignors when sales taxes are collected and remitted to the state by the consignee.
    8. Persons or organizations that provide three (3) or less rooms or apartments for residential use.
    9. For purposes of the license required by this chapter, any person or business whose annual value of products, gross proceeds of sales, or gross income of the business in the City is equal to or less than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) and who does not maintain a place of business within the City shall submit a business license application as provided for in this chapter, but be exempt from the City license fee. The threshold and fee exemption does not apply to regulatory license requirements or activities that require a specialized permit. (Ord. 1681, 1989; Ord. 2027, 2003; Ord. 2357, 2018; Ord. 2373, 2019)

5.02.040 Application Procedure.
A. Application for a business license shall be made by filing an application through the State of Washington Business Licensing Service, in coordination with the City’s Finance Department, giving such information as is deemed reasonably necessary to enable the enforcement of this chapter. Persons applying for a license must pay a fee as set by resolution of the City Council (Resolution 1368, 2018).
B. A business license must be approved by the City before a business commences operation within the City. If business is transacted by one (1) person at two (2) or more separate locations within the City, a separate application must be filed for each business location and a separate license shall be obtained and displayed in each location.
C. The Finance Department shall, when appropriate, refer applications to the Planning Department, the Police Department, or other governmental agencies for their review.
D. If more than one (1) business is conducted or operated on a single premises, a separate license shall be required for each business. Each business owner must make a separate application for license.
E. The filing of an application for a license or the renewal thereof, or the payment of any application or renewal fee, shall not authorize a person to engage in or conduct a business until such license has been granted or renewed.
F. A business license is not transferable. No licensee shall allow another person to operate a business under or display the license issued to their business, nor shall another person operate under or display the license issued to another business. A person who acquires an existing business must make application for a City business license before commencing business within the City with that business. A licensee must report a change of location of the business to the Washington State Business Licensing Service, in coordination with the City’s Finance Department. A change of the location of a business requires approval by the City before business may commence at the new location, and may require submitting a new master application and payment of fees.
G. The City’s decision to issue or the issuance of a business license shall not be construed as permission or acquiescence to conduct a prohibited activity or other violation, and the City shall not be held liable for the actions of any licensed business by virtue of having issued a license to conduct business.
H. Every applicant or licensee shall permit reasonable inspections of the business premises by governmental authorities for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter.
I. License renewals shall be processed by the State of Washington Business Licensing Service in coordination with the City. Renewal of the City license requires payment of fees including handling fees. (Resolution 1368, 2018).
J. If an application is denied, the reason for denial shall be stated in writing. The applicant shall have a period of ten (10) days after a license denial to appeal the same to the City Mayor. Upon receiving such an appeal, the City Mayor shall hold a public hearing to consider whether or not the license should be issued. The applicant shall be given not less than seven (7) days’ advance notice of the hearing. The decision of the City Mayor shall be final, subject only to an appeal filed with the Snohomish County Superior Court within fourteen (14) days following the date of such decision. (Ord. 1660, 1988; Ord. 2027, 2003; Ord. 2340, 2018; Ord. 2373, 2019)

5.02.050 Term of License.
Each City license issued shall have an expiration date as determined by the State of Washington Business Licensing Service in coordination with the City. (Ord. 1800, 1996; Ord. 2373, 2019)

5.02.060 Procedure for Renewing Licenses.
All business licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be renewed by following the same procedure as required for the original applications. (Ord. 2373, 2019)

5.02.070 Fees – Transfer Fee – Late Payment Fee.
A. The fee for each business license required by this chapter, and each renewal thereof, shall be established by resolution.
B. A late payment fee shall be established by resolution. (Ord. 2357, 2018; Ord. 2373, 2019)

5.02.080 Ineligible Activities.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, a license hereunder may not be issued to or held by any person who uses or occupies or proposes to use or occupy any real property or otherwise conducts or proposes to conduct any business in violation of the provisions of any ordinance of the City or the statutes of the state of Washington or any other applicable law or regulation. The granting of a business license shall not authorize any person to engage in any activity prohibited by a federal, state, or local law or regulation. (Ord. 2373, 2019)

5.02.090 Standards of Conduct.
Every licensee under this chapter shall:
A. Permit reasonable inspections of the business premises by governmental authorities for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter.
B. Comply with all federal, state and City statutes, laws, regulations, and ordinances relating to the business premises and the conduct of the business thereon.
C. Refrain from unfair or deceptive acts or practices, or consumer fraud, in the conduct of the business, and avoid maintaining a public nuisance on the business premises.
D. Refrain from operating the business after expiration of a license or during the period that the license may be suspended or revoked. (Ord. 2373, 2019)

5.02.100 New Location.
A licensee shall have the right to change the location of the licensed business. Prior to such a change, the licensee shall notify the State of Washington Business Licensing Service. (Ord. 2357, 2018; Ord. 2373, 2019)

5.02.110 Revocation or Suspension of License – Grounds.
The Mayor or designee may, at any time, suspend or revoke any license issued under the provisions of this chapter whenever the licensee, or any manager, officer, director, agent, or employee of the licensee has caused, permitted, or knowingly done any of the following:
A. Violated any federal, state, or City statute, law, regulation, or ordinance upon the business premises, or in connection with the business operation, whether or not any party has been convicted in any court of competent jurisdiction of such violation; or
B. Conducted, engaged in, or operated the business on the premises in the City which does not conform to the ordinance of the City; or
C. Engaged in unfair or deceptive acts or practices in conduct of the business, or operated the business in such a manner as to constitute a public nuisance; or
D. Made any false statement or representation, or failed to disclose any material information to the City in connection with obtaining the business license or any renewal thereof; or
E. Failed to pay within ninety (90) days of the date due any tax imposed by the City and payable to the City by the licensee. (Ord. 1807, 1996; Ord. 2027, 2003; Ord. 2340, 2018; Ord. 2373, 2019)

5.02.120 Hearing Required.
Whenever the Mayor or designee determines that there may be cause for suspending or revoking any license issued pursuant to this chapter, the Mayor or designee shall notify the person holding said license by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, of his determination. Notice mailed to the address on the license shall be deemed received three (3) days after mailing. The notice shall specify the grounds for suspension or revocation. The notice shall also specify that a hearing shall be conducted by the Hearing Examiner at a time and date denominated in the notice to determine whether or not the license should be suspended or revoked. The notice shall be mailed to the licensee at least seven (7) days prior to the date set for the hearing. The licensee may appear at the hearing and be heard in opposition to such suspension or revocation. The decision of the Hearing Examiner shall be final, subject only to an appeal filed with the Snohomish County Superior Court within fourteen (14) days following the date of such decision. (Ord. 2027, 2003; Ord. 2340, 2018; Ord. 2373, 2019)

5.02.130 Sale or Transfer of Business – New License Required.
Upon the sale or transfer of any business which is licensed pursuant to this chapter, the license issued to the prior owner shall automatically expire on the date of such sale or transfer and the new owner shall apply for and obtain a new business license prior to engaging in, conducting, or operating the business. (Ord. 2373, 2019)

5.02.140 Penalties for Violation.
Violation of this chapter shall be considered a civil violation pursuant to SMC 1.01.080 and Chapter 1.14 SMC, except as otherwise provided therein. (Ord. 1927, 1999; Ord. 2155, 2008; Ord. 2373, 2019)

Chapter 5.06 FRANCHISE REGULATIONS

Sections:
5.06.010     Short Title
5.06.020     Definitions
5.06.030     Franchise Grant
5.06.040     Franchise Purposes
5.06.050     Nonexclusive Franchise
5.06.060     Application
5.06.070     Duration
5.06.080     Police Powers
5.06.090     Use of Rights-of-Way
5.06.100     Franchise Fees
5.06.110     Taxes
5.06.120     Other Authorizations
5.06.130     Rules and Regulations of the City
5.06.140     Delegation of Powers
5.06.150     Right-of-Way Disturbance Permit
5.06.160     Street Cut or Repair
5.06.170     Safety Requirements
5.06.180     Regulation of Rates and Charges
5.06.190     Discriminatory Practices Prohibited
5.06.200     Equal Employment Opportunity
5.06.210     Reimbursement and Fees
5.06.220     Franchise Renewal
5.06.230     Franchise Revocation
5.06.240     Miscellaneous Provisions
5.06.250     Severability

5.06.010 Short Title.
This chapter shall constitute the general regulations for franchises within the City of Snohomish.

5.06.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural include the singular, and words in the singular include the plural. Words otherwise not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. The word “shall,” whether in this chapter or a franchise agreement under this chapter, is always mandatory and not merely directory.
“Applicant” means any person or entity that applies for an initial franchise.
“City” means the City of Snohomish, a municipal corporation of the State of Washington, and all of the area within its boundaries as such may change from time to time.
“City Council” means the Snohomish City Council, the governing body of the City.
“Franchise” means an agreement that authorizes a person or entity to construct, operate, maintain, or reconstruct a private facility, service, or system within a “franchise area.” Upon the written acceptance by a franchisee, the agreement constitutes a contract between the City and the franchisee.
“Franchise area” means the area within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City to be used or served, as the case may be, by a franchisee as specified in the franchise.
“Franchisee” means the person, firm, corporation, or entity to whom or which a franchise, as hereinabove defined, is granted by the City Council under this chapter and the lawful successor, transferee, or assignee of said person, firm, corporation, or entity.
“Right-of-Way” or “Rights-of-Way” means all of the following which have been dedicated to the public or are hereafter dedicated to the public and maintained under public authority or by others and are located within the City streets, roadways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, bridges, sidewalks, easements, and similar public property and areas.

5.06.030 Franchise Grant.
It is unlawful to engage in or commence construction, operation, or maintenance of a private service, facility, or system in a City right-of-way without a franchise issued under this chapter or Chapter 5.08 SMC. The City Council may, by ordinance, authorize the issuance of a nonexclusive franchise to construct, operate, and maintain a private service, facility, or system within the City to any person or entity, whether operating under an existing franchise or not, who applies to conduct a system, facility, or service, in a City right-of-way. Any franchise issued under the authority of this chapter shall comply with the terms and conditions of this chapter. The City Council may restrict the number of franchises should it determine such a restriction would be in the public interest.

5.06.040 Franchise Purposes.
A franchise granted by the City under the provisions of this chapter shall:
A. Permit the franchisee to engage in a service, facility, or system within the franchise area;
B. Permit the franchisee to erect, install, construct, repair, reconstruct, replace, and retain service, facility, or system improvements in, on, over, under, upon, along, or across rights-of-way within the City; and
C. Set forth the obligations of the franchisee under the franchise.

5.06.050 Nonexclusive Franchise.
Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be nonexclusive and not preclude the City from granting other or future franchises or permits.

5.06.060 Application.
A. An applicant for an initial franchise under this chapter shall submit to the City a written application on a form provided by the City, accompanied by the designated application fee. The City Council shall set the application fee for franchises under this chapter by resolution. The application fee is intended to cover the City’s cost associated with processing the application, including without limitation, costs of administrative review, financial, legal, and technical evaluation of the applicant, notice and publication requirements, and document preparation expenses. In the event such costs exceed the application fee, the applicant shall pay the difference to the City within thirty (30) days following receipt of an itemized statement of such costs. Conversely, if such costs are less than the application fee, the City shall upon request refund the difference to the applicant.
B. An application for an initial franchise under this chapter shall contain at a minimum:
    1. A statement as to the proposed franchise and franchise area;
    2. Résumé or prior history of the applicant, including experience, to conduct the service, facility, or system;
    3. Information demonstrating the applicant’s legal, technical, and financial ability to operate the franchise requested;
    4. Information concerning the officers, directors, equity holders of the entity seeking the franchise;
    5. Information concerning any parent or subsidiary entity of the applicant or any other business entity owning or controlling the applicant in whole or in part;
    6. Proposed construction and service schedule; and
    7. Such other information as the “franchise” or “franchise agreement” requires.
The City shall be allowed the opportunity to ask relevant follow-up questions and obtain further information from whatever source. A refusal by an applicant to cooperate or provide requested information is sufficient grounds for the City to deny an application.
C. Upon receipt of an application for an initial franchise and after obtaining any additional information, a hearing will be scheduled to allow public comment. At the hearing, the City Council shall receive public comment regarding the requested franchise:
    1. Whether the public will benefit from granting a franchise to the applicant;
    2. Whether the applicant appears to have adequate legal, financial, and technical qualifications and capabilities to operate the franchise proposed;
    3. Whether the applicant has any conflicting interests, either financial or commercial, that will be contrary to the interests of the City;
    4. Whether the applicant will comply with all of the terms and conditions placed upon the franchisee by the franchise, this chapter, and other applicable laws and regulations; and
    5. Whether the applicant will comply with all relevant federal and state laws and regulations pertaining to the construction, operation, and maintenance of the service, facility, or system proposed.
D. Within the timeframe and schedule prescribed by applicable law, the City Council shall decide whether to grant a franchise and on what conditions. The City Council’s decision shall be based upon the application, any additional information submitted by the applicant or obtained by the City from any source, and the public comments. The City Council may grant one (1) or more franchises or may decline to grant any franchise. The grant, renewal, or extension of a franchise shall be adopted and approved by ordinance enacted in accordance with RCW 35A.13.190.

5.06.070 Duration.
The term of any franchise granted under this chapter, and all rights, privileges, obligations, and restrictions pertaining thereto, shall be specified in the franchise. The effective date of any franchise shall be as specified in the franchise.

5.06.080 Police Powers.
In accepting any franchise granted under this chapter, the franchisee acknowledges that its rights thereunder are subject to the police powers of the City to adopt and enforce ordinances necessary for the health, safety, and welfare of the public and it agrees to comply with all applicable laws enacted by the City pursuant to such power.

5.06.090 Use of Rights-of-Way.
For the purposes of operating franchisee’s service, facility, or system in the franchise area, franchisee may place and maintain property and equipment within City rights-of-way consistent with the terms of the franchise granted.

5.06.100 Franchise Fees.
The franchisee shall pay the City franchise fees in accordance with the terms of the franchise and applicable law.

5.06.110 Taxes.
Nothing in this chapter shall limit the franchisee’s obligation to pay applicable local, state, and federal taxes.

5.06.120 Other Authorizations.
Franchisee shall comply with and obtain, at its own expense, all permits, licenses, and other authorizations required by federal, state, and local laws, rules, regulations, and applicable resolutions and ordinances which are now existing or hereafter lawfully adopted.

5.06.130 Rules and Regulations of the City.
The right and power is reserved by the City to promulgate such additional rules and regulations as it may find necessary in the exercise of its lawful police powers and in furtherance of the terms and conditions of a franchise and this chapter and as permitted by applicable state and federal law. In the event of a conflict between a franchise and this chapter, the franchise shall govern.

5.06.140 Delegation of Powers.
Any right or power of the City may be delegated by the Mayor to any officer, employee, department, or board of the City or to such other person or entity as the City may designate to act on its behalf. (Ord. 2341, 2017)

5.06.150 Right-of-Way Disturbance Permit.
Unless exemptions are expressly provided within the terms of the franchise agreement, franchisee shall apply for and obtain a Right-of-Way Disturbance Permit prior to altering the right-of-way.

5.06.160 Street Cut or Repair.
If the franchise allows street cuts or repairs, the franchisee shall guarantee the durability and structural integrity of any street cut or repair made by it or its agents which is necessary for the construction, installation, operation, repair, or maintenance of franchisee’s service, facility, or system, provided that no action by an unrelated third party materially affects the integrity of franchisee’s street cut or repair. Franchisee shall repair or replace, at no expense to the City, any failed street cut or repair which was completed by franchisee or franchisee’s agents.

5.06.170 Safety Requirements.
The franchisee shall at all times, install, maintain, and use commonly accepted methods and practices to avoid causing damage or injuries to the public. In furtherance thereof, all of franchisee’s service, facility, and system shall at all times be kept, maintained, and operated in a safe condition.

5.06.180 Regulation of Rates and Charges.
Consistent with the terms of the franchise granted, the City may regulate franchisee’s rates and charges to the full extent permitted by law.

5.06.190 Discriminatory Practices Prohibited.
The franchisee shall not deny service or otherwise discriminate against customers on the basis of race, color, natural origin, sex, age, disability, or other protected classes.

5.06.200 Equal Employment Opportunity.
The franchisee shall strictly adhere to and comply with the equal employment opportunity requirements of federal, state, and local laws.

5.06.210 Reimbursement and Fees.
To the extent allowed by applicable law, the City may require a franchisee to reimburse the City for:
A. The City’s reasonable processing and review expenses in connection with a sale or transfer of a franchise or a change in control of a franchise or franchisee. The City will send franchisee an itemized description of all such charges, and franchisee shall pay such amount within thirty (30) days after receipt of such description.
B. Use of the public right-of-way for commercial purposes. Franchise fees shall reimburse the City for its direct and indirect expenses relating to day-to-day use of the right-of-way by the franchisee.

5.06.220 Franchise Renewal.
To the extent not addressed in the franchise, franchise renewals will be conducted in accordance with applicable law. The City and franchisee by mutual consent may enter into renewal negotiations at any time during the term of a franchise.

5.06.230 Franchise Revocation.
Any franchise granted by the City may be revoked during the period of the franchise, as provided in the franchise, subject to the procedural requirements provided for therein. A failure by the franchisee to comply with any of the material provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a violation of the City Code.

5.06.240 Miscellaneous Provisions.
A. This chapter shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable federal, state, and local laws, and shall apply to any franchise hereafter accepted by franchisee.
B. The captions throughout this chapter are intended to facilitate the reading hereof. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of any part of this chapter.
C. A franchisee shall not be relieved of its obligations to comply with any or all of the provisions of this chapter or its franchise by reason of any failure of the City to demand prompt compliance.

5.06.250 Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, or provision of this chapter is determined to be illegal, invalid, or unconstitutional by any court or agency of competent jurisdiction, such determination shall have no effect on the validity of any other section, subsection, paragraph, or provision of this chapter, all of which will remain in full force and effect.

Chapter 5.08 CABLE SYSTEM REGULATIONS

Sections:
5.08.010     Short Title
5.08.020     Definitions
5.08.030     Franchise Grant
5.08.040     Franchise Purposes
5.08.050     Nonexclusive Franchise
5.08.060     Application
5.08.070     Duration
5.08.080     Police Powers
5.08.090     Use of Rights-of-Way
5.08.100     Pole or Conduit Agreements
5.08.110     Franchise Fees
5.08.120     Taxes
5.08.130     Customer Service Standards
5.08.140     Other Authorizations
5.08.150     Rules and Regulations of the City
5.08.160     Delegation of Powers
5.08.170     Technical Standards
5.08.180     Construction Standards
5.08.190     Street Cut or Repair
5.08.200     Safety Requirements
5.08.210     Regulation of Rates and Charges
5.08.220     Discriminatory Practices Prohibited
5.08.230     Equal Employment Opportunity
5.08.240     Reimbursement
5.08.250     Franchise Renewal
5.08.260     Franchise Revocation
5.08.270     Miscellaneous Provisions
5.08.280     Severability

5.08.010 Short Title.
This chapter shall constitute the “Cable System Regulations” of the City of Snohomish and may be referred to as such.

5.08.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural include the singular, and words in the singular include the plural. Words otherwise not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. The word “shall” is always mandatory and not merely directory.
“Applicant” means any person or entity that applies for an initial franchise.
“Cable Act” means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, and as any of them may be amended.
“Cable Operator” means any person or group of persons, including a franchisee, who provide(s) cable service over a cable system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such cable system or who otherwise control(s) or is (are) responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such a cable system.
“Cable Service” means the one-way transmission to customers of video programming or other programming service, and customer interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service.
“Cable System” means any facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple customers within a community, but such term does not include (A) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; (B) a facility that serves customers without using any public right-of-way; (C) a facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Federal Communications Act (47 U.S.C. 201 et seq.), except that such facility shall be considered a cable system [other than for purposes of Section 621(c) (47 U.S.C. 541(c)] to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to customers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services; (D) an open video system that complies with federal statutes and regulations; or (E) any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems.
“City” means the City of Snohomish, a municipal corporation of the State of Washington, and all of the area within its boundaries, as such may change from time to time.
“City Council” means the Snohomish City Council, or its successor, the governing body of the City.
“Customer” means any person who or which elects to subscribe to, for any purpose, cable service provided by a franchisee by means of or in connection with the cable system, and whose premises are physically wired and lawfully activated to receive cable service from franchisee’s cable system.
“Customer Service Representative” or “CSR” shall mean any person employed by the cable operator to assist or provide service to customers; whether by answering public telephone lines, answering customers’ questions, or performing other customer service related tasks.
“Customer Service Standards” means those customer service standards set forth herein and as hereafter amended that are applicable to cable operators.
“FCC” means the Federal Communications Commission.
“Franchise” means an agreement that authorizes a person or entity to construct, operate, maintain, or reconstruct a cable system. Upon the written acceptance by a franchisee, the agreement constitutes a contract between the City and franchisee.
“Franchise Area” means the area within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City to be served by a franchisee as specified in the franchise.
“Franchisee” means the person, firm, corporation, or entity to whom or which a franchise, as hereinabove defined, is granted by the City Council under this chapter and the lawful successor, transferee, or assignee of said person, firm, corporation, or entity.
“Normal Business Hours” shall mean those hours during which most similar businesses in the City are open to serve customers. In all cases, normal business hours must include some evening hours at least one night per week and/or some weekend hours.
“Normal Operating Conditions” shall mean those service conditions that are within the control of the cable operator. Those conditions that are not within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions that are ordinarily within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade of the cable system.
“Right-of-Way” or “Rights-of-Way” means all of the following which have been dedicated to the public or are hereafter dedicated to the public and maintained under public authority or by others and are located within the City: streets, roadways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, bridges, sidewalks, easements, and similar public property and areas.
“Service Interruption” shall mean the loss of picture or sound on one or more cable channels.

5.08.030 Franchise Grant.
It is unlawful to engage in or commence construction, operation, or maintenance of a cable system in the City without a franchise issued under this chapter. The City Council may, by ordinance, issue a nonexclusive franchise to construct, operate, and maintain a cable system within the City to any person or entity, whether operating under an existing franchise or not, who applies for authority to furnish cable service which complies with the terms and conditions of this chapter, and provided that such person or entity also agrees to comply with all of the provisions of the franchise. However, this shall not be deemed to require the grant of a franchise to any particular person or entity. The City Council may restrict the number of franchises should it determine such a restriction would be in the public interest.

5.08.040 Franchise Purposes.
A franchise granted by the City under the provisions of this chapter shall:
A. Permit the franchisee to engage in the business of operating a cable system and providing cable service within the City;
B. Permit the franchisee to erect, install, construct, repair, reconstruct, replace, and retain wires, cables, related electronic equipment, conduits, and other property in connection with the operation of the cable system in, on, over, under, upon, along, and across rights-of-way within the City; and
C. Set forth the obligations of the franchisee under the franchise.

5.08.050 Nonexclusive Franchise.
Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be nonexclusive and not preclude the City from granting other or future franchises or permits.

5.08.060 Application.
A. An applicant for an initial franchise shall submit to the City a written application on a form provided by the City, at the time and place specified by the City for accepting applications, and accompanied by the designated application fee. An application fee set by resolution of the City Council shall accompany the application to cover costs associated with processing the application, including, without limitation, costs of administrative review, financial, legal, and technical evaluation of the applicant, notice and publication requirements, and document preparation expenses. In the event such costs exceed the application fee, the applicant shall pay the difference to the City within thirty (30) days following receipt of an itemized statement of such costs. Conversely, if such costs are less than the application fee, the City shall refund the difference to the applicant.
B. An application for an initial franchise for a cable system shall contain, at a minimum:
    1. A statement as to the proposed franchise and information relating to the characteristics and location of the proposed cable system;
    2. A resume of prior history of the applicant, including the expertise of the applicant in the cable system field;
    3. Information demonstrating the applicant’s legal, technical, and financial ability to construct and operate the proposed cable system;
    4. A list of the partners, general and limited, of the applicant, if a partnership, members if a limited liability company, or the percentage of stock owned or controlled by each stockholder having a five percent (5%) or greater interest if a corporation;
    5. A list of officers, directors, and key employees of the applicant, together with a description of the background and experience of all such persons;
    6. The names and addresses of any parent entity or subsidiary of the applicant or any other business entity owning or controlling the applicant in whole or in part, or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant;
    7. A proposed construction and service schedule;
    8. Any other reasonable information that the City may request.
    The City shall be allowed the opportunity to ask relevant follow-up questions and obtain further information from whatever source. A refusal by an applicant to cooperate or provide requested information is sufficient grounds for the City to deny an application.
C. Upon receipt of an application for an initial franchise and after obtaining any additional information the City in its sole discretion deems appropriate from any source, a hearing shall be scheduled to allow public comment. At the hearing, the City Council shall receive public comment regarding the following:
    1. Whether the public will benefit from granting a franchise to the applicant;
    2. Whether the applicant appears to have adequate legal, financial, and technical qualifications and capabilities to build, operate, and maintain a cable system in the City;
    3. Whether the applicant has any conflicting interests, either financial or commercial, that will be contrary to the interests of the City;
    4. Whether the applicant will comply with all of the terms and conditions placed upon a franchisee by the franchise, this chapter and other lawfully applicable local laws and regulations;
    5. Whether the applicant will comply with all relevant federal and State laws and regulations pertaining to the construction, operation, and maintenance of the cable system.
D. Within the timeframe prescribed by applicable law, the City Council shall decide whether to grant a franchise and on what conditions. The City Council’s decision shall be based upon the application, any additional information submitted by the applicant or obtained by the City from any source, and public comments. The City Council may grant one (1) or more franchises or may decline to grant any franchise. (Ord. 2299, 2016)

5.08.070 Duration.
The term of any franchise, and all rights, privileges, obligations, and restrictions pertaining thereto, shall be specified in the franchise. The effective date of any franchise shall be as specified in the franchise.

5.08.080 Police Powers.
In accepting any franchise, the franchisee acknowledges that its rights thereunder are subject to the police powers of the City to adopt and enforce ordinances necessary for the health, safety, and welfare of the public, and it agrees to comply with all applicable laws enacted by the City pursuant to such power.

5.08.090 Use of Rights-of-Way.
For the purposes of operating and maintaining a cable system in the City, a franchisee may place and maintain within the rights-of-way such property and equipment as are necessary and appurtenant to the operation of the cable system. Prior to construction of the cable system in the rights-of-way, the franchisee shall procure all necessary permits, pay all applicable fees in connection therewith, and comply with all applicable laws, regulations, resolutions, and ordinances, including, but not limited to, land use and zoning requirements.

5.08.100 Pole or Conduit Agreements.
No franchise shall relieve franchisee of any of its obligations involved in obtaining pole or conduit agreements from any department of the City, any utility company, or from others maintaining facilities in the rights-of-way.

5.08.110 Franchise Fees.
The franchisee shall pay the City franchise fees in accordance with the terms of the franchise and applicable law.

5.08.120 Taxes.
Nothing in this chapter shall limit the franchisee’s obligation to pay applicable local, state, and federal taxes.

5.08.130 Customer Service Standards.
A. Policy. A cable operator will first resolve customer inquiries and complaints without delay and without involvement of the City. Where a given complaint is not addressed by the cable operator to the customer’s satisfaction, the City may intervene.
These standards are intended to be of general application. A cable operator is free to exceed these standards for the benefit of its customers. However, the cable operator shall be relieved of obligations hereunder if it is unable to perform due to a force majeure event affecting a significant portion of the franchise area.
B. Customer Service. 
    1. Courtesy. All employees of the cable operator shall be courteous, knowledgeable, and helpful, and shall provide effective and satisfactory service in all contacts with customers.
    2. Availability and Accessibility – In Person. The cable operator must maintain, at a minimum, one (1) customer service center located in Everett. This customer service location shall at all times allow customers to make payments, return equipment, or get assistance from knowledgeable staff. The customer service center shall be open Monday through Saturday, excluding legal holidays, with sufficient hours necessary to meet customer demand. The customer service center will be staffed to meet all customer needs with on-site customer service representatives. If, however, the customer service center is required to relocate, the cable operator shall be allowed a reasonable period of time to establish a new location.
    3. Availability and Accessibility – On the Telephone. A CSR will be available to respond to customer inquiries during normal business hours. The cable operator shall maintain local or toll free telephone access lines that shall be available during normal business hours for service/repair requests and billing inquiries.
    The cable operator shall retain sufficient CSRs and telephone line capacity to ensure that, during normal operating conditions, telephone calls to service/repair and billing inquiry lines are answered within thirty (30) seconds or less, and that any transfers are made within thirty (30) seconds. This standard shall be met no less than ninety (90) percent of the time, measured on a quarterly basis under normal operating conditions. Under normal operating conditions, the total number of calls receiving busy signals shall not exceed three percent (3%) of the total telephone calls.
    The cable operator shall not be required to acquire equipment or perform surveys to measure compliance with any of the telephone answering standards above unless and until the City requests such actions based on a historical record of customer complaints indicating a clear failure to comply.
C. Responsiveness. 
    1. The cable operator shall complete all standard aerial installations within seven (7) days after an order has been placed, unless otherwise requested by the customer. The cable operator shall schedule all standard underground installations within seven (7) days after an order has been placed, unless otherwise requested by the customer. “Standard” installations shall include those that are located within 125 aerial feet or sixty (60) underground trench feet of the cable operator’s distribution system. This standard must be met ninety-five percent (95%) of the time, under normal operating conditions as measured on a quarterly basis. If the customer requests a non-standard installation, or the cable operator determines that a non-standard installation is required, the cable operator shall provide the customer in advance with a total installation cost estimate and an estimated date of completion.
    2. Under normal operating conditions, all temporary cable drops shall be converted to a permanent drop within no more than three (3) calendar weeks from the initial installation, or at a time mutually agreed upon between the cable operator and customer.
    3. Customers requesting installation of cable service or repair service to an existing installation may choose any available four (4) hour block of time for the appointment during normal business hours.
    4. The cable operator shall be deemed to have responded to a request for service under the provisions of this subsection when a technician arrives within the agreed upon time. If the customer is absent when the technician arrives, the technician shall leave written notification of timely arrival. A record that notice was provided shall be kept by the cable operator.
    5. If a cable operator representative fails to keep an installation or service appointment for any reason, the cable operator will contact the customer before the end of the scheduled appointment and reschedule the appointment at a time convenient for the customer.
    6. The cable operator shall respond to a customer’s letter in writing within two (2) weeks of receipt of the letter. The cable operator shall initiate resolution to a customer’s inquiry, complaint, general question, or comment made by telephone or e-mail within forty-eight (48) hours.
    7. Any difficulties that cannot be resolved by the CSR shall be referred to the appropriate supervisor who shall use his/her best efforts to contact the customer within twenty-four (24) hours of initial contact and resolve the problem within a mutually agreeable timeframe.
D. Repairs and Outages. 
    1. The cable operator shall interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Scheduled interruptions that the cable operator anticipates will last more than four (4) hours shall occur during periods of minimum use of the cable system as reasonably determined by the cable operator.
    2. If a customer calls to report poor signal quality or interruptions attributable to the cable operator’s equipment, the cable operator shall begin working on the problem no later than the next day following the customer’s call, provided that the customer is available, or at such later time as is convenient for the customer. If an appointment is necessary, the customer may choose a four (4) hour block of time during normal business hours.
    3. Upon discovery of an outage affecting three (3) or more customers, the cable operator shall initiate its outage repair process within two (2) hours, under normal operating conditions.
    4. A cable operator shall initiate repairs to customer reported service interruptions, for any cause beyond the control of the cable operator, within twenty-four (24) hours after the conditions beyond its control have been corrected.
    5. Under normal operating conditions, if after twenty-four (24) hours service is not restored to a customer, a cable operator shall, upon a customer’s request, provide a refund or credit or other compensation of equal or greater value.
    6. The cable operator will track and record all outages and service interruptions that occur within the franchise area.
E. Bills, Credits, Refunds and Deposits. If a customer requests disconnection of any or all services, billing for affected services shall end on the same day as the request, or on the future date for which the disconnect is ordered. However, the customer may continue to be billed for equipment until returned to the cable operator. The cable operator shall issue a credit or refund to a customer within thirty (30) business days after the close of the billing cycle following the return of the equipment and request for disconnection. If a customer was required to provide a deposit, that deposit must be returned when appropriate.
F. Treatment of Property. 
    1. Removal or trimming of trees and shrubs in the right-of-way will be subject to the regulations of the City.
    2. The cable operator shall repair any damage or restore any property to as good a condition as before the work causing such damage or disturbance was initiated. The cable operator shall repair, replace, or compensate all property owners for damages resulting from the cable operator’s installation, construction, service, or repair activities.
    3. Except in the case of an emergency involving public safety or service interruption to a large number of customers, the cable operator shall give reasonable notice to property owners or legal tenants prior to entering upon private premises, and the notice shall specify the work to be performed; provided that, in the case of planned construction operations, such notice shall be delivered or provided at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to entry. All work done in the right-of-way shall be subject to time requirements of the permit.
    4. Nothing herein shall be construed as authorizing access or entry to private property, or any other property, where such right to access or entry is not otherwise provided by law.
    5. For major construction or installation projects, the cable operator shall notify by mail or door hanger the adjacent property owners/legal tenants in advance of the right-of-way work. In the case of an emergency, the cable operator shall attempt to contact the property owner or legal tenant in person, and in the event personal contact is not made, the cable operator shall leave a door hanger notice.
    6. The cable operator shall clean all areas surrounding any work site of debris caused by the cable operator’s activities.
G. Services for Customers with Disabilities. 
    1. For any customer with a disability, the cable operator shall upon a customer request and at no charge deliver and/or pick up converters at the customer’s home.
    2. The cable operator shall provide TDD/TYY service with trained operators who can provide assistance for hearing-impaired customers at no charge.
    3. The cable operator shall comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act.
H. Customer Information. 
    1. The cable operator shall provide to customers an accurate, comprehensive service agreement and customer installation packet upon installation, including the following information:
        a. Products and services offered by the cable operator, including channel positions of programming carried on the cable system.
        b. The cable operator’s complete range of service options and the prices for those services and conditions of subscription to programming and other services.
        c. Installation and service maintenance policies, including the customer’s and cable operator’s responsibilities for equipment.
        d. Billing and complaint procedures for investigation and resolution of customer service complaints, including the address and telephone number of the cable operator’s office(s), the cable operator’s policies on deposits, credit balances, and returned check charges.
        e. Policies concerning protection of customer privacy as required under law.
        f. The availability of a parental control/lock out device and the procedures for channel blocking.
        g. Service termination procedure.
        h. A description of the manner that will be used to provide notice of changes in rates, services, or service terms and conditions.
        i. The phone number of the Customer Service Department that is responsible for handling cable questions and complaints for the cable operator. This information shall be prominently displayed in the installation packet.
    2. The cable operator shall provide customers with written notification of any changes in rates, programming, services, or channel positions as soon as possible in writing. Customers shall be given a description of the changes, a phone number for questions, and the effective date. Notice must be given to customers a minimum of thirty (30) days in advance of such changes if the change is within the control of the cable operator.
    3. All officers, agents, and employees of the cable operator, its contractors, and subcontractors who are in personal contact with customers shall have visible identification cards bearing their name and photograph.
    4. Every vehicle of the cable operator, its contractors, and subcontractors, shall be clearly identified to the public as a vehicle of the cable operator.
I. Safety. 
    1. The cable operator shall install and locate its facilities, cable system, and equipment in compliance with all federal, state, local, and company safety standards, and in such manner as shall not endanger persons or property.
    2. Whenever the cable operator receives notice that an unsafe condition exists with respect to its equipment, the cable operator shall investigate such condition immediately, and shall take such measures as are necessary to remove or eliminate any unsafe condition.
J. Complaints to the City. 
    1. Any customer shall be entitled to lodge any complaint directly with the City. The customer may lodge the complaint either by calling the City or by filing a written complaint by letter or in electronic form.
    2. If the City decides that further action is warranted, the City may intercede and attempt to help reach a resolution and/or require the cable operator to address the inquiry in a timely manner. Upon request by the City, the cable operator shall notify the City of the status of the inquiry and any subsequent resolution.
    3. The cable operator shall maintain, in a manner consistent with the privacy rights of customers, an accurate and comprehensive file of complaints regarding the cable system or the cable operator’s operation of the cable system, by number and type and their disposition; service requests, identifying the number and nature of the requests and their disposition; and outages, service interruptions and their disposition.
K. Remedying Violations. If the City has reason to believe that the cable operator has failed to comply with any of these standards, or has failed to perform in a timely manner, or if similar complaints repetitively arise, the City may require in writing that the cable operator remedy the noncompliance. If the noncompliance is not remedied to the satisfaction of the City, the City may opt to follow the liquidated damages procedures or seek other remedies set forth in the franchise, or pursue any other remedies at law or in equity.

5.08.140 Other Authorizations.
Franchisee shall comply with and obtain, at its own expense, all permits, licenses, and other authorizations required by federal, state, and local laws, rules, regulations, and applicable resolutions and ordinances which are now existing or hereafter lawfully adopted.

5.08.150 Rules and Regulations of the City.
The right and power is reserved by the City to promulgate such additional rules and regulations as it may find necessary in the exercise of its lawful police powers and in furtherance of the terms and conditions of a franchise and this chapter, and as permitted by applicable state and federal law. In the event of a conflict between a franchise and this chapter, the franchise shall govern.

5.08.160 Delegation of Powers.
Any right or power of the City may be delegated by the City to any officer, employee, department, or board of the City or to such other person or entity as the City may designate to act on its behalf.

5.08.170 Technical Standards.
Franchisee shall construct, install, operate, and maintain its cable system in a manner consistent with all applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations, FCC technical standards, and the franchise.

5.08.180 Construction Standards.
A. All facilities constructed or operated under this chapter shall be installed and maintained at such places in or upon such rights-of-way and public places as shall not interfere with the free passage of traffic, and shall conform to federal standards, state requirements, and City regulations.
B. Franchisee shall be subject to any and all requirements established by the City with regard to the placement of franchisee’s facilities and equipment located in the rights-of-way and on other public property.

5.08.190 Street Cut or Repair.
The franchisee shall guarantee the durability and structural integrity of any street cut or repair made by it or its agents which is necessary for the construction, installation, operation, repair, or maintenance of franchisee’s facilities, provided that no action by an unrelated third party materially affects the integrity of franchisee’s street cut or repair. Franchisee shall repair or replace, at no expense to the City, any failed street cut or repair which was completed by franchisee or franchisee’s agent(s).

5.08.200 Safety Requirements.
The franchisee shall, at all times, install, maintain, and use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage or injuries to the public. In furtherance thereof, the franchisee must comply with the City’s traffic control requirements, including, for example, but without limitation, the use of signal devices, warning signs, and flaggers when appropriate. All of franchisee’s structures, cables, lines, equipment, and connections in, over, under, and upon the rights-of-way and public ways or other places in the franchise area, wherever situated or located, shall at all times be kept and maintained in a safe condition.

5.08.210 Regulation of Rates and Charges.
The City may regulate franchisee’s rates and charges to the full extent permitted by law.

5.08.220 Discriminatory Practices Prohibited.
A. The franchisee shall not deny cable service or otherwise discriminate against customers or others on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, disability, or other protected classes.
B. Access to cable service shall not be denied to any group of potential residential cable customers because of the income of the residents of the local area in which such group resides.

5.08.230 Equal Employment Opportunity.
The franchisee shall strictly adhere to and comply with the equal employment opportunity requirements of federal, state, and local laws.

5.08.240 Reimbursement.
To the extent allowed by applicable law, the City may require a franchisee to reimburse the City for the City’s reasonable processing and review expenses in connection with a sale or transfer of a franchise or a change in control of a franchise or franchisee. In connection with the foregoing, the City will send franchisee an itemized description of all such charges, and franchisee shall pay such amount within thirty (30) days after the receipt of such description.

5.08.250 Franchise Renewal.
Franchise renewals shall be conducted in accordance with applicable law. The City and franchisee, by mutual consent, may enter into renewal negotiations at any time during the term of a franchise.

5.08.260 Franchise Revocation.
Any franchise granted by the City may be revoked during the period of such franchise, as provided in the franchise, subject to the procedural requirements provided for therein. A failure by the franchisee to comply with any of the material provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a violation of the City Code.

5.08.270 Miscellaneous Provisions.
A. This chapter shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable federal, state, and local laws, and shall apply to any franchise hereafter accepted by a franchisee.
B. The captions throughout this chapter are intended to facilitate the reading hereof. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of any part of this chapter.
C. A franchisee shall not be relieved of its obligations to comply with any or all of the provisions of this chapter by reason of any failure of the City to demand prompt compliance.
D. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all cable operators and cable systems as permitted under applicable law.

5.08.280 Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, or provision of this chapter is determined to be illegal, invalid, or unconstitutional by any court or agency of competent jurisdiction, such determination shall have no effect on the validity of any other section, subsection, paragraph, or provision of this chapter, all of which will remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 2151, 2008)

Chapter 5.10 SPECIAL EVENT PERMITS AND CONTRACTS

Sections:
5.10.010     Definition
5.10.020     Permit and Contract Requirements
5.10.030     Permit Application
5.10.040     Staff Review
5.10.060     Approval
5.10.070     Business License Required
5.10.080     Insurance/Performance Bond Required
5.10.085     Cleaning/Damage Deposit
5.10.087     Exemptions from Fees, Special Events Contract, and Insurance
5.10.090     Denial of Permit
5.10.095     Penalties
5.10.100     Notification
5.10.110     No Special Duty Created
5.10.120     Severability

5.10.010 Definition.
“Special Event” is any activity, which occurs upon public or private property that will affect the standard and ordinary use of public streets, rights-of-way, or sidewalks, and/or which requires extraordinary levels of City services. This includes but is not limited to fairs, festivals, carnivals, sporting events, foot runs, bike-a-thons, markets, parades, exhibitions, auctions, dances, and motion picture filming. (Ord. 1922, 1999)

5.10.020 Permit and Contract Requirements.
A. No person or organization shall conduct a special event without first having obtained a Special Event Permit from the City of Snohomish.
B. Those events of a scope not Administratively Approved by the Mayor or his/her designee will require entering into a Special Event Contract with the City of Snohomish. The form of the Special Event Contract is to be approved by the City Attorney.
C. When a special event will be an exercise of rights protected by the First and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution, the application shall be processed promptly, without charging a fee for political or religious activities or imposing terms or conditions that infringe constitutional freedoms, and in a manner that respects the liberty of applicants and the public.
D. All permit applications shall be accompanied by an application fee to be set by resolution of the City Council; unless otherwise noted in this chapter. (Ord. 2051, 2004; Ord. 2129, 2007; Ord. 2299, 2016; Ord. 2341, 2017)

5.10.030 Permit Application.
An application for a Special Event Permit will be made in writing on forms provided by the office of the City Clerk and completed applications will be submitted to the City Clerk.
A Special Event Permit Application must be submitted 60 days prior to the event. Exceptions to this requirement may be approved by the Mayor or his/her designee. (Ord. 1922, 1999; Ord. 2341, 2017)

5.10.040 Staff Review.
A. The application shall be received and date stamped at City Hall by the Economic Development Manager, who shall coordinate the process of City Department Review. Copies of the application shall be sent to the Staff Review Committee for comments. This Committee consists of the City Engineer, City Planner, City Clerk, Economic Development Manager, Public Works Manager, Building Official, Police Chief, and Fire Department Representative, or their designees. Preliminary staff comments shall be assembled from the Staff Review Committee. A Special Events Contract shall be drafted by the Economic Development Manager and reviewed by the Mayor or his/her designee and City Attorney. A copy will be forwarded to the applicant in a timely manner.
B. Any department head may recommend conditions that are considered necessary to protect the public health and safety. The Chief of Police or Chief’s designee, Fire Chief, and Building Official shall each review the plan for the event and must approve the plans as amended by staff conditions.
C. The applicant shall have the opportunity to respond to all comments and conditions of the Permit and Special Events Contract either in writing or at a meeting with staff within a two-week period. (Ord. 2051, 2004; Ord. 2233, 2012; Ord. 2341, 2017)

5.10.060 Approval.
A. Approval by the Mayor or His/Her Designee. Administrative approval for events of one (1) day or less, contained on a single site or involving minor interruption of normal traffic flow.
B. Approval by the City Council. All Special Event Permits not Administratively Approved by the Mayor or his/her designee and all Special Event Contracts shall be placed on the City Council agenda with the staff report for final action.
C. The City may condition the issuance of a special events permit by imposing reasonable requirements concerning the time, place, and manner of the event, and such requirements as are necessary to protect the safety and rights of persons and property, and the control of traffic.
    1. The following conditions apply to all special events permits:
        a. Alteration of the time, place, and manner of the event proposed on the application.
        b. Conditions concerning the area of assembly and disbanding of an event occurring along a route.
        c. Conditions concerning accommodation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including restricting the event to only a portion of the street or right-of-way.
    2. Conditions on special events permits not protected under the First and Fourteenth Amendments of the U.S. Constitution may include, but are not limited to:
        a. Requirements for the use of traffic cones or barricades.
        b. Requirements for the provision of first aid or sanitary facilities.
        c. Requirements for use of event monitors and providing notice of permit conditions to event participants.
        d. Restrictions on the number and type of vehicles, animals, or structures at the event, and inspection and approval of floats, structures, and decorated vehicles for safety.
        e. Compliance with animal protection ordinances and laws.
        f. Requirements for use of garbage containers, cleanup, and restoration of City property.
        g. Restrictions on the use of amplified sound and compliance with noise ordinances, regulations, and laws.
        h. Notice to residents and/or businesses regarding any activity which would require street closure.
        i. Restrictions on the sale and/or consumption of alcohol.
        j. Elimination of an activity which cannot be mitigated to a point as to ensure public safety and welfare, or which causes undue liability to the City.
        k. Requirements regarding the use of City personnel and equipment.
        l. Compliance with any other applicable federal, state, or local law or regulation, including the other provisions of this chapter.
        m. Payment to the City of the cost of providing two (2) police officers per one thousand (1,000) attendees; provided that:
            i. Said number of police officers may be increased or decreased by the Chief of Police in accordance with the Chief’s written assessment of the event’s public safety risks based on past experience with the special event in question or with similar events; and
            ii. Special Event Sponsor at their expense must hire off-duty uniformed deputies for security and traffic control from the Snohomish County Deputy Sheriff’s Association; and
            iii. For City sponsored special events, the City’s financial contribution to the event may include the City absorbing some or all of the cost of providing said number of police officers.
        n. Event Sponsor is authorized to control the event parking for traffic control, event staging, and configuration. Where appropriate, the Event Sponsor shall clearly post temporary parking restriction/no-parking signs applicable for the Event. Where appropriate, Event Sponsor is authorized and responsible to arrange for the towing of vehicles violating the posted Event parking restrictions. Event Sponsor may use the tow company of their own choosing for Event towing purposes. Event Sponsor shall be responsible for all towing appeals made by the Event Sponsor. Event Sponsor shall indemnify, defend, and hold the City harmless for all costs and damages related to Event Sponsor tows. (Ord. 2051, 2004; Ord. 2129, 2007; Ord. 2166, 2009; Ord. 2233, 2012; Ord. 2245, 2012; Ord. 2340, 2018)

5.10.070 Business License Required.
All vendors operating a revenue generating business, as part of a non-profit organization sponsored event, shall obtain and display a special, limited business license. The City Clerk, upon receipt of a completed business license application form from a vendor approved by the Special Event applicant, will issue this special license to the vendor. The fee for this special license shall be established by resolution and applied to each vendor participating in the event. This special limited business license will be valid only during the special event or up to four (4) days per year.
Vendors participating in events of more than four days per year shall require a regular business license with an annual fee established by resolution. (Ord. 2051, 2004)

5.10.080 Insurance/Performance Bond Required.
For an event not protected by the First and Fourteenth Amendments of the United States Constitution:
A. If the permit or Special Events Contract includes permission to use City property, streets, or rights-of-way, the applicant will be required to obtain and present evidence of comprehensive liability insurance naming the City of Snohomish as an additional insured. The insurance requirement is a minimum of $2,000,000 combined single limit per event against all claims arising from permits issued and events or activities authorized pursuant to this chapter.
B. As part of the Special Events Contract, the applicant may be required to provide a performance bond in an amount up to the estimated staff costs determined by the City. This requirement would be based on lack of historical dealings with the applicant, or by applicant’s previous failure to comply with provisions of an earlier contract. The City Attorney shall approve the form of the performance bond. (Ord. 2051, 2004; Ord. 2129, 2007)

5.10.085 Cleaning/Damage Deposit.
For an event not protected by the First and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution, an applicant may be required to submit to the City a cleaning/damage deposit two weeks prior to the starting of the event. The amount of the deposit shall be set by resolution of the City Council. The deposit shall be refunded to applicant if, upon inspection, all is in order, or a prorated portion thereof as may be necessary to reimburse the City for loss or cleaning costs. The City reserves the right to retain the entire deposit if cleanup is not completed satisfactorily in the time frame as specified in the special events contract. (Ord. 2051, 2004; Ord. 2129, 2007; Ord. 2299, 2016)

5.10.087 Exemptions from Fees, Special Events Contract, and Insurance.
No fee, Special Event Contract, or insurance requirement shall be imposed when prohibited by the First and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution. Political or religious activity intended primarily for the communication or expression of ideas shall be presumed to be a constitutionally protected event. Factors that may be considered in evaluating whether or not the fee and other requirements apply include the nature of the event, the extent of commercial activity, such as the sales of food, goods, and services; product advertising or promotion, or other business participation in the event; the use or application of any funds raised; and if part of any annual tradition or series, previous events in the sequence and the public perception of the event. (Ord. 2129, 2007)

5.10.090 Denial of Permit.
Reasons for denial of a Special Event Permit include, but are not limited to:
A. The event will disrupt traffic within the City beyond practical solution.
B. The event will create a likelihood of endangering the public.
C. The event will interfere with access to emergency services.
D. The location or time of the special event will cause undue hardship or excessive noise levels to adjacent businesses or residents.
E. The event will require the diversion of City resource(s) that would unreasonably affect the maintenance of regular City service levels.
F. The application contains incomplete or false information.
G. The applicant fails to provide proof of insurance.
H. The applicant fails to obtain a City business license.
I. Inadequate provision for garbage and debris removal.
J. Inadequate provision of temporary restroom facilities.
K. Inadequate provisions for parking.
L. The City and the Applicant are unable to reach terms to sign a Special Event Contract. (Ord. 1922, 1999; Ord. 2051, 2004)

5.10.095 Penalties.
Violation of this Chapter shall be considered a civil violation pursuant to SMC 1.01.080 and Chapter 1.14 SMC, except as otherwise provided therein. (Ord. 2051, 2004; Ord. 2155, 2008)

5.10.100 Notification.
The City may condition any special event permit and Special Event Contract on a requirement that the permittee give written advance notice of the event and its probable impact to any property owners or tenants who will be impacted by the event. (Ord. 2051, 2004)

5.10.110 No Special Duty Created.
It is the purpose of this ordinance to provide for health, welfare, and safety of the general public, and not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited by the terms of this ordinance. No provision or term used in this ordinance is intended to impose any duty whatsoever upon the City or any of its officers, agents, or employees for who the implementation or enforcement of this ordinance shall be discretionary and not mandatory.
Nothing contained in this ordinance is intended to be, nor shall be construed to create or form the basis for any liability on the part of the City or its officers, agents, and employees for any injury or damage connected to the use for which the permit is issued. (Ord. 1922, 1999)

5.10.120 Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance are declared to be separate and severable. The invalidity of any clause, sentence, paragraph, subdivision, section, or portion of this ordinance, or the invalidity of the application thereof to any person or circumstance, shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this ordinance, or the validity of its application to other persons or circumstances. (Ord. 2051, 2004)

Chapter 5.28 PAWNBROKERS

Sections:
5.28.010     Definitions
5.28.020     Fixed Place of Business
5.28.030     License Requirements
5.28.040     License Issuance, Renewal, Denials, Suspension and Revocation
5.28.050     Exceptions
5.28.060     Duty to Record Information
5.28.070     Retention of Records
5.28.080     Identification of Property within Business
5.28.090     Inspections
5.28.100     Seller or Consignee to Give Truthful Information to the Dealer
5.28.110     Duty to Report to Chief of Police
5.28.120     Stolen Goods
5.28.130     Police Hold and Police Property Seizure Hearings
5.28.140     Consignment Selling
5.28.150     Dealers Removal of Property from Place of Business
5.28.160     Pawnbrokers Interest
5.28.170     Dealers Sale of Property
5.28.180     Acts of Employees Deemed Act of Dealer
5.28.190     City Non-liability
5.28.200     Violation Penalty
5.28.210     Repealer
5.28.220     Rules and Regulations
5.28.230     Title Gender
5.28.240     Conflicting Provisions
5.28.250     Severability

5.28.010 Definitions.
Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter.
A. “Melted metals” means metals derived from metal junk or precious metals that have been reduced to a melted state from other than ore or ingots which are produced from ore that has not previously been processed.
B. “Metal junk” means any metal that has previously been milled, shaped, stamped, or forged and that is no longer useful in its original form, except precious metals.
C. “Nonmetal junk” means any nonmetal, commonly discarded item that is worn out, or has out lasted its usefulness as intended in its original form, except nonmetal junk does not include any item made in a former period which has enhanced value because of its age.
D. “Precious metals” means gold, silver, and platinum.
E. “Personal property” means any item of property owned by an individual that is offered for sale which is not new, including metals in any form.
F. “Second hand property” means any item of personal property offered for sale which is not new, including metals in any form, except postage stamps, coins that are legal tender, bullion in the form of fabricated hallmarked bars, used books, and clothing of a resale value of seventy-five dollars or less, except furs.
G. “Antique or collectible” means any article that which, because of its age, rarity, or historical significance has a monetary value greater than its original value or has an age of 30 or more years; provided, however, the following items, regardless of age or value shall not be considered an antique or collectibles and shall be subject to regulation and reporting under this ordinance: ivory, precious and semi precious gems, gold or silver of any purity, or items that have any of the foregoing as components or attachments.
H. “Pawnbroker” means every person engaged, in whole or in part, in the business of loaning money on the security of pledges, deposits or conditional sales of personal property.
I. “Second hand dealer” means every person engaged in whole or in part in the business of purchasing, selling, trading, consignment selling, or otherwise transferring for value, second hand property including metal junk, melted metals or precious metals.
J. “Antique dealer” means every person engaged in whole or in part, in the business of purchasing, selling, trading, consignment selling, or otherwise transferring for value antiques or collectibles including metal junk, melted metals or precious metals.
K. “Transaction” means a pledge, purchase or consignment by a dealer from a member of the general public.
L. “Dealer” means, for the purpose of this ordinance, any person, partnership and/or corporation conducting business covered under the provisions of this ordinance. (Ord. 1678, 1989)

5.28.020 Fixed Place of Business.
No person may operate as a pawnbroker, second hand or antique dealer unless the person maintains a fixed place of business within the City of Snohomish. (Ord. 1678, 1989)

5.28.030 License Requirements.
Except as provided herein, no person, firm or corporation or any other organization shall hold out, advertise or engage in business as a pawnbroker, second hand or antique dealer in the City of Snohomish without first having obtained a license from the City therefor. (Ord. 1678, 1989)

5.28.040 License Issuance, Renewal, Denials, Suspension and Revocation.
Notwithstanding the general licensing provisions as they relate to license issuance, renewal, denial, suspension and revocation, this section shall control.
A. It is unlawful to engage in business as a pawnbroker, second hand or antique dealer in the City of Snohomish without first having obtained a license from the City Clerk permitting such business.
B. A license will be denied to any person if the Chief of Police after due investigation, finds that the applicant has done any of the following:
    1. Made any false statement on the application or omitted information required on the application;
    2. Had a conviction or bail forfeiture involving crimes pertaining to or directly related to the applicants honesty and integrity (fraud, larceny, extortion, theft, possession or stolen property, etc.) and ability to properly operate a pawnbroker, second hand or antique business;
    3. Exhibited conduct within the past three years in operating a pawnbroker, second hand or antique business which would lead the Chief of Police to reasonably conclude that the applicant will not comply with ordinance requirements;
    4. Been refused a pawnbroker, second hand or antique business license or had such license revoked under the provisions of this ordinance or by any other jurisdiction within the State of Washington; provided, however, that any applicant denied a license under this ordinance may re apply after one year from the date of the denial if the basis for the denial no longer exists.
C. A dealer’s license will be suspended or revoked if the licensee does any of the following:
    1. Fails to comply with any of the requirements of this ordinance;
    2. Violates any of the ordinances of the City of Snohomish or the laws of the State of Washington, the violation of which reflects unfavorably on the fitness of the license holder to engage in or work for a dealer;
    3. Falsifies any record, document or information required to be kept or submitted to the City by this ordinance or by regulation prescribed hereunder;
    4. Has a conviction or bail forfeiture involving crimes pertaining to or directly related to the licensee’s honesty and integrity (fraud, larceny, extortion, theft, possession of stolen property, etc.) and the ability to properly operate a pawnbroker, second hand or antique business.
D. Suspension of a license means that the licensee’s privilege to operate his/her business as a pawnbroker, second hand or antique dealer is barred for a specific period of time. A suspended license may be reinstated upon the lapse of a specific period of time or by correcting the deficiencies. The conditions or reinstatement will be determined by the City Hearing Examiner.
E. Revocation of a license means that the license has been cancelled. A licensee whose license has been revoked cannot have his/her license reinstated but must comply with all conditions of the revocation including re applying for a new license and paying all license fees.
F. When the City Clerk suspends or revokes a license, the City Clerk shall first provide the licensee with a Notice of Proposed Suspension/Revocation which shall provide notification to the licensee that a hearing will be held on the suspension/revocation at a time and date determined by the City Clerk. The Notice of Suspension/Revocation will be sent to the licensee’s address. It is the licensee’s duty to keep the address information on the application current at all times. The City Hearing Examiner will preside over the hearing. In the event the licensee fails to attend the hearing, the license will automatically be suspended/revoked. Any suspension/ revocation will not be effective until the City Hearing Examiner makes a determination following the hearing.
G. A license suspension/revocation shall become effective immediately without the benefit of any suspension/revocation hearing when the ordinance requires a summary suspension/revocation or when the City Hearing Examiner determines that it is in the best interest of the health and/or safety of the general public to do so.
H. Within ten (10) days following suspension or revocation of any license issued pursuant to this ordinance or within ten (10) days following the denial of any license regulated by this ordinance, an appeal may be filed with the City Council. Upon the receipt of such appeal notice, the licensee shall be afforded a hearing before the City Council after reasonable notice has been given. Said appeal shall be in writing and addressed to the City Council.
I. Notice of the time and date of such appeal hearing shall be given by delivering a copy of the notice to the holder of the license or by mailing a copy thereof to the holder at the last address shown by the City Clerk’s license records which notice shall be mailed or delivered at least five (5) days before the date fixed for the hearing. The City Council shall, within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of such hearing, issue a decision as to the suspension, revocation or denial. Such decision of the City Council shall be final and conclusive as of the date set forth in the decision, unless within fifteen (15) days from the effective date on the City Council order an aggrieved person or persons obtains a writ of certiorari from the Superior Court of Washington for the County of Snohomish for the purpose of review of the action taken.
J. It is unlawful for a person whose license has been revoked or suspended, to keep the license issued to him/her in his/her possession or under his/her control, and the same shall immediately be surrendered to the City Clerk. When revoked, the license shall be cancelled and when suspended, the City Clerk shall retain the same during the period of the suspension. (Ord. 1678, 1989)

5.28.050 Exceptions.
Except as otherwise provided in this ordinance, the provisions of this ordinance do not apply to transactions as conducted by the following.
A. Motor vehicle dealers licensed under RCW 46.70;
B. Motor vehicle wreckers or hulk haulers licensed under RCW 46.79 or 46.80;
C. Persons giving an allowance or the trade in or exchange of second hand property on the purchase of other merchandise of the same kind and of a greater value;
D. Organizations who obtain their inventories of second hand property solely through charitable contributions or charity drop box;
E. Persons in the business of buying empty food and beverage containers or non-metal junk;
F. Residents of the City when engaging in the sale of second hand property from their own residence and from their own personal property in a form commonly known as yard sales or garage sales, as long as these sales do not exceed a total of not more than four (4) days per year, and not on a total of more than four (4) separate occasions;
G. Sales in excess of four (4) days total per year or more than four (4) separate occasions shall be construed as being a second hand dealer business and shall be subject to all of the requirements of this ordinance and all other City ordinances;
H. Transactions by and between antique and collectible dealers involving any antique or collectible. (Ord. 1678, 1989)

5.28.060 Duty to Record Information.
A. Every dealer doing business in the City of Snohomish shall maintain, wherever that business is conducted, a record which shall be typewritten in the English language, at the time of each transaction which shall include the following information;
    1. The signature of the person with whom the transaction is made;
    2. The date and the time of the transaction;
    3. The name of the person or employee conducting the transaction;
    4. The first name, last name, middle name, sex, race, age, date of birth, height, weight, hair and eye color and address, telephone number, and social security number of the person with whom the transaction is made;
    5. A complete description of the property pledged, bought or consigned, including the brand name, serial number, model number, initials, engravings, size, patterns, and color, and in the case of firearms brand or country of origin if no brand is marked, type of action, manufacturer of the action if known, caliber by measurement or marking on the weapon, barrel length, type of finish (nickel, stainless, blued, satin or smooth), barrel length, and type of firearm whether it is a rifle, pistol/handgun or shotgun. In the case of jewelry, shape, number, color and type of stones, material of workmanship, whether the item is men’s or women’s jewelry, the type of jewelry (watch, ring, necklace, etc.) type of finish and color (black hills gold, yellow gold satin finish, silver filigree, etc.);
    6. The price paid or the amount loaned;
    7. The type and identifying number of the identification used by the person with whom the transaction is made, which shall consist of a valid driver’s license or identification card issued by any state or two pieces of identification issued by a governmental agency, one of which shall be descriptive of the person identified, and one which shall bear a picture of the person identified; and
    8. The nature of the transaction, a number identifying the transaction, the name and address of the business conducting the transaction, the location of the property and the licensee’s reporting number as assigned by the Chief of Police or his designee.
B. Each dealer who obtains property from private individuals shall keep an accurate record which shall be typewritten at the time of each transaction and an accurate description. In addition, the record shall contain the amount of money paid therefor or loaned thereon, the percentage rate to be repaid on any loan, the time within which said loan or pawn is to be redeemed and the identifying information as previously specified. (Ord. 1678, 1989)

5.28.070 Retention of Records.
A. Every dealer shall retain complete business records for three (3) years following the date of the transaction.
B. Every dealer shall retain complete business records until notified otherwise if said transactions will be involved in a criminal prosecution.
Notification of said criminal prosecution shall be in writing from the Police Department or from any law enforcement agency or prosecutor within the State of Washington.
C. The records shall be maintained at the place of business. (Ord. 1678, 1989)

5.28.080 Identification of Property within Business.
At the time of receipt of property from a customer the property shall be marked with a number corresponding to the number assigned the transaction in the store’s bookkeeping method. Such numbering shall be in ascending sequence and the transaction number shall be affixed to the item throughout the items tenure within the store. (Ord. 1678, 1989)

5.28.090 Inspections.
All records, books, and other records of any dealer as well as goods, ware, and any other merchandise connected to or relating to any pledge, purchase, exchange, receipt of goods, wares, or merchandise received from private individuals or other articles of value connected with the dealer acting as a pawnbroker or second hand dealer shall be open to inspection to any commissioned police officer of the State of Washington, or of any of its political subdivisions at all times. (Ord. 1678, 1989)

5.28.100 Seller or Consignee to Give Truthful Information to the Dealer.
All persons selling or consigning property to a dealer shall read and sign an affirmation statement on the transaction report to be completed at the time of the transaction which shall read as follows: “I certify that the information contained on this form is true and accurate. I further certify that the item(s) have no liens or financial claims against them and that the item(s) are not stolen. I realize that falsifying this form is a violation of the ordinances of the City of Snohomish and is subject to imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days or a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000) or both.” (Ord. 1678, 1989)

5.28.110 Duty to Report to Chief of Police.
A. Every dealer who accepts, purchases, trades, takes on consignment or by other means receives property from private individuals within the City of Snohomish shall deliver to the City of Snohomish Police Department no later than 1800 hours (6:00 p.m.) a full, true, and correct transcript of the record of all transactions conducted within the preceding twenty-four (24) hours. The report shall be made on forms approved by the Chief of Police or his designee. It shall be the responsibility of the dealer to obtain and keep in adequate supply, at his own expense, those forms required for reporting and records keeping. No forms may be utilized which do not contain the previously specified required information and which have not obtained the prior approval of the Police Department.
B. If a dealer or any employee thereof has reason to believe that goods in his possession are lost or stolen goods, such information shall be promptly reported to the Chief of Police or his designee, together with the name of the owner/pawner/or consignor and the date when the item was received by the business, as well as the customer’s name from whom the item was received.
C. It is unlawful for any person to provide false information to a dealer, and any person doing such shall be guilty of a violation of this ordinance and shall be subject to a fine or imprisonment. (Ord. 1678, 1989)

5.28.120 Stolen Goods.
A. In addition to retention of property required by this Chapter, any police officer having probable cause to believe that any item in possession of a licensee is stolen, may seize such item at any time. In the event of such seizure, the licensee shall be entitled to a written receipt.
B. In lieu of immediate seizure, any police officer having probable cause to believe that any item in the possession of the licensee is stolen may place a “Police Hold” on the item by notation to the record.
C. While an item is being held on “police hold” the dealer is required to:
    1. Tag the item and note the hold on the transaction record;
    2. Hold the item in a secure area and keep it separate from normal inventory. It shall be accessible at any time during the dealer’s normal business hours;
    3. In any event the hold shall expire at the end of one hundred and twenty (120) days unless written notification is given to the dealer. Renewal of the “police hold” results in an additional one hundred and twenty (120) day holding period for each renewal.
D. No licensee shall dispose of any item subject to a “police hold” in any manner. (Ord. 1678, 1989)

5.28.130 Police Hold and Police Property Seizure Hearings.
A. Any licensee who has had property placed on “police hold” or had property seized by a law enforcement officer may obtain a hearing to obtain additional information. The licensee shall cause notice to be served on the Chief of Police not more than fifteen (15) days after the “police hold” has been placed or the property seized.
    1. Notice shall be served by certified mail, addressed to the Chief of Police, Snohomish Police Department, 230 Maple Avenue, Snohomish, WA 98290.
    2. The request for hearing shall contain the following:
        a. Name, address, and phone number of the licensee requesting the hearing;
        b. Name of the business involved, address and phone of the business;
        c. Complete description of the item(s) of property involved;
        d. Date those items came into the licensee’s possession;
        e. The nature of the transaction and number identifying the transaction through which the licensee received the items;
        f. Brief statement describing the reason for the licensee’s concern.
B. Upon receipt of the notice requesting the hearing the Chief of Police or his designee shall schedule a hearing. The hearing shall be conducted within thirty (30) calendar days of the receipt of notice.
    1. Property hearings will be held at the Snohomish Police Department;
    2. The Chief of Police shall notify the Hearings Officer as provided in this ordinance.
    3. The Hearing Officer shall have the power to:
        a. Administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and receive evidence;
        b. Rule on offers of proof and receive relevant evidence;
        c. Regulate the course of the hearing;
        d. Make decisions which shall be so ordered;
        e. Establish rules and procedures to conduct hearings consistent herewithin.
C. The following procedures will be followed at a Hearing:
    1. At the hearing the licensee may produce any relevant evidence to substantiate his claim of ownership;
    2. The police report shall be admitted as probative evidence;
    3. All evidence including, but not limited to, records and documents in the possession of the licensee or the police department shall be admitted as evidence and no other factual information or evidence shall be considered in the determination of the case;
    4. The Hearing Officer may take notice of judicially cognizable facts;
    5. The Hearing Officer may exclude incompetent, irrelevant, immaterial and unduly repetitious information or evidence;
    6. Any order of the Hearing Officer shall be supported by proof by a preponderance of the evidence.
D. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall order:
    1. That the item(s) shall remain in the possession of the licensee, subject to a “police hold” upon the item(s) or order from a court of competent jurisdiction, or;
    2. That possession of the item(s) shall be transferred to the Snohomish Police Department. The Snohomish Police Department may retain the item(s) for use as evidence in court or be directed to return the item(s) to the rightful owner, or;
    3. That the item(s) shall remain in the possession of the Snohomish Police Department for use in court as evidence or be directed to return the item(s) to the rightful owner.
E. Any person, including the City, aggrieved by the final decision in a property hearing is entitled to review thereof in the Snohomish County Superior Court.
    1. Proceedings for review under this section shall be instituted by filing a petition in Superior Court.
    2. Filing of the petition shall not stay enforcement of the Hearing Officer’s decision except by order of the court.
    3. Review shall be by the court without a jury. The review shall be de novo unless provided otherwise by ordinance.
    4. The court may affirm the decision of the Hearing Officer or remand the case for further proceedings; or it may reverse the decision if substantial rights of the petitioners may be prejudiced because the administrative findings, inferences, conclusion or decisions are:
        a. In violation of constitutional provisions;
        b. In excess of the statutory authority of jurisdiction of the Hearing Officer. (Ord. 1678, 1989)

5.28.140 Consignment Selling.
A. Property bought or received on consignment by a dealer with a permanent place of business in the City shall not be removed from that place of business or co mingled with normal inventory, except consigned property returned to the owner, within fifteen (15) days after the receipt of the property. Property shall at all times during the ordinary hours of business be open to inspection to any commissioned law enforcement officer of the State or any of its political subdivisions.
B. Property bought or received on consignment in the City of Snohomish by a second hand dealer without a permanent place of business in the City shall be held within the City of Snohomish, except consigned property returned to the owner within fifteen (15) days after receipt of the property. The property shall be available for inspection at reasonable times by any commissioned law enforcement officer of the State or any of its political subdivisions. (Ord. 1678, 1989)

5.28.150 Dealers Removal of Property from Place of Business.
A. Property bought or received in pledge by any dealer shall not be removed from that place of business, except when redeemed by the bearer or a pawn ticket within fifteen (15) days after the receipt of the property.
B. Property purchased, traded, bartered, consigned, or otherwise received from another dealer may be sold, traded, bartered, consigned, or removed from the place of business at any time. (Ord. 1678, 1989)

5.28.160 Pawnbrokers Interest.
A. All pawnbrokers are authorized to charge and receive interest and other fees at the following rates for money loaned on the security of personal property actually received in pledge. The interest charged shall not exceed the rules set forth in RCW 19.60.060, as it now reads or is hereafter amended.
B. The fee for preparation of documents, pledges or reports required under the laws of the United States, the State of Washington or the counties, cities, towns or other political subdivision thereof, shall not exceed the amounts set forth in RCW 19.60.060, as it now reads or is hereafter amended.
C. Fees as set forth above may be charged only one time during the term of a pledge. A copy of the fees as set forth in RCW 19.60.060, as it now reads or is hereafter amended, set in twelve (12) point type or larger, shall be posted prominently in each business subject to this ordinance. (Ord. 1678, 1989)

5.28.170 Dealers Sale of Property.
A. Neither dealers nor their employees shall sell any property received in pledge within ninety (90) days after the term of the loan expires. However, if a pledged article is not redeemed within the ninety (90) day period, the pawnbroker has all rights, title and interest of the pledger or the pledger’s assigns.
B. Every transaction entered into by a pawnbroker or his employee shall be evidenced by a written document, a copy of which shall be furnished to the pledger. The document shall set forth the loan period, the date on which the loan is due and payable, and shall inform the pledger or the pledger’s right to redeem the pledge within ninety (90) days after the expiration of the loan term. (Ord. 1678, 1989)

5.28.180 Acts of Employees Deemed Act of Dealer.
The act of any servant or employee of any dealer or pawnbroker, shall also be deemed the act of such licensed dealer or pawnbroker. (Ord. 1678, 1989)

5.28.190 City Non-liability.
A. It is expressly the purpose of this ordinance to provide for and promote the health, safety and welfare of the general public, and not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited by the terms of this ordinance.
B. It is the specific intent of this ordinance that no provision, nor term, used in this ordinance is intended to impose any duty whatsoever upon the City or any of its officers or employees, for whom the implementation or enforcement of this ordinance shall be discretionary and not mandatory.
C. Nothing contained in this ordinance is intended to be nor shall be construed to create or form the basis for any liability on the part of the City, or its officers, employees or agents, for any injury or damage resulting from the failure to comply with the provisions of this ordinance, or by reason or in consequence of any inspection, notice, order, certificate, permission or approval authorized or issued or done in connection with the implementation or enforcement of this ordinance, or by reason of any action or inaction on the part of the City related in any manner to the enforcement of this ordinance by its officers, employees or agents. (Ord. 1678, 1989)

5.28.200 Violation Penalty.
A. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and each person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during which any violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance is committed, continued or permitted; and upon conviction of any such violation, such person shall be subject to a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000) or imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or both such fine and imprisonment.
B. Any violation of the provisions of this ordinance constitutes a public nuisance which the City can abate by an action in Snohomish County Superior Court. The costs of such action shall be taxed against the violator.
C. Penalty and enforcement provisions provided in this article are not exclusive, and the City may pursue any remedy or relief it deems appropriate.
D. It shall also be a violation of this ordinance for:
    1. Any person to remove, alter or obliterate any manufacturer’s make, model or serial number, personal identification number or identifying marks engraved or etched upon an item of personal property that was purchased, consigned or received in pledge;
    2. Any person to knowingly make, cause or allow to be made any false entry or misstatement of any material matter in any book, record or writing required to be kept under this ordinance;
    3. Any pawnbroker or second hand dealer to receive any property from any person under the age of eighteen years, any person under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs, or any person known to the pawnbroker or second hand dealer as having been convicted of burglary, robbery, theft or possession of or receiving stolen property within the past ten years whether the person is acting in his or her own behalf or as the agent of another; or
    4. Any person to violate any other provisions of this ordinance, or amendments thereto. (Ord. 1678, 1989)

5.28.210 Repealer.
Ordinance No. 98, effective date May 23, 1893, is hereby repealed in its entirety. All other ordinances or parts thereof in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. (Ord. 1678, 1989)

5.28.220 Rules and Regulations.
The Chief of Police and City Clerk are authorized to promulgate rules and regulations consistent with the terms of this ordinance. (Ord. 1678, 1989)

5.28.230 Title Gender.
A. All references in the ordinance to the City Clerk and Chief of Police shall include their respective designees.
B. Any reference or use of the terms he, she, him, her, or other gender based classification, if applicable as shown by the context thereof, shall apply to the opposite gender, also. (Ord. 1678, 1989)

5.28.240 Conflicting Provisions.
In the event any of the provisions of this ordinance conflict with any provision of any other ordinance, the provisions set forth in this ordinance shall supersede. (Ord. 1678, 1989)

5.28.250 Severability.
Should any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance or its application to any person or situation be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance or its application to any other person or situation. The City Council of the City of Snohomish hereby declares that it would have adopted this ordinance and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 1678, 1989)

Chapter 5.30 MOBILE FOOD VENDORS

Sections:
5.30.010     Purpose
5.30.020     Mobile food vendor defined
5.30.030     Restrictions
5.30.040     License renewal
5.30.050     License permit required – application contents
5.30.060     Conflicting provisions
5.30.070     Severability

5.30.010 Purpose.
This Chapter sets forth the licensing, location, and operating requirements for mobile food vendors.

5.30.020 Mobile food vendor defined.
For the purposes of this chapter, a “mobile food vendor” means a business that, as its principal function, sells or otherwise dispenses prepared food and non-alcoholic beverages to the general public from a licensed motor vehicle that is not permanently affixed to real property. The term excludes food delivery vehicles and vehicles that dispense food and move from place to place and are stationary for no more than 15 minutes at a time, such as ice cream trucks. The term also excludes food trucks and similar concession vehicles that are licensed by the City under a special event permit.

5.30.030 Restrictions.
A mobile food vendor shall:
A. Not be located on any given parcel or premises for more than six hours in any 24-hour period.
B. Mobile food vendors shall not operate at more than one site within any 24 hour period unless such sites are separated by at least 2,000 feet. Mobile food vendors that only serve employees of businesses on the property of such businesses are exempt from this provision.
C. Maintain a minimum setback of 20 feet between the mobile food preparation van or other vending unit and all interior property lines and other buildings and a minimum of 50 feet from flammable, combustible liquid or gas storage and dispensing structures.
D. No mobile food vendor shall sell or deliver any food or goods if the vending unit is within 200 feet of the entrance of any non-mobile business which serves food and is open for business, without the written consent of the business.
E. No mobile food vendor shall obstruct or cause to obstruct the passage of any pedestrian or vehicle on any public sidewalk, street, or any other public right-of-way, including customer queues or customers consuming any food sold by the mobile food vendor at or near the place where any items are sold or offered for sale. No items may be offered or sold and no customers served in any traveled portion of a public roadway.
F. No mobile food vendor shall operate except on private property in the Pilchuck District’s Neighborhood Center zone, Neighborhood Civic zone, Business Park land use designation or on public right-of-way or public property adjacent to the First Street travel lanes west of Avenue D. The reference to zoning districts in this section is solely for the purpose of regulation of the location of operations of mobile food vendor licensees under this chapter.
G. If operating on private property, the property owner shall designated at least two customer parking spaces for the use of the mobile food vendor’s customers while the mobile food vendor is operating on such private property.
H. Maintain all attachments to the vending unit, including but not limited to signs, lights, overhangs, and awnings, in such a manner as to not create a hazard to pedestrians, customers or vehicles.
I. No use of freestanding awnings, tents, canopies, umbrellas, or other structures or weather protection devices. All such devices shall remain attached to the vending unit. All merchandise, wares, and food shall only be displayed or offered for sale from the vendor’s vehicle.
J. Provide at least one trash receptacle for customer use. All such receptacles shall be screened from the right of way and securely covered, and the contents disposed with in compliance with City regulations.
K. Comply with all applicable requirements of the Snohomish County Health District and maintain current Snohomish Health District certifications.
L. Comply with the standards of the State of Washington Department of Labor and Industries for electrical service to the mobile food preparation vehicle and have a valid and current license issued by the Washington State Department of Licensing.

5.30.040 License renewal.
Mobile food vendor licenses shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance. Amendments to the original license application shall require a review fee but shall not change the renewal date.

5.30.050 License permit required – application contents.
A. No person, firm, or corporation shall operate within the city as a mobile food vendor without a valid business license according to the requirements of Chapter 5.02 SMC and a mobile food vendor license per this chapter. Application for a mobile food vendor license shall be made to the City Clerk, upon forms to be provided by the City Clerk. A mobile food vendor license shall not be issued prior to submittal and approval of all items required in this section and a determination of compliance with all conditions of license approval.
B. A mobile vendor license may be suspended or revoked in writing by the Mayor or his/her designee for any of the following reasons:
    1. Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for a license.
    2. Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in connection with the selling of products.
    3. Any violation of this chapter.
    4. Conviction of the licensee or operator of a felony or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.
    5. Conducting a business licensed under this chapter in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public.
C. The application for a mobile food vendor license shall state the name and address of the applicant and the vehicle license number from which the applicant proposes to conduct business.
D. Such application shall be accompanied with the license fee as provided for in the current fee resolution, together with a photocopy of a valid motor vehicle operator’s license for all operators, proof of automobile liability insurance coverage in an amount acceptable to the risk manager for the city, and evidence of a Washington State Department of Revenue business registration number.
E. In addition to the foregoing requirements, mobile food vendors shall:
    1. Provide documentation that the vending unit has been approved by the State of Washington Department of Labor and Industries.
    2. Provide evidence of current State of Washington vehicle registration.
    3. Provide documentation of approval by the Snohomish County Health District of the vending unit.
    4. Provide a written plan documenting appropriate disposal of wastewater generated by the vending unit.
    5. Identify available toilet and hand washing facilities.
    6. Provide written permission from the property owner(s) consenting to operation of the business on the owner’s property, if operated on private property.
    7. Provide a site plan depicting existing site improvements, ingress and egress location(s), the location of the vending unit, and, if on private property, the location of at least two spaces for customer parking. (Ord. 2341, 2017)

5.30.060 Conflicting provisions.
In the event any of the provisions of this ordinance conflict with any provision of any other ordinance, the provisions set forth in this ordinance shall supersede.

5.30.070 Severability.
Should any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance or its application to any person or situation be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance or its application to any other person or situation. The City Council of the City of Snohomish hereby declares that it would have adopted this ordinance and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional.

Chapter 5.36 SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS

Sections:
5.36.010     License and Permit Required
5.36.020     Definitions
5.36.030     Application for Permit and License
5.36.040     Investigation of Applicant – Denial or Issuance of License
5.36.050     License Fees
5.36.060     Display of License
5.36.070     Police Enforcement Duties
5.36.075     Denial of Permit – Appeal
5.36.080     Revocation of License – Hearing
5.36.090     Exemptions
5.36.100     Penalty for Violations
5.36.110     City Posting of Signage

5.36.010 License and Permit Required.
It shall be unlawful for any solicitor or canvasser as defined in Section 5.36.020 to engage in such business within the corporate limits of the City of Snohomish without obtaining a permit and/or license therefore in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 952, 1964)

5.36.020 Definitions.
A canvasser or solicitor is defined as any individual, whether or not a resident of the City of Snohomish, who travels in any manner from place to place or from house to house or street to street taking or soliciting orders for sales of goods, wares and merchandise, and personal property of any nature whatsoever for present or future delivery or for services to be performed presently or in the future, whether or not a sample of such goods, merchandise, or personal property is carried or exposed to prospective customers, and whether or not advance payments on such proposed sales are collected or not; said definition of a canvasser or solicitor shall include any person or party who for himself or for another person, firm, or corporation hires, leases, uses, or occupies any building, tent, or other structure or place within the City of Snohomish for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for present or future delivery of goods or services. (Ord. 952, 1964)

5.36.030 Application for Permit and License.
Applicants for permit and license shall submit a sworn application in duplicate on a form to be furnished by the City to the City Clerk, to include the following information pertaining to the applicant:
A. Name and description;
B. Permanent home address and local address;
C. Description of the nature of the business and goods and/or services to be sold;
D. Name and address of employer, if any;
E. Length of time the right to do business is desired;
F. The exact place where the goods or personal property proposed to be sold or for which orders are to be taken are manufactured or produced, and the exact location of such goods or personal property at the time said application is filed, and the proposed method of delivery thereof;
G. Fingerprints of applicant and names and addresses of at least two reliable property owners within the State of Washington who will certify as to applicant’s good character and business responsibility;
H. A statement as to whether or not applicant has been convicted of any crimes, misdemeanors, or violations of municipal ordinances, the location of the courts where so convicted, the nature of the offenses and punishment or penalty assessed for each;
I. At time of filing the application, pay the City Clerk a fee set by resolution of the City Council to cover cost of investigation of applicant;
J. Shall furnish the City Clerk with a photograph of applicant taken within sixty (60) days immediately prior thereto, to be not less than two inches by two inches (2”x2”) in size, showing the head and shoulders of applicant;
K. Post a bond in the penal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000) executed by a surety company or in lieu thereof a cash bond in said amount conditioned upon the making of final delivery of the goods and merchandise ordered or services to be performed in accordance with the terms of this chapter, or failing therein that any sums advanced as payment thereon be refunded; any person aggrieved by the action of any such solicitor or canvasser to have the right of action on said bond for recovery of money or damages or both, and such bond to remain in full force and effect, or in case of cash deposit, such deposit to be retained by the City of Snohomish, in either event, for a period of ninety days after the expiration of any such permit or license unless sooner released on order of the City Council. (Ord. 952, 1964; Ord. 2299, 2016)

5.36.040 Investigation of Applicant – Denial or Issuance of License.
On receipt of such application, the City Clerk shall refer the original thereof to the Chief of Police, who shall make investigation of applicant’s business responsibility, moral character, and reputation, and if he concludes same to be unsatisfactory shall endorse his findings thereon and return same to the City Clerk who shall notify applicant that no permit or license will be issued, and shall return any cash deposit made pursuant to the above section, except investigation fee. If the Chief of Police finds such business responsibility, moral character, and reputation of the applicant to be satisfactory, he shall endorse his approval thereon and return the application to the City Clerk who shall, upon payment of the prescribed license fee as herein provided, execute and deliver a license to the applicant accordingly, which license shall contain the signature of the City Clerk, shall show the name, address and attach the photograph of the licensee, and shall specify the class of license issued, the kind of goods or merchandise to be sold or services to be furnished, the amount of the license fee paid, the date of issuance of the license and the length of time same shall be in force, and shall contain a general description of the licensee, and the City Clerk shall keep a permanent record of all licenses so issued. (Ord. 952, 1964)

5.36.050 License Fees.
License fees to be charged such applicants shall be set by resolution of the City Council and no portion thereof shall be refunded in the event of cancellation thereof as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 952, 1964; Ord. 2299, 2016)

5.36.060 Display of License.
Licensee shall be required to exhibit such licenses upon request of any citizen. (Ord. 952, 1964)

5.36.070 Police Enforcement Duties.
It shall be the duty of the police officer of the City of Snohomish in charge at the time to require any person seen soliciting or canvassing who is not known to such officer to be duly licensed to produce his license, and the duty of such officer to enforce the provisions of this chapter against any person appearing to be operating in violation thereof. (Ord. 952, 1964)

5.36.075 Denial of Permit – Appeal.
Should any applicant for a permit pursuant to this chapter be denied a permit, the applicant shall have the right to appeal the denial to the City Council by giving the City Clerk written notice of appeal within ten days of the denial. The applicant shall be heard at the next regular meeting of the City Council which falls more than ten days from the date of notice of appeal, and shall be given not less than ten days’ notice of the date, time and place for the City Council hearing on the appeal. The City Council may affirm the denial if it finds that the applicant has not compiled with the intent of this chapter, but may order the permit issued if it finds that the applicant has complied with the intent of this chapter and that the public peace and welfare would not be endangered by the issuance of the permit. (Ord. 1392, 1978)

5.36.080 Revocation of License – Hearing.
Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked by action of the City Council following a notice and hearing thereon for fraud, misrepresentation, or false statements contained in application for such license or made in the course of conducting business as a solicitor or canvasser, or for violation of any provision of this chapter, or for conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or for conducting said business of solicitor or canvasser in an unlawful manner or in such manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the community.
Notice of hearing shall be given the licensee in writing, setting forth the nature of any complaints made or grounds upon which the hearing is to be had, and the time and place of such hearing, and shall be mailed with postage prepaid thereon by United States mail to the licensee at the address given in his application for license, at least five days prior to date of hearing. (Ord. 952, 1964)

5.36.090 Exemptions.
A. This chapter shall not apply to sales by farmers, gardeners, or other persons of fruits, vegetables, etc., produced, or manufactured by them within this state as exempted by RCW 36.71.090.
B. This chapter shall not apply to the dissemination of ideas and/or distribution of literature for religious purposes with or without charge.
C. This chapter shall not apply to the vendors of newspapers, the chief aim of which is the dissemination of current news, as distinguished from fictional writings.
D. Unpaid solicitors for religious, charitable, and local community service organizations operated not for profit engaged in the exchange of goods for money will be exempt from subsections (f), (g), (i) and (k) of Section 5.36.030; and licenses shall be granted to them without fee upon their compliance with subsections (a) through (e), (h) and (j) of Section 5.36.030. The licenses shall be valid for a period of six months from the date of issue. Tax exempt status approved by the Internal Revenue Service shall be prima facie proof of nonprofit status, and individuals or organizations claiming this exemption without such tax status shall have the burden of proving their nonprofit character to the City Clerk. (Ord. 1392, 1978)

5.36.100 Penalty for Violations.
Violation of this Chapter shall be considered a civil violation pursuant to SMC 1.01.080 and Chapter 1.14 SMC, except as otherwise provided therein. (Ord. 952, 1964; Ord. 1927, 1999; Ord. 2155, 2008)

5.36.110 City Posting of Signage.
The City is authorized to post within the City limits, signs depicting the rules and regulations of this chapter. Such signs may include but are not limited to such language as “No Commercial Solicitation without Permit & License – SMC 5.36/Ord. 952/Ord. 2033.” (Ord. 2033, 2003)

Chapter 5.44 TAXICABS

Sections:
5.44.010     Definitions
5.44.020     Taxicab Operator’s Permit
5.44.030     Taxicab Operator’s Permit Fee
5.44.040     Taxicab Operator’s Permit – Issuance and Display
5.44.050     Insurance
5.44.060     Taxicab Driver’s License
5.44.070     Taxicab Driver’s License Fee
5.44.080     Taxicab Driver’s License – Display
5.44.090     Posting Rates
5.44.100     Taxicab Inspection
5.44.110     Taxicab Stands
5.44.120     Duties of the Licensing Officer
5.44.130     Suspension or Revocation of Permits or Licenses
5.44.140     Appeal
5.44.150     Availability and Inspection of Records
5.44.160     Penalties

5.44.010 Definitions.
When used in this chapter:
A. “Taxicab” includes all vehicles used for the transportation of passengers for compensation, except ambulances, first aid vehicles, and other vehicles which are represented to provide medical services to their passengers, school buses operating exclusively under a contract to a school district, and auto stages which carry passengers on a regular schedule of time and rates;
B. “Taxicab operator” means and includes any person, concern, business, corporation, or other entity which owns one or more taxicabs and is engaged in the business of transporting passengers for compensation in such vehicles;
C. “Taxicab driver” means and includes any person who drives a taxicab on a full time or part time basis by arrangement with the owner thereof, and who uses said vehicle for the transportation of passengers for compensation;
D. “Licensing officer” means the manager of the City of Snohomish or his designee who shall administer and enforce the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1202, 1973)

5.44.020 Taxicab Operator’s Permit.
No person, business, or corporation shall operate a taxicab for calls originating within the corporate limits of the City without first obtaining a taxicab operator’s permit from the licensing officer. Such permit shall be valid until December 31st of the year of its issuance, and is not transferable. Such permit shall be issued upon submission of a completed permit application form, which form shall be provided by the licensing officer and shall include:
A. The name and address of the owner or owners, and if a corporation, the names and addresses of the principal officers thereof;
B. The address where the operator’s taxis will be based;
C. The name and motor number of any vehicle to be operated;
D. The permit number for the Washington State “for hire vehicle” permit issued to the operator;
E. Evidence that the insurance requirement of this chapter is complied with;
F. Evidence that the drivers of all taxicabs owned by the operator are qualified pursuant to this chapter;
G. Such other information as the licensing officer may require. (Ord. 1202, 1973)

5.44.030 Taxicab Operator’s Permit Fee.
Applications for taxicab operator’s permits shall be forwarded to the licensing officer with a fee in an amount which shall be set on a uniform basis by the licensing officer. All operator’s permits shall expire on the thirty first day of December of each year, and applications for renewal thereof shall be accompanied by an annual fee, the amount of which shall be set on a uniform basis by the licensing officer. (Ord. 1202, 1973)

5.44.040 Taxicab Operator’s Permit – Issuance and Display.
Upon receipt of an application for a taxicab operator’s permit and the requisite fee, the licensing officer shall, if such application is in proper form, issue a permit authorizing the applicant to operate taxicabs within the City until such operator ceases to do business as such, or until the permit expires, is suspended or revoked. Such permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the principal place of business of the operator. (Ord. 1202, 1973)

5.44.050 Insurance.
Prior to a taxicab operator’s permit being issued, the taxicab operator shall be required to deposit and keep on file and in force and effect with the licensing officer a public liability insurance policy covering each and every motor vehicle operated or intended to be so operated, executed by an insurance company licensed and authorized to write such insurance policies in the State of Washington, assuring the operator against property damage and personal liability to the public, with the premiums paid and the payment noted thereon. Said policy of insurance shall provide a minimum coverage as follows:
A. Bodily injury liability, one hundred thousand dollars for each person;
B. Bodily injury liability, three hundred thousand dollars for each accident;
C. Property damage liability, fifty thousand dollars for each accident.
The provisions of this section shall not be construed to limit the right of any injured person to any private right of action against a taxicab operator as herein defined. (Ord. 1202, 1973)

5.44.060 Taxicab Driver’s License.
No person shall drive a taxicab on a full time or part time basis for a taxicab operator who is regulated by this chapter unless such driver first obtains a taxicab driver’s license from the licensing officer. Such license shall be valid until December 31st of the year of its issuance, and is not transferable. The requirements for obtaining such a license are as follows:
A. The applicant must complete a license application form provided by the licensing officer;
B. The applicant must have a valid Washington State Driver’s License issued by the Department of Motor Vehicles;
C. The applicant must be at least eighteen years of age;
D. The applicant must submit to an investigation under the direction of the Chief of Police with regard to his driving record and his record of criminal arrests and convictions, and must receive a favorable recommendation from the Chief of Police as a person with experience, competence, and character consistent with the high standard expected of a taxicab driver. The Chief of Police shall not require photographs or fingerprints to be taken of any applicant, and shall make his recommendation within a reasonable time after receiving a driver’s application. (Ord. 1202, 1973)

5.44.070 Taxicab Driver’s License Fee.
Applications for taxicab driver’s licenses shall be forwarded to the licensing officer with a fee in an amount which shall be set on a uniform basis by the licensing officer. All driver’s licenses shall expire on the thirty first day of December of each year, and applications for renewal thereof shall be accompanied by an annual fee, the amount of which shall be set on a uniform basis by the licensing officer. (Ord. 1202, 1973)

5.44.080 Taxicab Driver’s License – Display.
Upon the issuance of a taxicab driver’s license, such license shall be valid until the driver ceases to do business as a taxicab driver, or until the license expires, is suspended or revoked. Such license shall be carried on the person of the taxicab driver at all times he is offering his vehicle for hire. (Ord. 1202, 1973)

5.44.090 Posting Rates.
The rate schedule charged passengers by any taxicab operator shall be filed and kept current with the licensing officer and a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place within each taxicab owned by said operator. The licensing officer may regulate taxicab rate schedules on a uniform basis by duly promulgated rules and regulations. No rates shall be charged passengers which are inconsistent with said schedule or said rules and regulations. (Ord. 1202, 1973)

5.44.100 Taxicab Inspection.
All taxicabs owned and operated by a taxicab operator shall be kept in good mechanical and sanitary condition and shall be subject to inspection at all times under the direction of the licensing officer. (Ord. 1202, 1973)

5.44.110 Taxicab Stands.
The matter of granting stands for licensed taxicabs shall be left to the discretion of the licensing officer, except that no such stand shall exceed one regular parking space, nor shall it be granted unless a fee is paid in accordance with a schedule to be promulgated by the licensing officer. No right to stands granted pursuant to this section shall be assignable or transferable, and all such rights shall be subject to cancellation by action of the licensing officer, with or without cause, if such cancellation is found by the licensing officer to be for the best interests of the City. Unless sooner cancelled, the rights incident to all stands so granted by the licensing officer shall expire on the thirty first day of December of the year in which granted, and if granted for a period of less than one year, the costs thereof shall be pro rated accordingly. (Ord. 1202, 1973)

5.44.120 Duties of the Licensing Officer.
The licensing officer shall promulgate, revise, or rescind such reasonable rules and regulations as may be necessary or appropriate to administer the provisions of this chapter and to perform the duties assigned to the licensing officer in conformity with the intent and purpose of this chapter. The licensing officer or his designee shall take such action as is necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter, including a program to inspect all licensed taxicabs at regular intervals. (Ord. 1202, 1973)

5.44.130 Suspension or Revocation of Permits or Licenses.
The licensing officer shall have authority to revoke, suspend, or deny any taxicab operator’s permit or taxicab driver’s license on any of the following grounds:
A. Failure to comply and to maintain compliance with, or for violation of, any applicable provisions, standards, or requirements of this chapter or regulations promulgated hereunder, or of any other applicable laws or ordinances or regulations promulgated thereunder, but only after being given a written warning and such reasonable time for compliance as may be set by the licensing officer;
B. If the holder of a taxicab driver’s license is convicted of, or forfeits bail for, any of the following driving violations, whether or not in connection with driving a taxicab:
    1. Reckless driving,
    2. Driving while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs;
C. If the license or permit holder is convicted of any felony or any criminal offense involving moral turpitude, intemperance, or drugs or narcotics;
D. If the license or permit was obtained by fraud or if the application therefor contains any false statements, or if a fact concerning the applicant was not disclosed at the time of his making the application, when such fact would have constituted just cause for refusing to issue such license or permit. (Ord. 1202, 1973)

5.44.140 Appeal.
The decision of the licensing officer with regard to suspension, revocation, or refusal to grant or renew a taxicab operator’s permit or a taxicab driver’s license is subject to review by the City Council upon ten days’ written notice. The suspension or revocation shall be effective pending the City Council’s review, unless a special waiver is obtained from the City Council. The City Council shall afford the permittee or licensee a public hearing, and within ten days after the conclusion of such hearing shall issue a written decision as to the suspension or retention of the permit or license in question. Such decision shall be final, subject to review by the Superior Court. (Ord. 1202, 1973)

5.44.150 Availability and Inspection of Records.
Each taxicab operator shall maintain accurate records upon such forms as may be prescribed by and containing such information as may be required by the licensing officer concerning the services performed within or about the City of Snohomish and the rates charged. Such records shall be available to inspection by the licensing officer at any reasonable time. A condition of any taxicab operator’s permit granted under this chapter shall be the implied consent of the permittee to all reasonable inspections required by the licensing officer. (Ord. 1202, 1973)

5.44.160 Penalties.
Violation of this Chapter shall be considered a civil violation pursuant to SMC 1.01.080 and Chapter 1.14 SMC, except as otherwise provided therein. (Ord. 1202, 1973; Ord. 1927, 1999; Ord. 2155, 2008)

Chapter 5.52 GAMBLING, BINGO, RAFFLES AND GAMES OF AMUSEMENT

Sections:
5.52.010     Misdemeanor – Exception
5.52.020     Definitions
5.52.030     Bingo – Restrictions
5.52.040     Bingo – Tax
5.52.050     Tax on Punchboards and Pull-Tabs
5.52.060     Tax Payments
5.52.070     Taxpayer to Keep Records
5.52.080     City Finance Officer to Investigate Returns
5.52.090     Extension of Time Penalties
5.52.100     Over or Under Payment of Tax
5.52.110     Failure to Make Return
5.52.120     Appeal to City Council
5.52.130     Mayor to Make Rules
5.52.140     False Returns – Unlawful
5.52.150     License Fee – Additional to Others
5.52.160     Tax Constitutes Debt
5.52.170     Violations – Penalty
5.52.180     Severability

5.52.010 Misdemeanor – Exception.
Whoever engages in gambling, or knowingly causes, aids, abets, or conspires with another to engage in gambling, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars or imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety days, or both such fine and imprisonment; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to those persons or organizations engaged in the gambling activities of bingo, raffles, amusement games, fishing derbies, punch boards, pull-tabs, or social card games as specifically authorized herein. (Ord. 1179, 1973; Ord. 1236, 1974; Ord. 1389, 1978)

5.52.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:
A. “Contest of chance” means any contest, game, gaming scheme, or gaming device in which the outcome depends in a material degree upon an element of chance, notwithstanding that skill of the contestants may also be a factor therein;
B. “Gambling” A person engages in gambling if he stakes or risks something of value upon the outcome of a contest of chance or a future contingent event not under his control or influence, upon an agreement or understanding that he or someone else will receive something of value in the event of a certain outcome. Gambling does not include pari-mutuel betting as authorized by RCW 67.16, bona fide business transactions valid under the law of contracts, including, but not limited to, contracts for the purchase or sale at a future date of securities or commodities, and agreements to compensate for loss caused by the happening of chance, including, but not limited to, contracts of indemnity or guarantee and life, health, or accident insurance;
C. “Thing of value” means any money or property, any token, object, or article exchangeable for money or property, or any form of credit or promise, directly or indirectly, contemplating transfer of money or property or of any interest therein, or involving extension of a service, entertainment or a privilege of playing at a game or scheme without charge;
D. “Bingo” means a game in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card conforming to numbers or symbols selected at random and in which no cards are sold except at the time and place of said game, when said game is conducted by a bona fide charitable or nonprofit organization which does not conduct or allow its premises to be used for conducting bingo on more than three occasions per week and which does not conduct bingo in any location which is used for conducting bingo on more than three occasions per week or if an agricultural fair authorized under RCW 15.76 and 36.37, which does not conduct bingo on more than twelve consecutive days in any calendar year, and except in the case of any agricultural fair as authorized under RCW 15.76 and 36.37, no person other than a bona fide member of said organization takes any part in the management or operation of said game, and no person who takes any part in the management or operation of any game conducted by any other organization or any other branch of the same organization and no part of the proceeds thereof inure to the benefit of any person other than the organization conducting the said game;
E. “Raffle” means a game in which tickets bearing an individual number are sold for not more than one dollar each and in which a prize or prizes are awarded on the basis of a drawing from said tickets by the person or persons conducting the game, when said game is conducted by a bonafide charitable or nonprofit organization, no person other than a bona fide member of said organization takes any part in the management or operation of said game, and no part of the proceeds thereof inure to the benefit of any person other than the organization conducting said game;
F. “Amusement game” means a game played for entertainment in which:
    1. The contestant actively participates;
    2. The outcome depends in a material degree upon the skill of the contestant;
    3. Only merchandise prizes are awarded;
    4. The outcome is not in the control of the operator;
    5. The wagers are placed, the winners are determined, and a distribution of prizes or property is made in the presence of all persons placing wagers at such game; and
    6. Said game is conducted by, sponsored by, or on behalf of a bona fide charitable or nonprofit organization, said game is part of a community-wide civic festival held not more than once annually and sponsored or approved by the City, and said game is conducted with the written approval of the Mayor or his/her designee.
G. “Bona fide charitable or nonprofit organization” means any organization duly existing under the provisions of RCW 24.12, 24.20, or 24.28, any agricultural fair authorized under the provisions of RCW 15.76 or 36.37, or any nonprofit corporation duly existing under the provisions of RCW 24.03 for charitable, benevolent, eleemosynary, educational, civic, patriotic, political, social, fraternal, athletic or agricultural purposes only, which has been organized and is operated primarily for purposes other than the operation of bingo games, raffles, amusement games, and which received not more than twenty thousand dollars or twenty-five percent of its gross receipts, whichever is the greater, in any calendar year from the operation of bingo, raffles, amusement games; but these limitations on receipts shall not apply to any organization which conducts only one raffle per calendar year, the total gross income from which does not exceed twenty thousand dollars, and which does not conduct bingo games and/or amusement games; provided, that the money or gross receipt limitations hereinabove set forth in this subsection shall not include the amount of cash prizes actually paid out in the operation of bingo games or the actual costs to an organization of any prizes given in the conduct of a raffle. The fact that contribution to an organization do not qualify for charitable contribution deduction purposes or that the organization is not otherwise exempt from payment of federal income taxes pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended, shall constitute prima facie evidence that the organization is not a bona fide charitable or nonprofit organization for the purposes of this section;
H. “Whoever” and “person” include natural persons, corporations and partnerships, and associations of persons; and when any corporate officer, director, or stockholder or any partner authorizes, participates in, or knowingly accepts benefits from any violation of this chapter committed by his corporation or partnership, he shall be punishable for such violation as if it had been directly committed by him;
I. “Punch boards” and “pull-tabs” shall be given their usual and ordinary meaning as of August 20, 1974, except that such definition may be revised by the Washington State Gambling Commission pursuant to rules and regulations promulgated by said commission;
J. “Gross revenue or income” is defined as the total sum of money or value received from the particular activity before any deductions on account of operational and maintenance expenses or any expense whatsoever, and without any deduction on account of losses;
K. “Fishing derby” means a fishing contest, with the payment or giving of an entry fee or other consideration by some or all of the contestants; wherein the contestants compete with each other for a prize or prizes, whether money, merchandise or other thing of value; the prize or prizes is or are awarded based upon the lawful catching of fish by any one or more of the contestants; and when such contest is conducted by a bona fide charitable or nonprofit organization;
L. “Social card game” means a card game, including but not limited to the game commonly known as “Mah Jongg,” which constitutes gambling and contains each of the following characteristics:
    1. There are two or more participants and each of them is a player, and
    2. A player’s success at winning money or other thing of value by overcoming chance is in the long run largely determined by the skill of the player, and
    3. No organization, corporation, or person collects or obtains or charges any percentage of or collects or obtains any portion of the money or thing of value wagered or won by any of the players; provided, that this item shall not preclude a player from collecting or obtaining his winnings, and
    4. No organization, corporation, or person collects or obtains any money or thing of value from, or charges or imposes any fee upon, any person which either enables him to play or results in or from his playing; provided, that this item shall not apply to the membership fee in any bona fide charitable or nonprofit organization or to an admission fee allowed by the state gambling commission, and
    5. The type of card game is one specifically approved by the state gambling commission, and
    6. The extent of wagers, money, or other thing of value which may be wagered or contributed by any player does not exceed the amount or value specified by the state gambling commission. (Ord. 1179, 1973; Ord. 1236, 1974; Ord. 1389, 1978; Ord. 2254, 2013; Ord. 2340, 2018)

5.52.030 Bingo – Restrictions.
The conduct of bingo games shall be subject to the following restrictions:
A. No person, firm, association, corporation, or organization other than as specified in this chapter shall conduct such game, or shall obtain a lease for or otherwise make available for conducting bingo therein, a hall or other premises, for any consideration whatsoever, direct or indirect.
B. No bingo games shall be held, operated, or conducted on or within any leased premises if rental under such lease is to be paid, wholly or partly, on the basis of a percentage of the receipts or net profits derived from the operation of such game, nor shall the rental under such lease exceed the usual rental for such premises in the same locality.
C. No bingo game shall be held, operated, or conducted if the compensation to any person taking part in the management or operation of such game is based upon a percentage of the receipts or net profits derived from the operation of such game.
D. The entire net proceeds of any game of bingo and of any rental therefor shall be exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct the same. Net proceeds for the purposes of this subsection shall mean that amount remaining after expenses for supplies, rental, and prizes awarded to participants are deducted from the gross proceeds of such game.
The willful violation of subsections (A), (B), (C) or (D) above shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars, or imprisonment for a term of not exceeding ninety days, or both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 1179, 1973; Ord. 1389, 1978)

5.52.040 Bingo – Tax.
There is levied upon and shall be collected from and paid as hereinafter provided by every organization conducting bingo, as authorized pursuant to RCW Chapter 9.46 and this chapter, a tax in the amount of five percent of the gross revenue received from such bingo activity, less the amount paid for or as prizes; provided that the first five hundred dollars of gross revenue received per month shall be exempt from such taxation.
Provided further, that no tax shall be imposed under the authority of this chapter on bingo games when such activities are conducted by any bona fide charitable or nonprofit organization as defined in RCW 9.46.020(3), which organization has not paid operating or management personnel and has a gross income from bingo not exceeding five thousand dollars per year, less the amount paid for as prizes. (Ord. 1179, 1973; Ord. 1236, 1974; Ord. 1389, 1978)

5.52.050 Tax on Punchboards and Pull-Tabs.
There is hereby levied upon and shall be collected from and paid as hereinafter provided by every person, organization, or association utilizing punchboards or pull-tabs as authorized pursuant to Chapter 9.46 RCW and this chapter, a tax in the amount of ten percent of the gross receipts-less-prizes from such punchboards and pull-tabs. (Ord. 1179, 1973; Ord. 1236, 1974; Ord. 1339, 1976; Ord. 1834, 1997)

5.52.060 Tax Payments.
A. Monthly Return and Payment. At the option of the taxpayer, any tax payable under Chapter 5.52 may be reported and paid in monthly installments. In addition, monthly reporting and payments shall be required of taxpayers who fail to timely report and file returns when due for two reporting periods, and taxpayers who have not timely paid any tax due imposed by this Chapter to the City within thirty (30) days of the date said tax is due. Monthly reports and payment shall be due on the 15th day of the month next succeeding the month for which the report and payment is due.
B. Annual Return and Payment. Whenever the total tax for which any person is liable under this chapter does not exceed the sum of $2.00 for any quarterly period, an annual return may be made upon written request and subject to the approval of the City Treasurer.
C. Semi-Annually. In all other instances, semi-annual reports and payments of tax imposed by this chapter shall be due and payable in semi-annual installments. The semi-annual terms shall be January 1 through June 30 and July 1 through December 31 of each year. Tax remittances therefore shall be made on or before the last day of the month next succeeding the end of the semi-annual period in which the tax accrued.
D. Supporting Documentation. All gambling tax reports shall include a copy of the taxpayer’s Organizational Activity Report as outlined and required under WAC 230-08-130, 230-08-165, and/or 230-08-160.
Regardless of the reporting period, all remittances shall be by bond, draft, certified check, and cashier’s check, money order, or in cash, and shall be accompanied by a return on a form to be provided and prescribed by the City Treasurer. The taxpayer shall be required to swear or affirm that the information given on the tax return is full and true and that the taxpayer knows the same to be so.
For purposes of required monthly reporting, the City may not count any return prior to a return for the second quarter of 1996 or any nonpayment of taxes for any quarter prior to the second quarter of 1996. (Ord. 1807, 1996; Ord. 1834, 1997; Ord. 2114, 2006)

5.52.070 Taxpayer to Keep Records.
It shall be the duty of each taxpayer taxed pursuant to this chapter to keep and enter in a proper book or set of books or records an account which shall accurately reflect the amount of the gross revenue received from the taxable gambling activity which he is conducting. (Ord. 1179, 1973; Ord. 1236, 1974; Ord. 1389, 1978)

5.52.080 City Finance Officer to Investigate Returns.
If any taxpayer fails to make his return, or if the City Finance Officer is dissatisfied as to the correctness of the statements made in the return of any taxpayer, said officer or his authorized agent may enter the premises of such taxpayer at any reasonable time for the purpose of inspecting his books or records of account to ascertain the amount of the tax or to determine the correctness of such statements, as the case may be, and may examine any person under oath administered by said officer or his agent, touching the matters inquired into, or said officer or his
authorized agent may fix a time and place for an investigation of the correctness of the return and may issue a subpoena to the taxpayer, or any other person, to attend upon such investigation and there testify, under oath administered by said officer or his agent, in regard to the matters inquired into and may, by subpoena, require him, or any person, to bring with him such books, records and papers as may be necessary. (Ord. 1179, 1973; Ord. 1236, 1974; Ord. 1389, 1978)

5.52.090 Extension of Time Penalties.
The City Finance Officer for good cause shown may extend the time for making and filing any return as required under this chapter, and may grant such reasonable additional time within which to file such return as he may deem proper. Provided, that any extension in excess of thirty days shall be conditioned upon payment of interest of one-half of one percent for each thirty days or portion thereof on the amount of the tax from the date upon which tax becomes due. If tax return and/or payment are not received within fifteen days of due date, a penalty must be included as follows: If sixteen to forty-five days delinquent, ten percent of the tax with a minimum penalty of one dollar; if forty-six to seventy-five days delinquent, fifteen percent of the tax with a minimum penalty of two dollars; if seventy-six or more days delinquent, twenty percent of the tax with a minimum penalty of three dollars. (Ord. 1179, 1973; Ord. 1236, 1974; Ord. 1389, 1978)

5.52.100 Over or Under Payment of Tax.
If the City Finance officer upon investigation or upon checking returns finds that the tax paid on any of them is more than the amount required of the taxpayer, he shall refund the amount overpaid by a warrant upon the general fund. If the City Finance Officer finds that the tax paid is less than required, he shall mail a statement to the taxpayer showing the balance due, who shall within ten days pay the amount shown thereon. (Ord. 1179, 1973; Ord. 1236, 1974; Ord. 1389, 1978)

5.52.110 Failure to Make Return.
If any taxpayer fails, neglects, or refuses to make his return as and when required herein, the City Finance Officer is authorized to determine the amount of the tax payable, and by mail to notify such taxpayer of the amount so determined. The amount so fixed shall thereupon become the tax and be immediately due and payable. (Ord. 1179, 1973; Ord. 1236, 1974; Ord. 1389, 1978)

5.52.120 Appeal to City Council.
Any taxpayer aggrieved by the amount of the tax found by the City Finance Officer to be required under the provisions of this chapter may appeal to the City Council from such finding by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Finance Officer within five (5) days from the time such taxpayer was given notice of such amount. The City Finance Officer shall, as soon as practicable, fix a time and place for the hearing of such appeal, which time shall be not more than ten (10) days after the filing of the notice of appeal, and he/she shall cause a notice of hearing, and a notice of the time and place thereof to be mailed to the applicant. At such hearing, the taxpayer shall be entitled to be heard and to introduce evidence in his/her own behalf. The City Council shall thereupon ascertain the correct amount of the tax by resolution and the City Finance Officer shall immediately notify the appellant thereof by mail, which amount, together with costs of the appeal, if appellant is unsuccessful therein, must be paid within ten (10) days after such notice is given.
The Mayor may, by subpoena, require the attendance thereat of any person, and may also require him/her to produce any pertinent books and records. Any person with such subpoena shall appear at the time and place therein stated and produce the books and records required, if any, and shall testify truthfully under oath administered by the Mayor as to any matter required of him/her pertinent to the appeal and it shall be unlawful for him/her to fail or refuse so to do. (Ord. 1179, 1973; Ord. 1236, 1974; Ord. 1389, 1978; Ord. 2340, 2018)

5.52.130 Mayor to Make Rules.
The Mayor shall have the power, and it shall be his/her duty, from time to time, to adopt, publish, and enforce rules and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter or with law for the purpose of carrying out the provisions hereof, and it shall be unlawful to violate or fail to comply with any such rule. (Ord. 1179, 1973; Ord. 1236, 1974; Ord. 1389, 1978; Ord. 2340, 2018)

5.52.140 False Returns – Unlawful.
It is unlawful for any person liable to tax hereunder to fail or refuse to make the returns as and when required or to pay the tax when due, or for any person to make any false or fraudulent return or any false statement or representation in, or in connection with, any such return, or to aid or abet another in any attempt to evade payment of the tax, or any part thereof, or for any person to fail to appear and/or testify in response to subpoena issued pursuant hereto, or to testify falsely upon any investigation of the correctness of a return or upon the hearing of any appeal, or in any manner to hinder or delay the City or any of its officers in carrying out the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1179, 1973; Ord. 1236, 1974; Ord. 1389, 1978)

5.52.150 License Fee – Additional to Others.
The tax herein levied shall be additional to any license fee or tax imposed or levied under any law or any other ordinance of Snohomish, a municipal corporation, except as herein otherwise expressly provided. (Ord. 1179, 1973; Ord. 1236, 1974; Ord. 1389, 1978)

5.52.160 Tax Constitutes Debt.
Any tax due and unpaid under this chapter and all penalties thereon, shall constitute a debt to Snohomish, a municipal corporation, and may be collected by court proceedings in the same manner as any other debt in like amount, which remedy shall be in addition to all other existing remedies. The right of recovery by the City of Snohomish from the taxpayer for any tax provided hereunder shall be outlawed after the expiration of three years and the right of recovery against the City of Snohomish because of overpayment of tax by any taxpayer shall be outlawed after the expiration of three years after which time the taxpayer shall have no right of recovery against the City of Snohomish. (Ord. 1179, 1973; Ord. 1236, 1974; Ord. 1389, 1978)

5.52.170 Violations – Penalty.
Violation of this Chapter shall be considered a civil violation pursuant to SMC 1.01.080 and Chapter 1.14 SMC, except as otherwise provided therein. (Ord. 1179, 1973; Ord. 1236, 1974; Ord. 1389, 1978; Ord. 1927, 1999; Ord. 2155, 2008)

5.52.180 Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this ordinance or its application to any person or circumstance be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid for any reason, or should any portion of this ordinance be preempted by state or federal law or regulation, such a decision or preemption shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of the remaining portions of this ordinance or its application to any other persons or circumstances. (Ord. 1179, 1973; Ord. 1236, 1974; Ord. 1389, 1978; Ord. 2176, 2009)

Chapter 5.53 SOCIAL CARD GAMES

Sections:
5.53.010     Applicable State Law
5.53.020     Non-house-banked Card Games and Social Card Games by Nonprofit and Charitable Organizations Specifically Permitted
5.53.030     Tax Rate Imposed on Social Card Games
5.53.040     Tax Payments
5.53.050     Taxpayer to Keep Records
5.53.060     City Finance Officer to Investigate Returns
5.53.070     Extension of Time Penalties
5.53.080     Over or Under Payment of Tax
5.53.090     Failure to Make Return
5.53.100     Appeal to City Council
5.53.110     Mayor to Make Rules
5.53.120     False Returns – Unlawful
5.53.130     License Fee – Additional to Others
5.53.140     Violation

5.53.010 Applicable State Law.
Any license issued under the authority of state law to engage in any legal activity shall be legal authority to engage in the gambling activities for which the license was issued throughout the City, except that the City, in accordance with RCW 9.46.295, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended, prohibits house-banked card games:
It is unlawful within City limits for any person to allow any premises or any facilities to be used for the purpose of conducting house-banked card games as described in WAC 230-05-025(2) as now in effect or hereinafter amended. “House-banking” is hereby defined to mean any procedure employed by the card room where the operator collects money from the losers and pays it to the winners.

5.53.020 Non-house-banked Card Games and Social Card Games by Nonprofit and Charitable Organizations Specifically Permitted.
The prohibition of house-banked card games described in 5.53.010 shall not apply to all other card games authorized by RCW 9.46.0311 and 9.46.0351 and WAC 230-05-020(3), 230-05-025(1) and (3) as now in effect or hereinafter amended.

5.53.030 Tax Rate Imposed on Social Card Games.
A. Pursuant to RCW 9.46.110 that allows a city to impose a tax on any gambling activity which is not prohibited by state law or city ordinance, social card games shall be taxed at ten (10) percent of gross revenue.
B. Lien. Taxes imposed under this chapter become a lien upon personal and real property used in the gambling activity in the same manner as provided for under RCW 84.60.010. The lien shall attach on the date the tax becomes due and shall relate back and have priority against real and personal property to the same extent as ad valorem taxes.

5.53.040 Tax Payments.
A. Monthly Return and Payment. At the option of the taxpayer, any tax payable under this Chapter may be reported and paid in monthly installments. In addition, monthly reporting and payments shall be required of taxpayers who fail to timely report and file returns when due for two reporting periods, and taxpayers who have not timely paid any tax due imposed by this Chapter to the City within thirty (30) days of the date said tax is due. Monthly reports and payment shall be due on the 15th day of the month next succeeding the month for which the report and payment is due.
B. Annual Return and Payment.Whenever the total tax for which any person is liable under this Chapter does not exceed the sum of $2.00 for any quarterly period, an annual return may be made upon written request and subject to the approval of the City Treasurer.
C. Semi-Annually. In all other instances, semi-annual reports and payments of tax imposed by this chapter shall be due and payable in semi-annual installments. The semi-annual terms shall be January 1 through June 30 and July 1 through December 31 of each year. Tax remittances therefore shall be made on or before the last day of the month next succeeding the end of the semi-annual period in which the tax accrued.
D. Supporting Documentation. All gambling tax reports shall include a copy of the taxpayer’s Organizational Activity Report as outlined and required under this Chapter and WAC 230-08-130, 230-08-165, and/or 230-08-160. Regardless of the reporting period, all remittances shall be by bond, draft, certified check, and cashier’s check, money order, or in cash, and shall be accompanied by a return on a form to be provided and prescribed by the City Treasurer. The taxpayer shall be required to swear or affirm that the information given on the tax return is full and true and that the taxpayer knows the same to be so.

5.53.050 Taxpayer to Keep Records.
It shall be the duty of each taxpayer taxed pursuant to this chapter to keep and enter in a proper book or set of books or records an account which shall accurately reflect the amount of the gross revenue received from social card games.

5.53.060 City Finance Officer to Investigate Returns.
If any taxpayer fails to make his return, or if the City Finance Officer is dissatisfied as to the correctness of the statements made in the return of any taxpayer, said officer or his authorized agent may enter the premises of such taxpayer at any reasonable time for the purpose of inspecting his books or records of account to ascertain the amount of the tax or to determine the correctness of such statements, as the case may be, and may examine any person under oath administered by said officer or his agent, touching the matters inquired into, or said officer or his authorized agent may fix a time and place for an investigation of the correctness of the return and may issue a subpoena to the taxpayer, or any other person, to attend upon such investigation and there testify, under oath administered by said officer or his agent, in regard to the matters inquired into and may, by subpoena, require him, or any person, to bring with him such books, records and papers as may be necessary.

5.53.070 Extension of Time Penalties.
The City Finance Officer for good cause shown may extend the time for making and filing any return as required under this chapter, and may grant such reasonable additional time within which to file such return as he may deem proper. Provided, that any extension in excess of thirty days shall be conditioned upon payment of interest of one-half of one percent for each thirty days or portion thereof on the amount of the tax from the date upon which tax becomes due. If tax return and/or payment are not received within fifteen days of due date, a penalty must be included as follows: If sixteen to forty-five days delinquent, ten percent of the tax with a minimum penalty of one dollar; if forty-six to seventy-five days delinquent, fifteen percent of the tax with a minimum penalty of two dollars; if seventy-six or more days delinquent, twenty percent of the tax with a minimum penalty of three dollars.

5.53.080 Over or Under Payment of Tax.
If the City Finance Officer upon investigation or upon checking returns finds that the tax paid on any of them is more than the amount required of the taxpayer, he shall refund the amount overpaid by a warrant upon the general fund. If the City Finance Officer finds that the tax paid is less than Section 5.53.030 required, he shall mail a statement to the taxpayer showing the balance due, who shall within ten days pay the amount shown thereon.

5.53.090 Failure to Make Return.
If any taxpayer fails, neglects, or refuses to make his return as and when required herein, the City Finance Officer is authorized to determine the amount of the tax payable, and by mail to notify such taxpayer of the amount so determined. The amount so fixed shall thereupon become the tax and be immediately due and payable.

5.53.100 Appeal to City Council.
Any taxpayer aggrieved by the amount of the tax found by the City Finance Officer to be required under the provisions of this chapter may appeal to the City Council from such finding by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Finance Officer within five (5) days from the time such taxpayer was given notice of such amount. The City Finance Officer shall, as soon as practicable, fix a time and place for the hearing of such appeal, which time shall be not more than ten (10) days after the filing of the notice of appeal, and he/she shall cause a notice of hearing, and a notice of the time and place thereof to be mailed to the applicant. At such hearing, the taxpayer shall be entitled to be heard and to introduce evidence in his/her own behalf. The City Council shall thereupon ascertain the correct amount of the tax by resolution and the City Finance Officer shall immediately notify the appellant thereof by mail, which amount, together with costs of the appeal, if appellant is unsuccessful therein, must be paid within ten (10) days after such notice is given.
The Mayor may, by subpoena, require the attendance thereat of any person, and may also require him/her to produce any pertinent books and records. Any person with such subpoena shall appear at the time and place therein stated and produce the books and records required, if any, and shall testify truthfully under oath administered by the Mayor as to any matter required of him/her pertinent to the appeal and it shall be unlawful for him/her to fail or refuse so to do. (Ord. 2340, 2018)

5.53.110 Mayor to Make Rules.
The Mayor shall have the power, and it shall be his/her duty, from time to time, to adopt, publish, and enforce rules and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter or with law for the purpose of carrying out the provisions hereof, and it shall be unlawful to violate or fail to comply with any such rule. (Ord. 2340, 2018)

5.53.120 False Returns – Unlawful.
It is unlawful for any person liable to tax hereunder to fail or refuse to make the returns as and when required or to pay the tax when due, or for any person to make any false or fraudulent return or any false statement or representation in, or in connection with, any such return, or to aid or abet another in any attempt to evade payment of the tax, or any part thereof, or for any person to fail to appear and/or testify in response to subpoena issued pursuant hereto, or to testify falsely upon any investigation of the correctness of a return or upon the hearing of any appeal, or in any manner to hinder or delay the City or any of its officers in carrying out the provisions of this chapter.

5.53.130 License Fee – Additional to Others.
The tax herein levied shall be additional to any license fee or tax imposed under the Snohomish Municipal Code or levied under any law or any other ordinance of Snohomish, a municipal corporation, except as herein otherwise expressly provided.

5.53.140 Violation.
Violation of this Chapter shall be considered a civil violation pursuant to SMC 1.01.080 and Chapter 1.14 SMC, except as otherwise provided therein.

Chapter 5.54 FIREWORKS

Sections:
5.54.010     Definitions Incorporated by Reference
5.54.020     Permit Required
5.54.030     Permit Procedure
5.54.040     Action by City Council or Designee
5.54.050     Issuance of Permit--Non-transferable
5.54.060     Dates for Sale and Use of Consumer Fireworks
5.54.070     Storage of Unsold Stocks of Fireworks
5.54.080     Discharge of Display Fireworks
5.54.090     Restriction on Sale of Common Fireworks
5.54.100     Specifications for Fireworks Stands
5.54.110     Operation of Fireworks Stands
5.54.120     Fees
5.54.130     Enforcement Revocation of Permit
5.54.140     Seizure of Fireworks
5.54.150     Seizure Proceedings
5.54.160     Penalty for Violation
5.54.170     Purpose and Intent Liability
5.54.180     Severability

5.54.010 Definitions Incorporated by Reference.
As used in this chapter, the term “fireworks”, “display fireworks”, and “consumer fireworks” shall have the same meaning and be defined in Chapter 70.77 RCW, as amended by Chapter 370, Laws of 2002. (Ord. 1622, 1987; Ord. 2007, 2002)

5.54.020 Permit Required.
No person, firm, partnership or corporation shall establish or maintain a place where fireworks are sold without first having obtained a City fireworks permit. Such permit shall be issued if the application meets the requirements of RCW Chapter 70.77 and all ordinances of the City of Snohomish. (Ord. 1781, 1995)

5.54.030 Permit Procedure.
Any adult person, firm, partnership, corporation, association or other group may apply for a fireworks permit. The application shall be in writing and shall be filed with the local fire official after April 10th and before May 10th. The application shall include the following:
A. Proof that the applicant has been issued a fireworks license by the state fire marshal;
B. Certification of insurance in a minimum amount of one million dollars Combined single limit covering bodily injury liability and premises liability with the applicant names as insured, and also naming the City of Snohomish, its officers and employees in their capacities acting as agents for the City of Snohomish;
C. Site map showing location of the proposed stand, including street names, sidewalks, distances from structures and driveways;
D. Sketch of proposed stand showing approximate dimensions and materials;
E. Signed statement of property owner’s permission to place a fireworks stand at the proposed location;
F. Cashier’s receipt showing payment of permit fee and/or clean up fee as established by Council resolution. (Ord. 2091, 2005)

5.54.040 Action by City Council or Designee.
After a completed permit application is received, the City Council or its designee shall grant the permit, if the application meets the standards under Chapter 70.77 RCW and this chapter. The permit shall be granted by June 10th, or no less than thirty (30) days after receipt of a complete application, whichever occurs first. The City Council may designate the Mayor as the approval authority for fireworks permits under this chapter. The decision of the City with respect to an application shall be final. (Ord. 2091, 2005; Ord. 2340, 2018)

5.54.050 Issuance of Permit--Non-transferable.
Upon approval by the City Council or its designee of the fireworks permit, the City Clerk shall issue the same to the applicant. The permit shall be for a term of one year. No permit shall be transferable without express approval by the City Council or its designee. (Ord. 2091, 2005)

5.54.060 Dates for Sale and Use of Consumer Fireworks.
No consumer fireworks shall be sold within the City except from nine a.m. to ten p.m. on July 1st, 2nd, 3rd, and 4th of each year. Hours of discharge or use shall be limited to nine a.m. to ten p.m. July 4th. The sale, use and discharge of consumer fireworks from December 27, 2002, to December 31, 2002, and from December 27th to December 31st of each year thereafter, and at all other times except as provided above, shall be and hereby is specifically prohibited. (Ord. 1736, 1993; Ord. 1781, 1995; Ord. 2007, 2002; Ord. 2304, 2016)

5.54.070 Storage of Unsold Stocks of Fireworks.
Unsold stocks of fireworks remaining after the authorized sales period provided above shall be returned on or before July 31st of the same year to an approved storage facility of a licensed fireworks wholesaler, or to some other magazine or storage place approved by the local fire official. (Ord. 1622, 1987)

5.54.080 Discharge of Display Fireworks.
No person shall discharge display fireworks as defined at any place in the City except as authorized by state license and local permit for a public display of fireworks as defined by Chapter 70.77 RCW as amended by Chapter 370, Laws of 2002. (Ord. 1622, 1987; Ord. 2007, 2002)

5.54.090 Restriction on Sale of Common Fireworks.
No person shall sell or transfer any consumer fireworks to a consumer or user thereof other than at a fixed place of business or a retailer for which a fireworks permit has been issued. No sale of fireworks shall be to a person under the age of 16. (Ord. 1622, 1987; Ord. 2007, 2002)

5.54.100 Specifications for Fireworks Stands.
Consumer fireworks shall not be sold from any permanent buildings or structures. Temporary fireworks stands shall be constructed in accordance with the following specifications, subject to approval by the local fire official and building inspector:
A. Fireworks stands shall be located more than one hundred feet from any place of assembly, gasoline station, storage tank, or premises where flammable liquids are stored, and shall be located more than fifty feet from all other structures;
B. Fireworks stands shall be erected to the satisfaction of the fire department and shall be structurally sound and will have the following:
    1. No less than two exits located at opposite ends of the stand. It shall remain unobstructed at all times,
    2. No less than two fire extinguisher (water) of not less than a 2A rating,
    3. “No Smoking” signs installed so that they are visible on all four sides of the stand,
    4. A no parking area of twenty-five feet in front of the stand and within fifteen feet of the three other sides of the stand shall be roped or barricaded off,
    5. Fireworks stored and displayed so that the general public cannot physically handle the fireworks,
    6. No matches, lighters, open fires, or other sources of ignition shall be sold or stored in the stand,
    7. No discharge of fireworks within one hundred feet of the stand,
    8. All weeds and combustible materials shall be cleared from within at least twenty-five feet of a fireworks stand.
C. All permits, including these standards, shall be posted and maintained in the stand at all times;
D. Stands shall be removed and area cleaned up by ten p.m. July 9 (five days after sales cease). (Ord. 1622, 1987; Ord. 2007, 2002; Ord. 2304, 2016)

5.54.110 Operation of Fireworks Stands.
The party holding the fireworks permit shall operate the fireworks stand exclusively by and through its employees, members or designees. No person under the age of eighteen years shall staff a fireworks stand.
A. One operator shall remain at the counter where fireworks are sold at all times that the stand is open.
B. Operators shall enforce the no smoking rule.
C. Operators shall enforce no parking within the barricaded area described in Section 5.54.100(B)(4) of this chapter.
D. When stands are closed, the fireworks area shall be closed and locked. Sleeping therein is prohibited.
E. No fireworks shall be sold to persons under 16 years of age. All fireworks stands shall post, in at least two conspicuous places, a sign, acceptable in size, form and content to the local fire official, concerning the prohibition of sales of fireworks to persons under the age of 16 years.
F. Only such fireworks as authorized by the state of Washington, pursuant to RCW 70.77, will be sold.
G. A list of all fireworks which may be sold to the public shall be posted prominently and maintained at each retail outlet. The posted list shall be in a form approved by the state fire marshal. (Ord. 1622, 1987; Ord. 1672, 1989; Ord. 1736, 1993)

5.54.120 Fees.
The City Council shall establish the fees for permits and/or clean up fees issued pursuant to this ordinance by council resolution. (Ord. 1622, 1987)

5.54.130 Enforcement Revocation of Permit.
The local fire official shall be authorized to enter and inspect all fireworks stands to assure compliance with the provisions of this chapter and to protect the public health, safety and welfare. The fire official is authorized to temporarily revoke any permit, for cause. Any party aggrieved by such revocation shall have the right to appeal the same to the City Council within ten days thereafter. The decision of the City Council shall be final. (Ord. 1622, 1987)

5.54.140 Seizure of Fireworks.
Any fireworks which are illegally sold, offered for sale, used, discharged, possessed or transported in violation of this chapter shall be subject to seizure by the local fire official or his designee or the Chief of Police or his designee or the state fire marshal. Any fireworks seized may be disposed of by the local fire official or designee by distribution at any time subsequent to thirty days from such seizure or ten days from the termination of proceedings under Section 5.54.150. (Ord. 1622, 1987)

5.54.150 Seizure Proceedings.
Seized fireworks may be returned after a petition is filed and, if requested, a hearing held proves the fireworks were illegally or erroneously seized.
A. Any person whose fireworks are seized under Section 5.54.140 may within ten days after such seizure petition the local fire official or state fire marshal to return the fireworks seized upon the ground that such fireworks were illegally or erroneously seized. Any petition filed hereunder shall be considered by the local fire official or state fire marshal within fifteen days after filing and an oral hearing granted the petitioner, if requested. Notice of the decision of the local fire official or state fire marshal shall be served upon the petitioner. The local fire official or state fire marshal may order the fireworks seized to be disposed of or returned to the petitioner if illegally or erroneously seized. The determination of the local fire official or state fire marshal is final unless within sixty days an action is commenced in a court of competent jurisdiction for the recovery of the fireworks seized by the local fire official or state fire marshal.
B. If the fireworks are not returned to the petitioner or destroyed, the local fire official or state fire marshal may sell confiscated common fireworks to wholesalers licensed by the state fire marshal. Sale shall be by public auction after publishing a notice of the date, place and time of the auction in a newspaper of general circulation in Snohomish County at least three days before the date of the auction. Proceeds of the sale of seized fireworks shall be deposited in a general fund. Fireworks that are not legal for use and possession shall be destroyed by the local fire official or state fire marshal. (Ord. 1622, 1987)

5.54.160 Penalty for Violation.
Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association or other group violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding three hundred dollars, or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding ninety days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, The fireworks permit of any violator shall be revoked. (Ord. 1622, 1987)

5.54.170 Purpose and Intent Liability.
A. It is expressly the purpose of this chapter to provide for and promote the health, safety and welfare of the general public, and not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited by the terms of this chapter.
B. It is the specific intent of this chapter that no provision nor any term used in this chapter is intended to impose any duty whatsoever upon the City or any of its officers or employees, for whom the implementation or enforcement of this chapter shall be discretionary and not mandatory.
C. Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to be nor shall be construed to create or form the basis for any liability on the part of the City, or its officers, employees or agents, for any injury or damage resulting from the failure of a permittee to comply with the provisions of this chapter, or by reason or in consequence of any inspection, notice, order, certificate, permission or approval authorized or issued or done in connection with the implementation or enforcement pursuant to this chapter, or by reason of any action or inaction on the part of the City related in any manner to the enforcement of this chapter by its officers, employees or agents. (Ord. 1622, 1987)

5.54.180 Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are declared to be separate and severable. The invalidity of any clause, sentence, paragraph, subdivision, section or portion of this chapter or the invalidity of the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this chapter, or the validity of its application to other persons or circumstances. (Ord. 1622, 1987)

Chapter 5.60 ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATERS, ADULT DRIVE-IN THEATERS AND ADULT CABARETS

Sections:
5.60.010     Definitions
5.60.020     License Required
5.60.030     Adult Cabaret, Adult Drive-In Theater, Adult Motion Picture Theater Licenses
5.60.040     Adult Motion Picture Theater or Adult Drive-In Theater Manager, Projectionist, Usher and Security Personnel Licenses
5.60.050     Adult Cabaret Manager, Assistant Manager, Security Personnel and Entertainer Licenses
5.60.060     Denials of License
5.60.070     Suspension or Revocation of Licenses--Notice Summary Suspension or Revocation
5.60.080     Standards of Conduct and Operation--Adult Cabarets
5.60.090     Standards of Conduct and Operation--Adult Motion Picture Theaters and Adult Drive-In Theaters
5.60.100     Record Keeping
5.60.110     Inspections
5.60.120     Misdemeanor
5.60.130     Severability

5.60.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter and unless the context plainly requires otherwise, the following definitions are adopted:
A. “Adult cabaret” is a commercial establishment which presents go-go dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators, or other similar entertainers and in which patrons are exposed to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
B. “Adult drive-in theater” is a drive-in theater used for presenting motion picture films, videocassettes, television, or any other such visual media, distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or related to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
C. “Adult entertainer” means any person who provides live adult entertainment at an adult cabaret, whether or not a fee is charged or accepted for such entertainment. References to “entertainer(s)” shall be references to “adult entertainer(s).”
D. “Adult motion picture theater” is an enclosed building used for presenting for commercial purposes motion picture films, videocassettes, cable television or any other such visual media, distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or related to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” for observation by patrons therein.
E. “Applicant” means the individual or entity seeking a license to operate either an adult motion picture theater, adult drive-in theater or adult cabaret in the City of Snohomish. Upon issuance of a license, the applicant may be referred to as the “licensee.”
F. “Applicant control person” means: all partners, corporate officers and directors and any other individuals in the applicant’s business organization who hold a significant interest in the business, based on responsibility for the management of the business.
G. “Beginning work” shall mean engaged in activities for a business required to be licensed by this chapter, whether the relationship is deemed between employer and employee or owner and independent contractor.
H. “Clerk” shall mean the City Clerk or Deputy City Clerk as appointed pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 2.28 Snohomish Municipal Code.
I. “Employee or independent contractor” means any and all persons, including managers, and entertainers who work in or at or render any services directly related to the operation of an adult motion picture theater, adult drive-in theater or adult cabaret.
J. “Hearing Examiner” shall mean the Hearing Examiner as appointed pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 2.33 of the Snohomish Municipal Code.
K. “Live adult entertainment” means entertainment presented by go-go dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators, or other similar entertainers and in which patrons are exposed to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
L. “Manager” means any person who manages, directs, administers or is in charge of the affairs and/or conduct of any portion of any activity at an adult motion picture theater, adult drive-in theater or adult cabaret. An “assistant manager” shall be that person who, in the absence of the manager or jointly with the manager, shall undertake the duties of the manager as defined by this section.
M. “Person” means any individual, partnership, corporation, trust, incorporated or unincorporated association, marital community, joint venture or other entity or group of persons, however organized.
N. “Projectionist” means that person operating any projector, videocassette recorder, television or video display terminal for commercial purposes, but not in an adult panoram establishment as covered by Chapter 5.62 Snohomish Municipal Code where the visual media is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
O. “Security personnel” means those persons at an adult motion picture theater, adult drive-in theater or adult cabaret and who are either responsible for admissions to the adult motion picture theater, adult drive-in theater or adult cabaret or who act to preserve the peace in the facility through control of the patrons or employees or independent contractors in the facility.
P. “Specified anatomical areas” means:
    1. Less than completely and/or opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola;
    2. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely or opaquely covered.
Q. “Specified sexual activities” means:
    1. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy;
    2. Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock, or female breast;
    3. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
R. “Usher” means those persons in an adult motion picture theater or adult drive-in theater who direct or assist patrons in finding their seating or locations from which the visual media may be observed.

5.60.020 License Required.
A. It is unlawful for any person to conduct, manage or operate any of the following businesses unless such person is the holder of a valid and subsisting license from the City to do so, obtained in the manner provided in this chapter: adult motion picture theater, adult drive-in theater, or adult cabaret.
B. It is unlawful for any adult entertainer or manager to knowingly work in or about, or to knowingly perform any service or entertainment directly related to the operation of an unlicensed adult cabaret.
C. It is unlawful for any adult entertainer to perform in an adult cabaret unless such person is the holder of a valid and subsisting license from the City to do so.
D. It is unlawful for any manager or assistant manager to work in an adult cabaret, adult motion picture theater, or adult drive-in theater unless such person is the holder of a valid and subsisting license from the City to do so.
E. It is unlawful for any projectionist or usher to work in an adult drive-in theater or an adult motion picture theater unless such person is the holder of a valid and subsisting license from the City to do so.
F. It is unlawful for any security personnel to work in an adult cabaret, adult drive-in theater or an adult motion picture theater unless such person is the holder of a valid and subsisting license from the City to do so.

5.60.030 Adult Cabaret, Adult Drive-In Theater, Adult Motion Picture Theater Licenses.
A. All applications for either an adult cabaret, adult drive-in theater, or an adult motion picture theater license shall be submitted to the Clerk in the name of the person or entity proposing to conduct said business and shall be signed by such person and certified as true under penalty of perjury. All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the City, which shall require the following information:
    1. For the applicant and for each applicant control person, provide: names, any aliases or previous names, driver’s license number, if any, Social Security number, if any, and business, mailing and residential address, and business telephone number.
    2. If a partnership, whether general or limited, the names and addresses of all partners; and if a corporation, date and place of incorporation, names and addresses of all shareholders, evidence that it is in good standing under the laws of Washington, and name and address of any registered agent for service of process.
    3. Whether the applicant or any partner, corporate officer, or director of the applicant holds any other licenses under this chapter or any license for adult entertainment, including panorams, from the City or another city, county or state, and if so, the names and addresses of each other licensed business.
    4. A summary of the business history of the applicant and applicant control persons in owning or operating an adult cabaret, adult motion picture theater, adult drive-in or an adult panoram, providing names, addresses and dates of operation for such businesses, and whether any business license has been revoked or suspended, and the reason therefor.
    5. For the applicant and all applicant control persons, any and all criminal convictions or forfeitures within five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the application, other than parking offenses or minor traffic infractions including the dates of conviction, nature of the crime, name and location of court and disposition.
    6. For the applicant and all applicant control persons, a description of business, occupation or employment history for the three (3) years immediately preceding the date of the application.
    7. Authorization for the City, its agents and employees to seek information to confirm any statements set forth in the application.
    8. The location and doing-business-as name of the proposed adult cabaret, adult drive-in theater, or adult motion picture theater, including a legal description of the property, street address, and telephone number, together with the name and address of each owner and lessee of the property.
    9. Two (2) two-inch by two-inch color photographs of the applicant and applicant control persons, taken within six (6) months of the date of application showing only the full face.
    10. A complete set of fingerprints for the applicant or each applicant control person taken by Snohomish Police Department employees.
    11. A scale drawing or diagram showing the configuration of the premises for the proposed adult cabaret, adult drive-in theater or adult motion picture theater, including a statement of the total floor space occupied by the business, and marked dimensions of the interior of the premises. Performance areas, seating areas, manager’s office and stations, restrooms and service areas shall be clearly marked on the drawing. When required, an exterior lighting plan shall be submitted also.
B. An application shall be deemed complete upon the applicant’s provision of all information requested above, including identification of “none” where that is the correct response, and the applicant’s verification that the application is complete. The Clerk may request other information or clarification in addition to that provided in a complete application where necessary to determine compliance with this chapter.
C. A nonrefundable application fee set by resolution of the City Council must be paid at the time of filing an application in order to defray the costs of processing the application. The annual renewal fee shall be set by resolution of the City Council.
D. Each applicant shall verify, under penalty of perjury, that the information contained in the application is true.
E. If any person or entity acquires, subsequent to the issuance of a license under this chapter, a significant interest based on responsibility for management or operation of the licensed premises or the licensed business, notice of such acquisition shall be provided in writing to the City Clerk, no later than twenty-one (21) days following such acquisition. The notice required shall include the information required for the original license application.
F. The adult cabaret, adult drive-in theater or adult motion picture theater license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is issued, the expiration date, the doing-business-as name and the address of the licensed adult cabaret, adult drive-in theater or adult motion picture theater. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the adult cabaret, adult drive-in theater or adult motion picture theater, so that it can be easily read at anytime the business is open.
G. No person granted a license pursuant to this chapter shall operate the business under a name not specified on the license, nor shall any person operate a business licensed under this chapter under any designation or at any location not specified on the license. A separate license shall be required for each type of business covered by this chapter, and a separate license shall be required for each location at which a business covered by this chapter is operated. A license shall be valid for one year, and must be annually renewed.
H. Upon receipt of the complete application and fee, the Clerk shall provide copies to the police, fire and community development departments for their investigation and review to determine compliance of the proposed business with the laws and regulations which each department administers. Each department shall, within thirty (30) days of the date of such application, inspect the application and premises and shall make a written report to the Clerk whether such application and premises complies with the laws administered by each department. No license may be issued unless each department reports that the application and premises comply with the relevant laws. In the event the premises is not yet constructed, the departments shall base their recommendation as to premises compliance on their review of the drawings submitted in the application. Any license approved prior to premises construction shall contain a condition that the premises may not open for business until the premises have been inspected and determined to be in substantial conformance with the drawings submitted with the application and submitted with any application for a building permit. A department shall recommend denial of a license under this subsection if it finds that the proposed business is not in conformance with the requirements of this chapter or other law in effect in the city. A recommendation for denial shall cite the specific reason therefor, including applicable laws.
I. A license shall be issued by the Clerk within thirty (30) days of the date of filing a complete license application and fee, unless the Clerk determines that the applicant has failed to meet any of the requirements of this chapter or provide any information required under this subsection or that the applicant has made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact on the application for a license. The Clerk shall grant an extension of time in which to provide all information required for a complete license application upon the request of the applicant. If the Clerk finds that the applicant has failed to meet any of the requirements for issuance of a license, the Clerk shall deny the application in writing and shall cite the specific reasons therefor, including applicable law. If the Clerk fails to issue or deny the license within thirty (30) days of the date of filing of a complete application and fee, the applicant shall be permitted, subject to all other applicable law, to operate the business for which the license was sought until notification by the Clerk that the license has been denied, but in no event may the Clerk extend the application review time for more than an additional twenty (20) days. (Ord. 2299, 2016)

5.60.040 Adult Motion Picture Theater or Adult Drive-In Theater Manager, Projectionist, Usher and Security Personnel Licenses.
A. No person shall work as a manager, assistant manager, projectionist, usher or security personnel at an adult drive-in theater or adult motion picture theater without a manager, assistant manager, projectionist, usher or security personnel license from the City. Each applicant for a license shall complete an application on forms provided by the City containing the information identified below. A nonrefundable application fee set by resolution of the City Council, shall accompany the application for a manager or assistant manager. A nonrefundable fee set by resolution of the City Council shall accompany the application for a projectionist, usher or security personnel. A copy of the application shall be provided to the Police Department for its review, investigation and recommendation. All applications shall be signed by the applicant and certified to be true under penalty of perjury. Each license application shall require the following information:
    1. The applicant’s name, home address, home telephone number, date and place of birth, fingerprints taken by Snohomish Police Department employees, and Social Security number.
    2. The name and address of each business at which the applicant intends to work.
    3. Documentation that the applicant has attained the age of eighteen (18) years. Any two of the following shall be accepted as documentation of age:
        a. a motor vehicle operator’s license issued by any state bearing the applicant’s photograph and date of birth;
        b. a state-issued identification card bearing the applicant’s photograph and date of birth;
        c. an official passport issued by the United States of America;
        d. an immigration card issued by the United States of America; or
        e. any other identification that the City determines to be acceptable.
    4. A complete statement of all convictions of the applicant for any misdemeanor or felony violations in this or any other city, county, or state within five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the application, except parking violations or minor traffic infractions.
    5. A description of the applicant’s principal activities or services to be rendered.
    6. Two (2) two-inch by two-inch color photographs of applicant, taken within six (6) months of the date of application showing only the full face.
    7. Authorization for the City, its agents and employees to investigate and confirm any statements set forth in the application.
    8. Each person licensed by this section shall provide a copy of his or her license to the manager on duty on the premises where said person works. The manager shall retain the copy of the licenses readily available for inspection by the City at any time during business hours of the adult motion picture theater or adult drive-in theater.
B. The Clerk may request additional information or clarification when necessary to determine compliance with this chapter.
C. A license shall be issued by the Clerk within fourteen (14) days from the date the complete application and fee are received unless the Clerk determines that the applicant has failed to provide any information required to be supplied according to this chapter, has made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application, or has failed to meet any of the requirements for issuance of a license under this chapter. If the Clerk determines that the applicant has failed to qualify for the license applied for, the Clerk shall deny the application in writing and shall cite the specific reasons therefor, including applicable laws. If the Clerk has failed to approve or deny an application for license within fourteen (14) days of filing of a complete application, the applicant may, subject to all other applicable laws, commence work until notified by the Clerk that the license has been denied, but in no event may the Clerk extend the application review time for more than an additional twenty (20) days.
D. A license issued under this section shall be valid for one year and must be annually renewed. The annual renewal fee for a manager or assistant manager shall be set by resolution of the City Council. The annual renewal fee for a projectionist, usher or security personnel shall be set by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 2299, 2016)

5.60.050 Adult Cabaret Manager, Assistant Manager, Security Personnel and Entertainer Licenses.
A. No person shall work as a manager, assistant manager, security personnel or adult entertainer at an adult cabaret without an entertainer’s, managers, or security personnel’s license from the City. Each applicant for a manager’s, security personnel’s or entertainer’s license shall complete an application on forms provided by the City containing the information identified below. A nonrefundable application fee as set by resolution of the City Council shall accompany the application. A copy of the application shall be provided to the Police Department for its review, investigation and recommendation. All applications shall be signed by the applicant and certified to be true under penalty of perjury. The license application shall require the following information:
    1. The applicant’s name, home address, home telephone number, date and place of birth, fingerprints taken by Snohomish Police Department employees, Social Security number, and in the entertainer’s application any stage names or nicknames used in entertaining.
    2. The name and address of each business at which the applicant intends to work.
    3. Documentation that the applicant has attained the age of eighteen (18) years. Any two of the following shall be accepted as documentation of age:
        a. a motor vehicle operator’s license issued by any state bearing the applicant’s photograph and date of birth;
        b. a state-issued identification card bearing the applicant’s photograph and date of birth;
        c. an official passport issued by the United States of America;
        d. an immigration card issued by the United States of America; or
        e. any other identification that the City determines to be acceptable.
    4. A complete statement of all convictions of the applicant for any misdemeanor or felony violations in this or any other city, county, or state within five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the application, except parking violations or minor traffic infractions.
    5. A description of the applicant’s principal activities or services to be rendered.
    6. Two (2) two-inch by two-inch color photographs of applicant, taken within six (6) months of the date of application showing only the full face.
    7. Authorization for the City, its agents and employees to investigate and confirm any statements set forth in the application.
    8. Every adult entertainer and each and all security personnel shall provide his or her license to the adult cabaret manager on duty on the premises prior to beginning work. The manager shall retain the licenses of the adult entertainers and security personnel readily available for inspection by the City at any time during business hours of the adult cabaret.
B. The Clerk may request additional information or clarification when necessary to determine compliance with this chapter.
C. An adult cabaret manager’s or security personnel’s or adult entertainer’s license shall be issued by the Clerk within fourteen (14) days from the date the complete application and fee are received unless the Clerk determines that the applicant has failed to provide any information required to be supplied according to this chapter, has made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application, or has failed to meet any of the requirements for issuance of a license under this chapter. If the Clerk determines that the applicant has failed to qualify for the license applied for, the Clerk shall deny the application in writing and shall cite the specific reasons therefor, including applicable laws. If the Clerk has failed to approve or deny an application for an adult cabaret manager’s or security personnel’s license within fourteen (14) days of filing of a complete application, the applicant may, subject to all other applicable laws, commence work as an adult cabaret manager or as security personnel in a duly licensed adult cabaret until notified by the Clerk that the license has been denied, but in no event may the Clerk extend the application review time for more than an additional twenty (20) days.
D. An applicant for an adult entertainer’s license shall be issued a temporary license upon receipt of a complete license application and fee. Said temporary license will automatically expire on the fourteenth day following the filing of the complete application and fee, unless the Clerk has failed to approve or deny the license application, in which case the temporary license shall be valid until the Clerk approves or denies the application, or until the final determination of any appeal from a denial of the application. In no event may the Clerk extend the application review time for more than an additional twenty (20) days. If the Clerk determines that the adult entertainer has failed to quality for the license applied for, the Clerk shall deny the application in writing and shall cite the specific reasons therefor, including applicable laws.
E. A license issued under this section shall be valid for one year and must be annually renewed. The annual renewal fee for a manager, assistant manager, adult entertainer or for security personnel shall be set by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 2299, 2016)

5.60.060 Denials of License.
Should the person seeking a license under this chapter disagree with the Clerk’s determination, the applicant must file a notice of non-acceptance with the City Attorney’s office within ten (10) working days of receipt of the notification of denial.
A. The City shall, within five (5) working days following receipt of the notice of non-acceptance, apply to the Superior Court for a judicial determination as to whether the applicant’s license was properly denied. The burden of showing that the applicant’s license was properly denied shall rest on the City.
B. If a preliminary judicial determination sustaining the City’s denial of the subject license is not obtained within five (5) working days from the date the complaint is served, an interim license shall be issued under this chapter by operation of the law. The interim license shall issue in any event if a final judicial determination on the merits is not obtained within twenty (20) days from the date the complaint is filed. In such case, the interim license will remain in effect until a final judicial determination on the merits is reached; provided, however, that any delays caused or requested by the applicant shall be excluded from the above-mentioned twenty-day period.

5.60.070 Suspension or Revocation of Licenses--Notice Summary Suspension or Revocation.
A. The City Clerk may suspend or revoke any license issued pursuant to this chapter for a period of time not to exceed one year where one or more of the following conditions exist:
    1. The license was procured by fraud or false representation of fact in the application or in any report or record required to be filed with the Clerk;
    2. The building, structure, equipment, operation or location of the business for which the license was issued does not comply with the requirements or fails to meet the standards of this chapter;
    3. The applicant, applicant control person, manager, assistant manager, projectionist, usher, adult entertainer, or security personnel has violated or permitted violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
B. The procedure for revoking or suspending a license under this chapter shall be the following: Upon determining that grounds for revocation or suspension exist, the City Clerk shall send the licensee a notice of intent to revoke or suspend the license. Such notice shall set forth the grounds for suspension or revocation and schedule a hearing before the Hearing Examiner. The Hearing Examiner is hereby specifically authorized to conduct said hearing in accordance with the following procedures (and not the procedures of Chapter 2.33 of the Snohomish Municipal Code):
    1. The hearing shall be held no earlier than three (3) and no later than ten (10) working days from the date of notice of intent to revoke.
    2. The licensee shall be permitted to present evidence in support of his position at the hearing.
    3. Within two working days after the hearing, the Hearing Examiner shall notify the licensee in writing of his/her determination and reasons therefor.
    4. Should the licensee disagree with the determination, he/she must file a notice of non-acceptance with the City Attorney’s office within ten (10) working days of receipt of the Hearing Examiner’s determination.
    5. In the event that a notice of non-acceptance is not filed, the Hearing Examiner’s determination shall become final and the suspension/revocation shall be given immediate effect.
C. The City shall, within five (5) working days following receipt of a notice of non-acceptance, file a complaint with the Superior Court enjoining the licensee from operating his/her business or acting pursuant to his/her license. The burden of proof shall be on the City. The status quo shall be maintained and the Clerk’s determination of revocation or suspension shall not be effective until a final judicial determination on the merits affirming the suspension/revocation is rendered.

5.60.080 Standards of Conduct and Operation--Adult Cabarets.
The following standards of conduct and operation must be adhered to by an adult cabaret and its employees and independent contractors:
A. Required on Premises. While open to the public, a licensed manager and/or assistant manager shall be on premises at all times. While open to the public, licensed, uniform-wearing security personnel in the following numbers shall be on premises at all times:
+---------------------+----------------------------------------+
|   PATRON SEATING    | Number of Uniformed Security Personnel |
+---------------------+----------------------------------------+
| Less than 50 seats  | 1                                      |
+---------------------+----------------------------------------+
| 50 to 100 seats     | 2                                      |
+---------------------+----------------------------------------+
| 100 to 150 seats    | 3                                      |
+---------------------+----------------------------------------+
| More than 150 seats | 4                                      |
+---------------------+----------------------------------------+
B. Nudity. No employee, independent contractor or entertainer shall be unclothed or in such less than opaque and complete attire, costume or clothing so as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or any portion of the pubic region, anus, buttocks, vulva or genitals, except upon a stage at least eighteen (18) inches above the immediate floor level and removed at least eight (8) feet from the nearest member of the public (the “performance area”).
C. Mingling. No employee, independent contractor or entertainer mingling with members of the public shall be unclothed or in less than opaque and complete attire, costume or clothing as described in subdivision B of this section, nor shall any male employee or entertainer at any time appear with his genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered, or wear or use any device or covering which simulates the same.
D. Simulated Anatomy. No employee, independent contractor or entertainer mingling with members of the public shall wear or use any device or covering exposed to view which simulates the breast below the top of the areola, vulva, genitals, anus, any portion of the pubic region, or buttocks.
E. Sexual Touching--Patrons. No employee, independent contractor or entertainer shall caress, fondle, or erotically touch any member of the public. No employee, independent contractor or entertainer shall encourage or permit any member of the public to caress, fondle or erotically touch any employee, independent contractor or entertainer.
F. Sexual Acts--Employees. No employee, independent contractor or entertainer shall perform actual or simulated acts of sexual conduct, or any act which constitutes a violation of RCW 7.48A, the Washington Moral Nuisances Statute.
G. Four Feet. No employee, independent contractor or entertainer mingling with members of the public shall conduct any dance, performance or exhibition in or about the non-stage area of the adult cabaret unless that dance, performance or exhibition is performed at a distance of no less than four (4) feet from any member of the public.
H. Gratuities. No payment, tip or gratuity offered to or accepted by an adult entertainer may be offered or accepted prior to any performance, dance or exhibition provided by the entertainer. No adult entertainer performing upon any stage area shall be permitted to accept any form of payment or gratuity offered directly to the entertainer by any member of the public. Any payment or gratuity offered to any adult entertainer performing upon any stage area must be provided through a manager on duty on the premises. Any payment, gratuity or tip offered to any adult entertainer conducting any performance, dance or exhibition in or about the non-stage area of the adult cabaret shall be placed into the hand of the adult entertainer or into a receptacle provided by the adult entertainer, and not upon the person or into the clothing of the adult entertainer.
I. Admission. Admission must be restricted to persons of the age of eighteen (18) years or more. It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, manager, or other person in charge of an adult cabaret to knowingly permit or allow any person under the minimum age specified to be in or upon such premises.
J. Employees; Independent Contractors. All managers, adult entertainers, security personnel, employees, independent contractors or entertainers shall be over the age of eighteen (18) years.
K. Signage. Neither the performance nor any photograph, drawing, sketch, or other pictorial or graphic representation thereof displaying any portion of the breasts below the top of the areola or any portion of the pubic hair, buttocks, genitals and/or anus may be visible outside of the adult cabaret.
L. Access to Nonpublic Areas. No member of the public shall be permitted at any time to enter into any of the nonpublic portions of the adult cabaret, which shall include but are not limited to: the dressing rooms of the entertainers or other rooms provided for the benefit of employees or independent contractors, and the kitchen and storage areas; EXCEPT that authorized vendors or service personnel delivering goods and materials, food and beverages, or performing maintenance or repairs to the premises or equipment on the premises may be permitted into nonpublic areas to the extent required to perform their job duties.
M. Performance Area. The performance area of the adult cabaret shall be a stage or platform at least eighteen (18) inches in elevation above the level of the patron seating areas, and shall be separated by a distance of at least eight (8) feet from all areas of the premises to which members of the public have access. A continuous railing at least three (3) feet in height and located at least eight (8) feet from all points of the performance area shall separate the performance area and the public seating areas. The stage and the entire interior portion of cubicles, rooms or stalls wherein entertainment is provided must be visible from the common areas of the premises and at least one manager’s station. Visibility shall not be blocked or obstructed by doors, curtains, drapes or any other obstruction whatsoever.
N. Interior Lighting. Sufficient interior lighting shall be provided and equally distributed throughout the public areas of the premises so that all objects are plainly visible at all times and all parts of the public areas shall be illuminated so that patrons with normal vision in any part of the public areas of the premises shall be able to read written textual material printed in 8 point type. A sample of 8 point type follows:This is a sample of 8 point type.
O. Exterior Lighting. All on-site parking areas and premise entries shall be illuminated from dusk until one hour past closing hours of operation with a lighting system that provides an average maintained horizontal illumination of one (1) foot candle of light on the parking surface and/or walkways. An on-premise exterior lighting plan shall be included in the application for license submitted to the Clerk.
P. Signs. Two signs at least two feet by two feet, and one in the immediate area of the entrance, with letters at least one inch high shall be conspicuously displayed in the public area(s) of the premises stating the following:
+------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| THIS ADULT CABARET IS REGULATED BY THE CITY OF SNOHOMISH. ENTERTAINERS ARE:  |
+------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1. NOT PERMITTED TO ENGAGE IN ANY TYPE OF SEXUAL CONDUCT.                    |
| 2. NOT PERMITTED TO APPEAR SEMI-NUDE OR NUDE EXCEPT ON STAGE.                |
| 3. NOT PERMITTED TO ACCEPT PAYMENT, TIPS OR GRATUITIES IN ADVANCE OF THEIR   |
| PERFORMANCE.                                                                 |
| 4. NOT PERMITTED TO ACCEPT PAYMENT, TIPS OR GRATUITIES DIRECTLY FROM PATRONS |
| WHILE PERFORMING UPON ANY STAGE AREA.                                        |
| 5. WHILE PERFORMING IN NONSTAGE AREAS, NOT PERMITTED TO ACCEPT PAYMENT, TIPS |
| OR GRATUITIES EXCEPT THOSE PLACED IN THE ENTERTAINER’S HAND OR A RECEPTACLE. |
+------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

5.60.090 Standards of Conduct and Operation--Adult Motion Picture Theaters and Adult Drive-In Theaters.
The following standards of conduct and operation must be adhered to by adult motion picture theaters and adult drive-in theaters:
A. Required on Premises. While open to the public, a licensed manager or assistant manager shall be on premises at all times. While open to the public, a licensed, uniform-wearing security person shall be on premises at all times as well.
B. Nudity. No employee or independent contractor shall be unclothed or in such less than opaque or complete attire, costume or clothing so as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or any portion of the pubic region, anus, buttocks, vulva or genitals.
C. Simulated Anatomy. No employee or independent contractor shall wear or use any device or covering exposed to view which simulates the breast below the top of the areola, vulva, genitals, anus, any portion of the pubic region or buttocks.
D. Sexual Acts--Employees. No employee or independent contractor shall perform actual or simulated acts of sexual conduct or any act which constitutes a violation of RCW 7.48(a), the Washington Moral Nuisances statute.
E. Sexual Touching--Patrons. No employee or independent contractor shall caress, fondle or erotically touch any member of the public. No employee shall encourage or permit any member of the public to caress, fondle or erotically touch any employee.
F. Admission. Admission must be restricted to persons of the age of eighteen (18) years or more. It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, manager or other person in charge of an adult motion picture theater or adult drive-in to knowingly permit or allow any person under the minimum age specified to be in or upon such premises.
G. Employees; Independent Contractors. All managers, ushers, projectionists, employees and independent contractors shall be over the age of eighteen (18) years.
H. Signage. No photograph, drawing, sketch or other pictorial or graphic representation thereof displaying any portion of the breast below the top of the areola or any portion of the pubic area, buttocks, genitals, buttocks and/or anus may be visible outside the premises, or in the case of a drive-in theater, outside the property of the adult drive-in.
I. Access to Nonpublic Areas. No member of the public shall be permitted at any time to enter into any of the nonpublic portions of the adult motion picture theater or adult drive-in theater; except that authorized vendors or service personnel delivering goods and materials, food and beverages or performing maintenance or repairs to the premises or equipment on the premises may be permitted into nonpublic areas to the extent required to perform their job duties.
J. Exterior Lighting. All on-site parking areas and premise entries for an adult motion picture theater shall be illuminated from dusk until one hour past closing hours of operation with a lighting system that provides an average maintained horizontal illumination of one (1) foot candle of light on the parking surface and/or walkways. An on-premise exterior lighting plan shall be included in the application for license submitted to the Clerk.

5.60.100 Record Keeping.
A. All papers, records and things required to be kept pursuant to this chapter shall be open to inspection by the Clerk during the hours when the licensed premises are open for business, upon two days’ written notice. The purpose of such inspections shall be to determine whether the papers, records and things meet the requirements of this ordinance.
B. Each adult cabaret shall maintain and retain for a period of two (2) years the name, address and age of each person employed or otherwise retained or allowed to perform on the premises as an adult entertainer or to act as a manager or security personnel, including independent contractors and their employees. Each adult motion picture theater or adult drive-in theater shall maintain and retain for a period of two (2) years the name, address and age of each person employed or otherwise retained to act as manager, projectionist or usher, including independent contractors and their employees. This information shall be open to inspection by the Clerk during hours of operation of the business upon twenty-four (24) hours’ notice to the licensee.

5.60.110 Inspections.
In order to insure compliance with this chapter, all areas of licensed adult cabarets, adult motion picture theaters and adult drive-in theaters which are open to members of the public shall be open to inspection by City agents and employees during the hours when the premises are open for business. The purpose of such inspections shall be to determine if the licensed premises are operated in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. It is hereby expressly declared that unannounced inspections are necessary to insure compliance with this chapter.

5.60.120 Misdemeanor.
Any person knowingly violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in Section 9.04.050 Snohomish Municipal Code.

5.60.130 Severability.
Each provision of this chapter is separate and severable from all other provisions of this chapter. The invalidity of any clause, sentence, paragraph, subdivision, section or portion of this chapter, or the invalidity of the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall not affect the enforcement of the remainder of this chapter to any person or circumstances. (Ord. 1880, 1999)

Chapter 5.62 ADULT PANORAMS

Sections:
5.62.010     Definitions
5.62.020     License Required
5.62.030     Adult Panoram License
5.62.040     Adult Panoram Manager and Assistant Manager Licenses
5.62.050     Panoram Device License
5.62.060     Denials of License
5.62.070     Suspension or Revocation of Licenses--Notice Summary Suspension or Revocation
5.62.080     Standards of Conduct and Operation--Adult Panorams
5.62.090     Record Keeping
5.62.100     Inspections
5.62.110     Misdemeanor
5.62.120     Severability

5.62.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter and unless the context plainly requires otherwise, the following definitions are adopted:
A. “Adult panoram establishment” or “adult panoram” means a business in a building or a portion of a building which contains device(s) which for payment of a fee, membership fee or other charge, is used to exhibit or display a picture, view, or other graphic display distinguished or characterized by emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
B. “Applicant” means the individual or entity seeking a license to operate an adult panoram establishment. Upon issuance of a license, the applicant may be referred to as the “licensee.”
C. “Applicant control person” means: all partners, corporate officers and directors and any other individuals in the applicant’s business organization who hold a significant interest in the business, based on responsibility for the management of the business.
D. “Clerk” shall mean the City Clerk or Deputy City Clerk as appointed pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 2.28 Snohomish Municipal Code.
E. “Employee or independent contractor” means any and all persons, including managers, and entertainers who work in or at or render any services directly related to the operation of an adult panoram.
F. “Hearing Examiner” shall mean the Hearing Examiner as appointed pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 2.33 of the Snohomish Municipal Code.
G. “Manager” means any person who manages, directs, administers or is in charge of the affairs and/or conduct of any portion of any activity at an adult panoram. An “assistant manager” shall be that person who, in the absence of the manager, shall undertake the duties of the manager as defined by this section.
H. “Person” means any individual, partnership, corporation, trust, incorporated or unincorporated association, marital community, joint venture or other entity or group of persons, however organized.
I. “Specified anatomical areas” means:
    1. Less than completely and/or opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola;
    2. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely or opaquely covered.
J. “Specified sexual activities” means:
    1. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy;
    2. Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock, or female breast;
    3. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.

5.62.020 License Required.
A. It is unlawful for any person to conduct, manage or operate an adult panoram unless such person is the holder of a valid and subsisting license from the City to do so, obtained in the manner provided in this chapter.
B. It is unlawful for any employee, independent contractor or manager to knowingly work in or about, or to knowingly perform any service or entertainment directly related to the operation of an unlicensed adult panoram.
C. It is unlawful for any manager or assistant manager to work in an adult panoram unless such person is the holder of a valid and subsisting license from the City to do so.
D. It is unlawful to exhibit, display or provide for public use any panoram device upon any adult panoram establishment without having first obtained a license for each such panoram device.

5.62.030 Adult Panoram License.
A. All applications for an adult panoram license shall be submitted to the Clerk in the name of the person or entity proposing to conduct said business and shall be signed by such person and certified as true under penalty of perjury. All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the City, which shall require the following information:
    1. For the applicant and for each applicant control person, provide: names, any aliases or previous names, driver’s license number, if any, Social Security number, if any, and business, mailing and residential address, and business telephone number.
    2. If a partnership, whether general or limited, the names and addresses of the partners; and if a corporation, date and place of incorporation, names and addresses of corporate officers, evidence that it is in good standing under the laws of Washington, and name and address of any registered agent for service of process.
    3. Whether the applicant or any partner, corporate officer, or director of the applicant holds any other licenses under this chapter or any license for adult entertainment, including adult motion picture theaters, adult drive-in theaters, or adult cabarets from the City or another city, county or state, and if so, the names and addresses of each other licensed business.
    4. A summary of the business history of the applicant and applicant control persons in owning or operating adult panorams, or adult cabarets, adult motion picture theaters, adult drive-in theaters, or bikini clubs, providing names, addresses and dates of operation for such businesses, and whether any business license has been revoked or suspended, and the reason therefor.
    5. For the applicant and all applicant control persons, any and all criminal convictions or forfeitures within five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the application, other than parking offenses or minor traffic infractions including the dates of conviction, nature of the crime, name and location of court and disposition.
    6. For the applicant and all applicant control persons, a description of business, occupation or employment history for the three (3) years immediately preceding the date of the application.
    7. Authorization for the City, its agents and employees to seek information to confirm any statements set forth in the application.
    8. The location and doing-business-as name of the proposed adult panoram, including a legal description of the property, street address, and telephone number, together with the name and address of each owner and lessee of the property.
    9. Two (2) two-inch by two-inch color photographs of the applicant and applicant control persons, taken within six (6) months of the date of application showing only the full face.
    10. A complete set of fingerprints for the applicant or each applicant control person taken by Snohomish Police Department employees.
    11. A scale drawing or diagram showing the configuration of the premises for the proposed adult panoram, including a statement of the total floor space occupied by the business, and marked dimensions of the interior of the premises. The location of each panoram device, seating areas, manager’s office and manager’s stations, restrooms and service areas shall be clearly marked on the drawing.
B. An application shall be deemed complete upon the applicant’s provision of all information requested above, including identification of “none” where that is the correct response, and the applicant’s verification that the application is complete. The Clerk may request other information or clarification in addition to that provided in a complete application where necessary to determine compliance with this chapter.
C. A nonrefundable application fee set by resolution of the City Council, must be paid at the time of filing an application in order to defray the costs of processing the application. The annual renewal fee shall be set by resolution of the City Council.
D. Each applicant shall verify, under penalty of perjury, that the information contained in the application is true.
E. If any person or entity acquires, subsequent to the issuance of a license under this chapter, a significant interest based on responsibility for management or operation of the licensed premises or the licensed business, notice of such acquisition shall be provided in writing to the City Clerk, no later than twenty-one (21) days following such acquisition. The notice required shall include the information required for the original license application.
F. The adult panoram license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is issued, the expiration date, the doing-business-as name and the address of the licensed adult panoram. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the adult panoram so that it can be easily read at anytime the business is open.
G. No person granted a license pursuant to this chapter shall operate the business under a name not specified on the license, nor shall any person operate a business licensed under this chapter under any designation or at any location not specified on the license. A separate license shall be required for each location at which a business covered by this chapter is operated. A license shall be valid for one year, and must be annually renewed.
H. Upon receipt of the complete application and fee, the Clerk shall provide copies to the police, fire and community development departments for their investigation and review to determine compliance of the proposed business with the laws and regulations which each department administers. Each department shall, within thirty (30) days of the date of such application, inspect the application and premises and shall make a written report to the Clerk whether such application and premises complies with the laws administered by each department. No license may be issued unless each department reports that the application and premises comply with the relevant laws. In the event the premises are not yet constructed, the departments shall base their recommendation as to premises compliance on their review of the drawings submitted in the application. Any license approved prior to premises construction shall contain a condition that the premises may not open for business until the premises have been inspected and determined to be in substantial conformance with the drawings submitted with the application and submitted with any application for a building permit. A department shall recommend denial of a license under this subsection if it finds that the proposed business is not in conformance with the requirements of this chapter or other law in effect in the City. A recommendation for denial shall cite the specific reason therefor, including applicable laws.
I. A license shall be issued by the Clerk within thirty (30) days of the date of filing a complete license application and fee, unless the Clerk determines that the applicant has failed to meet any of the requirements of this chapter or provide any information required under this subsection or that the applicant has made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact on the application for a license. The Clerk shall grant an extension of time in which to provide all information required for a complete license application upon the request of the applicant. If the Clerk finds that the applicant has failed to meet any of the requirements for issuance of a license, the Clerk shall deny the application in writing and shall cite the specific reasons therefor, including applicable law. If the Clerk fails to issue or deny the license within thirty (30) days of the date of filing of a complete application and fee, the applicant shall be permitted, subject to all other applicable law, to operate the business for which the license was sought until notification by the Clerk that the license has been denied, but in no event may the Clerk extend the application review time for more than an additional twenty (20) days. (Ord. 2299, 2016)

5.62.040 Adult Panoram Manager and Assistant Manager Licenses.
A. No person shall work as a manager or assistant manager at an adult panoram without a manager or assistant manager license from the City. Each applicant for a license shall complete an application on forms provided by the City containing the information identified below. A nonrefundable application fee of $100.00 shall accompany the application for a manager or assistant manager. A copy of the application shall be provided to the Police Department for its review, investigation and recommendation. All applications shall be signed by the applicant and certified to be true under penalty of perjury. Each license application shall require the following information:
    1. The applicant’s name, home address, home telephone number, date and place of birth, fingerprints taken by Snohomish Police Department employees, and Social Security number.
    2. The name and address of each business at which the applicant intends to work.
    3. Documentation that the applicant has attained the age of eighteen (18) years. Any two of the following shall be accepted as documentation of age:
        a. a motor vehicle operator’s license issued by any state bearing the applicant’s photograph and date of birth;
        b. a state-issued identification card bearing the applicant’s photograph and date of birth;
        c. an official passport issued by the United States of America;
        d. an immigration card issued by the United States of America; or
        e. any other identification that the City determines to be acceptable.
    4. A complete statement of all convictions of the applicant for any misdemeanor or felony violations in this or any other city, county, or state within five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the application, except parking violations or minor traffic infractions.
    5. A description of the applicant’s principal activities or services to be rendered.
    6. Two (2) two-inch by two-inch color photographs of applicant, taken within six (6) months of the date of application showing only the full face.
    7. Authorization for the City, its agents and employees to investigate and confirm any statements set forth in the application.
B. The Clerk may request additional information or clarification when necessary to determine compliance with this chapter.
C. A license shall be issued by the Clerk within fourteen (14) days from the date the complete application and fee are received unless the Clerk determines that the applicant has failed to provide any information required to be supplied according to this chapter, has made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application, or has failed to meet any of the requirements for issuance of a license under this chapter. If the Clerk determines that the applicant has failed to qualify for the license applied for, the Clerk shall deny the application in writing and shall cite the specific reasons therefor, including applicable laws. If the Clerk has failed to approve or deny an application for license within fourteen (14) days of filing of a complete application, the applicant may, subject to all other applicable laws, commence work until notified by the Clerk that the license has been denied, but in no event may the Clerk extend the application review time for more than an additional twenty (20) days.
D. A license issued under this section shall be valid for one year and must be annually renewed. The annual renewal fee for a manager or assistant manager shall be set by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 2299, 2016)

5.62.050 Panoram Device License.
All applications for a panoram device license shall be submitted to the City Clerk on a form supplied by the City, which shall require the following information:
A. The business name, address and telephone number of the location of the panoram device.
B. The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the panoram device;
C. A description of each of the panoram devices located at the location described in Subsection A above.

5.62.060 Denials of License.
Should the person seeking a license under this chapter disagree with the Clerk’s determination, the applicant must file a notice of nonacceptance with the City Attorney’s office within ten (10) working days of receipt of the notification of denial.
A. The City shall, within five (5) working days following receipt of the notice of non-acceptance, apply to the Superior Court for a judicial determination as to whether the applicant’s license was properly denied. The burden of showing that the applicant’s license was properly denied shall rest on the City.
B. If a preliminary judicial determination sustaining the City’s denial of the subject license is not obtained within five (5) working days from the date the complaint is served, an interim license shall be issued under this chapter by operation of the law. The interim license shall issue in any event if a final judicial determination on the merits is not obtained within twenty (20) days from the date the complaint is filed. In such case, the interim license will remain in effect until a final judicial determination on the merits is reached; provided, however, that any delays caused or requested by the applicant shall be excluded from the above-mentioned twenty-day period.

5.62.070 Suspension or Revocation of Licenses--Notice Summary Suspension or Revocation.
A. The City Clerk may suspend or revoke any license issued pursuant to this chapter for a period of time not to exceed one year where one or more of the following conditions exist:
    1. The license was procured by fraud or false representation of fact in the application or in any report or record required to be filed with the Clerk;
    2. The building, structure, equipment, operation or location of the business for which the license was issued does not comply with the requirements or fails to meet the standards of this chapter;
    3. The applicant, applicant control person, manager or assistant manager has violated or permitted violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
B. The procedure for revoking or suspending a license under this chapter shall be the following: Upon determining that grounds for revocation or suspension exist, the City Clerk shall send the licensee a notice of intent to revoke or suspend the license. Such notice shall set forth the grounds for suspension or revocation and schedule a hearing before the Hearing Examiner. The Hearing Examiner is hereby specifically authorized to conduct said hearing in accordance with the following procedures (and not the procedures of Chapter 2.33 of the Snohomish Municipal Code):
    1. The hearing shall be held no earlier than three (3) and no later than ten (10) working days from the date of notice of intent to revoke.
    2. The licensee shall be permitted to present evidence in support of his position at the hearing.
    3. Within two working days after the hearing, the Hearing Examiner shall notify the licensee in writing of his/her determination and reasons therefor.
    4. Should the licensee disagree with the determination, he/she must file a notice of non-acceptance with the City Attorney’s office within ten (10) working days of receipt of the Hearing Examiner’s determination.
    5. In the event that a notice of non-acceptance is not filed, the Hearing Examiner’s determination shall become final and the suspension/revocation shall be given immediate effect.
C. The City shall, within five (5) working days following receipt of a notice of non-acceptance, file a complaint with the Superior Court enjoining the licensee from operating his/her business. The burden of proof shall be on the City. The status quo shall be maintained and the Clerk’s determination of revocation or suspension shall not be effective until a final judicial determination on the merits affirming the suspension/revocation is rendered.

5.62.080 Standards of Conduct and Operation--Adult Panorams.
The following standards of conduct and operation must be adhered to by an adult panoram:
A. Main Aisle. The entire interior of the panoram premises shall be arranged in such a manner so that each panoram station or device therein is entered from a continuous main aisle at least five (5) feet in width. The only access to a station or device shall be from the main aisles.
B. View. The view from the continuous main aisle of any person inside a station shall not be obstructed except by a door, curtain or other screening device as permitted by this chapter.
C. Doors. The bottom of any door, curtain or screening device shall be not less than twenty-seven (27) inches above the floor of the panoram station or device where the occupant sits in a chair or on a seating surface to view the panoram. In panoram stations where the occupant stands to view the panoram, the bottom of any door, curtain or screening device shall not be less than thirty-six (36) inches above the floor of the panoram station.
D. Restriction on Seating. No panoram station or device having a door, curtain or other screening device at its entrance shall contain any chair or other seating surface unless the door, curtain or screening device has at a location between sixty-six (66) and seventy-eight (78) inches above the floor an opening twelve (12) inches in height and at least twenty-four (24) inches in width which provides an unobstructed view through either open space or clear and clean window glass to the side walls and back walls of the station. Any chair or seating surface in such panoram station shall not provide a seating surface more than twenty (20) inches in either length or width, and shall not be higher than twenty (20) inches from the floor. There shall not be more than one such chair or seating surface in any panoram station. Occupancy of a station or device shall be limited to one (1) person.
E. No Locking, No Holes. Doors, curtains or screening devices on panoram stations shall not be capable of being locked. There shall be no holes in partitions between panoram stations or devices.
F. Interior Lighting. Sufficient interior lighting shall be provided and equally distributed throughout the public areas of the adult panoram so that all objects are plainly visible at all times and all parts of the public areas shall be illuminated so that patrons with normal vision on any part of the public areas of the premises shall be able to read written textual material printed in 8 point type. A sample of 8 point type follows:This is a sample of 8 point type.
G. Floor-Level. The entire floor area of a panoram station or device shall be level with the continuous main aisle. No steps or risers shall be allowed in any such station.
H. Signage. There shall be permanently posted and maintained in at least two conspicuous locations on the interior of every panoram premises a sign stating substantially the following:“Occupancy of any station (booth) is at all times limited to only one person. There is to be no masturbation or exposure of genitals in the panoram stations (booths) or on the panoram premises. Violators are subject to criminal prosecution under either state law or local ordinance as may be adopted or amended from time to time.”
The signs shall be conspicuously displayed in the public area of the premises. Letters shall be at least one (1) inch high and be on a sign at least two (2) feet by two (2) feet.
In addition, on each panoram station or device, a sign shall be conspicuously displayed containing the same message as above. The sign on each panoram device shall be of a minimum size of 8" by 11" and the letters should be at least 1/2" high.
I. No Warning Devices. No warning system or device shall be permitted on the premises for the purpose of warning customers or patrons or any other persons occupying panoram devices or stations located on licensee’s premises that police officers or City health, fire, licensing or building inspectors are approaching or have entered the licensee’s premises.
J. Admission. Admission must be restricted to persons of the age of eighteen (18) years or more. It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, manager, or other person in charge of an adult panoram to knowingly permit or allow any person under the minimum age specified to be in or upon such premises.
K. Employees and Independent Contractors. All managers, employees and independent contractors shall be over the age of 18 years.

5.62.090 Record Keeping.
A. All papers, records and things required to be kept pursuant to this chapter shall be open to inspection by the Clerk during the hours when the licensed premises are open for business, upon two days’ written notice. The purpose of such inspections shall be to determine whether the papers, records and things meet the requirements of this ordinance.
B. Each adult panoram shall maintain and retain for a period of two (2) years the name, address and age of each person employed or otherwise retained as a manager or assistant manager. This information shall be open to inspection by the Clerk during hours of operation of the business upon twenty-four (24) hours’ notice to the licensee.

5.62.100 Inspections.
In order to insure compliance with this chapter, all areas of licensed adult panorams which are open to members of the public shall be open to inspection by City agents and employees during the hours when the premises are open for business. The purpose of such inspections shall be to determine if the licensed premises are operated in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. It is hereby expressly declared that unannounced inspections are necessary to insure compliance with this chapter.

5.62.110 Misdemeanor.
Any person knowingly violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in Section 9.04.050 Snohomish Municipal Code.

5.62.120 Severability.
Each provision of this chapter is separate and severable from all other provisions of this chapter. The invalidity of any clause, sentence, paragraph, subdivision, section or portion of this chapter, or the invalidity of the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall not affect the enforcement of the remainder of this chapter to any person or circumstances. (Ord. 1880, 1999)

Chapter 5.65 BODY ART, BODY PIERCING, AND TATTOOING

Sections:
5.65.010     Definitions
5.65.020     Licensing
5.65.030     Work Unlawful

5.65.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted.
A. “Body art” means the practice of invasive cosmetic adornment including the use of branding and scarification. “Body art” also includes the intentional production of scars upon the body. “Body art” does not include any health-related procedures performed by licensed health care practitioners under their scope of practice.
B. “Body piercing” means the process of penetrating the skin or mucous membrane to insert an object, including jewelry, for cosmetic purposes. “Body piercing” also includes any scar tissue resulting from or relating to the piercing. “Body piercing” does not include the use of stud and clasp piercing systems to pierce the earlobe in accordance with the manufacturer’s directions and applicable United States Food and Drug Administration requirements. “Body piercing” does not include any health-related procedures performed by licensed health care practitioners under their scope of practice, nor does it include the implantation of foreign objects into the human body.
C. “Tattooing” means to pierce or puncture the human skin with a needle or other instrument for the purpose of implanting an indelible mark or pigment into the skin. “Tattooing” includes the application of permanent cosmetics such as permanent eyeliner, eyebrows, lip liner, and full lip color. (Ord. 2251, 2013)

5.65.020 Licensing.
All business license applications and fees for body art, body piercing, and tattooing shall be processed pursuant to SMC Chapter 5.02 and shall comply with all City laws and regulations and all State licensing laws and regulations. Issuance of a City business license for body art, body piercing, and/or tattooing shall be subject to documentation of a state-issued location license. (Ord. 2251, 2013)

5.65.030 Work Unlawful.
A. It is unlawful for a manager or an employee or independent contractor to work in a body art, body piercing, or tattoo business unless the manager or employee or independent contractor is a holder of a valid and subsisting license from the state and City to do so.
B. RCW 26.28.085, Applying a tattoo to a minor – Penalty, including all future amendments, additions, or deletions, is incorporated and adopted by reference. (Ord. 2251, 2013)

Chapter 5.68 BODY STUDIOS

Sections:
5.68.010     Definitions
5.68.020     Prohibited
5.68.030     Misdemeanor

5.68.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter and unless the context plainly requires otherwise, a “body studio” means any premises upon which is furnished for a fee or charge or like consideration the opportunity to paint, feel, handle or touch the unclothed body or unclothed portion of the body of another person or to be so painted, felt, handled, or touched by another person or to observe, view or photograph any such activity, and shall include any such premises which are advertised or represented in any manner as an adult body-painting studio, model studio, sensitivity awareness studio, or any other expression or characterization which characterizes the same or a similar meaning. It does not include a massage parlor operated by massage therapists licensed by the State of Washington.

5.68.020 Prohibited.
A. It is unlawful for any person to conduct, manage or operate a body studio within the City of Snohomish.
B. It is unlawful for any person to knowingly work in or about a body studio in the City of Snohomish.

5.68.030 Misdemeanor.
Any person knowingly violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in Section 9.04.050 Snohomish Municipal Code. (Ord. 1880, 1999)

Chapter 5.70 WAYFINDING SIGNS

Sections:
5.70.010     Fees

5.70.010 Fees.
Any business that requests placement of a downtown wayfinding sign shall pay a fee as set by resolution of the City Council for the first year. The annual renewal fee shall be set by resolution of the City Council.

Title 6 (RESERVED)

Title 7 ANIMAL CODE
Chapter 7.04 Animals
    7.04.010     Title Created
    7.04.020     Definitions
    7.04.030     Fees Set by Resolution
    7.04.040     Licensing
    7.04.050     Exotic Animals/Potentially Dangerous Wild Animals
    7.04.060     Livestock
    7.04.065     Number of Animals Allowed
    7.04.070     Prohibited Conduct
    7.04.080     Penalties
    7.04.090     Severability
    7.04.100     Third Party Liability
    7.04.110     Statutes Incorporated by Reference
Chapter 7.08 Dangerous Dogs
    7.08.010     Created
    7.08.020     Definitions
    7.08.030     Potentially Dangerous Dog or Dangerous Dog Outside Enclosure
    7.08.040     Dangerous Dogs and Potentially Dangerous Dogs – Certificate of Registration Required – Prerequisites
    7.08.050     Dangerous Dogs Required to be Microchipped
    7.08.060     Declaration of Potentially Dangerous or Dangerous Dog – Procedure and Notification Requirements
    7.08.070     Appeal of Notice of Potentially Dangerous Dog or Dangerous Dog
    7.08.080     Dangerous Dogs/Potentially Dangerous Dogs – Confiscation - Offenses
    7.08.090     Severability
    7.08.100     Third Party Liability
Chapter 7.12 Licensing and Impoundment
    7.12.010     Licensing
    7.12.020     Kennels, Catteries, Shelters, and Boarding Facilities
    7.12.030     Impoundment Procedures
    7.12.040     Shelter Operation
    7.12.050     Facilities, Licensing, Requirements – Regulations and Procedures
    7.12.060     Change in Classification
    7.12.070     Right of Inspection
    7.12.080     Denial or Revocation of a License
    7.12.085     Penalties
    7.12.090     Citizen Right to Appeal
    7.12.100     Severability
    7.12.110     Third Party Liability

Chapter 7.04 ANIMALS

Sections:
7.04.010     Title Created
7.04.020     Definitions
7.04.030     Fees Set by Resolution
7.04.040     Licensing
7.04.050     Exotic Animals/Potentially Dangerous Wild Animals
7.04.060     Livestock
7.04.065     Number of Animals Allowed
7.04.070     Prohibited Conduct
7.04.080     Penalties
7.04.090     Severability
7.04.100     Third Party Liability
7.04.110     Statutes Incorporated by Reference

7.04.010 Title Created.
This title of the Snohomish Municipal Code shall be entitled “Animal Control” and this Chapter shall be entitled “Animals”. (Ord. 1915, 1999)

7.04.020 Definitions.
As used in this title, the terms defined in this section shall have the defined meanings unless the context requires otherwise.
“Abatement” means the termination of any violation of this title by lawful and reasonable means as determined by the authorized City of Snohomish Animal Control Officer in order that a person or persons presumed to be the owner of an animal comply with this title.
“Adult dog or cat” means any dog or cat over the age of six months.
“Altered” means sexually neutered, medically determined to be incapable of reproduction, or when the physical condition of an animal is certified by a licensed veterinarian to be unreproductive.
“Animal” means any live vertebrate and invertebrate creature, reptile, amphibian, or bird, except man.
“At large” means any animal off the property of its owner, unless restrained by leash, tether, or other physical control device not to exceed eight feet in length, and under the physical control of a responsible person, whether or not the owner of such animal, or which enters upon the property of another person without authorization of that person, shall be deemed at large.
“Animal Control Authority” means an entity acting alone or in connection with other local governmental units for enforcement of the animal control laws of the City, county, and state, and the shelter and welfare of animals.
“Animal Control Officer” means any individual employed, contracted with, or appointed by the Animal Control Authority for the purpose of aiding in the enforcement of this chapter or any other law or ordinance relating to the licensure of animals, control of animals, or seizure and impoundment of animals, and includes any state or local law enforcement officer or other employee whose duties in whole or in part include assignments that involve the seizure and impoundment of any animal.
“Animal Exhibition” means public display of any living animal in the promotion of entertainment, education, advertisement, or any commercial enterprise.
“Kennel or Cattery.” The two types of kennels or catteries are defined as follows:
    1. “Private kennel or cattery” means any residence where more than three licensed dogs or cats over six months of age, are harbored. The number of dogs and cats kept at the private kennel shall not exceed eight. No more than one litter of either puppies or kittens, not both, is allowed per year.
    2. “Commercial kennel or cattery” means any residence or facility where dogs and/or cats are kept for the purpose of being sold for gain, provides facilities for breeding, boarding, transporting, exhibiting, grooming, including bathing or cosmetic care, or provides guard services. The Commercial kennel or cattery must have a business license. In addition to the Commercial kennel fee, each dog over six (6) months of age staying at the facility for more than one (1) month must be licensed. The Commercial kennel or cattery cannot keep/house more than twelve (12) dogs and/or cats over six (6) months of age and no more than two (2) litters per year of either puppies or kittens.
“Dangerous dog” means any dog that according to the records of the appropriate authority has (1) inflicted severe injury on a human being without provocation on a public or private property; (2) killed a domestic animal without provocation while off the owner’s property; or (3) been previously found to be potentially dangerous, the owner having received notice of such and the dog again aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans or domestic animals.
“Dog handler” means a law enforcement officer who has successfully completed training as prescribed by the Washington State Criminal Justice Training Commission in police dog handling.
“Euthanasia” means the putting to death of an animal in a humane manner.
“Exotic, wild or dangerous animal” means any member of the animal kingdom which is not commonly domesticated or which is not common to North America; or which, irrespective of geographic origin, is of a wild or predatory nature; or any domesticated animal which, because of its size, vicious nature or other similar characteristics, would constitute a danger to human life or property if not kept, maintained, or confined in a safe and secure manner. Incorporated by reference are the definitions contained within the Revised Code of Washington (RCW) and the Washington Administrative Code (WAC).
“Fecal Matter” means the solid excretory product evacuated from the bowels.
“Fowl” includes birds such as chicken, or any of several other, usually ground feeding, domestic or game birds including, but not limited to duck, goose, peacock, turkey, or pheasant.
“Harboring” means allowing any animal to remain, be lodged, fed, or sheltered on the property one owns, occupies, or controls for more than twenty-four hours.
“Hearing Officer/Examiner” means the individual that will hear appeals of the orders issued by the Animal Control Authority during the performance of enforcing the City of Snohomish Animal Control Code.
“License” means a tag that shall be purchased from the City of Snohomish that contains a license number and the year for which the tag was issued.
“Litter” means the number of young under six (6) months of age brought forth at birth.
“Livestock” includes horses, mules, jackasses, cattle, sheep, llamas, goats, swine, and all ratites, which includes, but is not limited to, emus and ostriches.
“Micro-chipping” means the implantation of an identification microchip or similar electronic identification device to establish the identity of an individual animal.
“Owner” means any person or legal entity having a possessory property right in an animal or who harbors, cares for, exercises control over, or knowingly permits any animal to remain on premises occupied by them.
“Police dog” means a dog used by a law enforcement agency specially trained for law enforcement work and under the control of a dog handler.
“Potentially dangerous dog” means:
    1. Any dog that, when unprovoked, chases or approaches a person upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public grounds in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or any dog with a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury, or otherwise threaten the safety of humans or domestic animals; or
    2. Any dog that, when unprovoked, inflicts bites on a human or a domestic animal either on public or private property.
“Proper enclosure of a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog” means, while on the owner’s property, a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog shall be securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure, suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and designed to prevent the animal from escaping. Such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top, and shall also provide protection from the elements for the dog.
“Proper shelter” means a structure with at least four walls, a roof, a floor which is raised off the ground, and a door opening properly shielded from the wind and rain, with size commensurate to the size of the inhabiting animal.
“Quarantine” means the keeping of a biting animal or the suspected biting animal separate and apart from other animals and people for a period of up to fourteen days.”
“Rabies” is an acute viral, infectious, and usually fatal disease of dogs, cats, and other warm-blooded animals, attacking the central nervous system causing inflammation of the brain and spinal cord, and transmitted to humans by the bite of an infected animal. Animals infected with rabies may appear sick, crazed, or vicious.
“Sanitary manner” means the method in which the handling of waste is done with regard to cleanliness and precautions against diseases. Fecal waste shall be disposed of by double bagging.
“Service dog/animal” which includes “guide dog,” means any dog that is individually trained to do work or perform tasks for the benefit of an individual with a disability, including a physical, sensory, psychiatric, intellectual, or other mental disability.
“Severe injury” means any physical injury that results in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery.
“Sexually neutered” See “Altered.”
“Shelter” means a facility which is maintained expressly for impounded and/or stray animals and that provides the necessary associated services.
“Small animal” means animals which are kept indoors as household pets in aquariums, terrariums, cages, or similar containers including, but not limited to animals such as rabbits, hamsters, mice, gerbils, guinea pigs, non-venomous snakes, exotic birds, small non-venomous reptiles and amphibians, and fish.
“Small livestock” includes domesticated animals such as sheep, goat, and swine.
“Valid license” means a current tag from the jurisdiction in which the animal resides.
“Vicious” means acting in an unruly manner or the propensity to do any act which might endanger the safety of any person, animal, or property of another. (Ord. 1915, 1999; Ord. 2100, 2005; Ord. 2193, 2010; Ord. 2266, 2014)

7.04.030 Fees Set by Resolution.
All licensing, permitting, fines, and penalties shall be adopted by resolution. (Ord. 1915, 1999)

7.04.040 Licensing.
All dogs within the City of Snohomish shall be licensed. Unlicensed dogs shall be subject to impoundment pursuant to SMC Section 7.12.030.
Kennels, catteries, shelters, and boarding facilities shall be licensed pursuant to SMC Chapter 7.12. (Ord. 1915, 1999; Ord. 2021, 2003)

7.04.050 Exotic Animals/Potentially Dangerous Wild Animals.
A. No person shall possess, breed, import, export, barter, buy, sell, or attempt to buy or sell any exotic animals or “potentially dangerous wild animals” as defined by the Washington Administrative Code (WAC) and the Revised Code of Washington (RCW), including but not limited to RCW 16.30.010. Not all exotic animals are prohibited. Refer to RCW and WAC for prohibited exotic animals or “potentially dangerous wild animals” including but not limited to RCW Ch. 16.30.
B. All other species to be determined by the City.
C. Exotics must be housed in accordance to specie/breed specific living standards. The reference used for living standard will be the most recent edition of both Reptile Medicine and Surgery by Douglas R. Mader MS DVM for reptiles and Exotic Companion Medicine Handbook for Veterinarians by Cathy A. Johnson-Delaney for other species. (Ord. 1915, 1999; Ord. 2193, 2010)

7.04.060 Livestock.
A. The keeping of livestock as an accessory use must meet the following conditions:
    1. A minimum lot size of forty thousand (40,000) square feet for every four (4) animals. One additional animal is permitted for each ten thousand (10,000) square feet of lot area in excess of forty thousand (40,000) square feet.
    2. Small livestock, including but not limited to sheep, goats, and swine, shall be kept on a minimum lot size of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet for every four (4) animals. One additional animal is permitted for each five thousand (5,000) square feet of lot area in excess of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
    3. Suitable structures or fences shall be provided to comply with applicable regulations and controls to restrain animals from leaving the premises.
    4. The lot upon which the animals are kept shall be maintained in a sanitary condition and shall be free of objectionable noises and odors.
    5. Animals shall be contained on the lot owned or leased by the animal owner.
    6. Animals shall be maintained in a humane manner and condition.
    7. All livestock, large or small, shall be kept away from critical area buffers associated with wetlands, streams, rivers, lakes, and habitat conservation areas.
    8. All shelter buildings, including stables, barns, aviaries, and coops that are in excess of one hundred (100) square feet, shall be kept a minimum setback sixty (60) feet from any property line.
B. The keeping of fowl, rabbits, or similar mammals raised for domestic, noncommercial use shall be permitted on lot sizes smaller than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet provided:
    1. The minimum lot size shall be no less than five thousand (5,000) square feet.
    2. All animals kept outside shall be cooped or kept in hutches, pens, or appropriate enclosures that have a minimum setback of ten (10) feet from all property lines.
    3. A total of no more than five (5) female fowl, weighing less than five (5) pounds shall be kept on a single lot between five thousand (5,000) and nineteen thousand, nine hundred, and ninety-nine (19,999) square feet. No fowl shall be kept on lots less than five thousand (5,000) square feet.
    4. It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor a rooster on any lot in the City.
C. The keeping of a Potbelly Pig (Sus scrofa bittatus) in the City as a household pet:
    1. The type of swine commonly known as the Vietnamese, Chinese, or Asian Potbelly Pig (Sus scrofa bittatus) is not subject to the small livestock requirements. A Potbelly Pig may be kept as a household pet, provided that no swine is greater than twenty-two (22) inches in height at the shoulder or more than one hundred fifty (150) pounds in weight. Multi dwelling units are prohibited from housing Potbelly Pigs.
    2. No more than one (1) Potbelly Pig may be kept as a household pet.
D. Beekeeping shall follow these additional requirements pursuant to the Land Use Code, SMC Title 14:
    1. Beekeepers shall register with the State Department of Agriculture as provided by law.
    2. Beehives shall not be kept for commercial purposes (i.e., for the purpose of selling honey).
    3. No more than four hives, each with only one swarm, shall be kept upon a City lot.
    4. Beehives will be located either twenty-five (25) feet or more away from any property line, or the hives will be elevated on a platform not less than eight (8) feet above grade, or a solid fence, six (6) feet in height, will be provided along any property line less than twenty-five (25) feet from the hive.
    5. Colonies shall be re-queened following any swarming or aggressive behavior.
    6. Abandoned colonies, diseased bees, or bees living in trees, buildings, or any other space except in movable–frame hives shall constitute a public nuisance, and shall be abated immediately. (Ord. 1915, 1999; Ord. 2193, 2010)

7.04.065 Number of Animals Allowed.
The following table establishes the number of animals that may be kept in conjunction with the provisions specified by Title 7 SMC:
+-------------------+------------------+-----------------+---------------------+---------------------+
|  Type of Animal   | Size of Property |                 |                     |                     |
|                   |  (square feet)   |                 |                     |                     |
+-------------------+------------------+-----------------+---------------------+---------------------+
|                   |     < 5,000      |  5,000-19,999   |    20,000-39,999    |      ≥ 40,000       |
+-------------------+------------------+-----------------+---------------------+---------------------+
| Beehive           | 0                | 4               | 4                   | 4                   |
+-------------------+------------------+-----------------+---------------------+---------------------+
| Dog, Cat, or      | 3 dogs, 4 cats,  | 3 dogs, 4 cats, | 3 dogs, 4 cats,     | 3 dogs, 4 cats,     |
| Potbelly Pig      | 1 potbelly pig   | 1 potbelly pig  | 1 potbelly pig      | 1 potbelly pig      |
|                   | with a combined  | with a combined | with a combined     | with a combined     |
|                   | maximum of 5     | maximum of 5    | maximum of 5        | maximum of 5        |
+-------------------+------------------+-----------------+---------------------+---------------------+
|                   |                  |                 |                     | Private kennel:     |
|                   |                  |                 |                     | 8 plus 1 litter     |
|                   |                  |                 |                     | per year.           |
+-------------------+------------------+-----------------+---------------------+---------------------+
|                   |                  |                 |                     | Commercial kennel:  |
|                   |                  |                 |                     | 12 plus 2 litters   |
|                   |                  |                 |                     | per year.           |
+-------------------+------------------+-----------------+---------------------+---------------------+
| Exotic animal     | 1                | 1               | 1                   | 1                   |
+-------------------+------------------+-----------------+---------------------+---------------------+
| Female fowl under | 0                | 5               | 5 plus 1 additional | 5 plus 1 additional |
| 5 pounds          |                  |                 | fowl for each       | fowl for each       |
|                   |                  |                 | 5,000 sq. ft.       | 5,000 sq. ft.       |
|                   |                  |                 | over 20,000         | over 20,000         |
|                   |                  |                 | sq. ft.             | sq. ft.             |
+-------------------+------------------+-----------------+---------------------+---------------------+
| Livestock         | -                | 0               | 0                   | 4 plus 1 additional |
|                   |                  |                 |                     | animal for each     |
|                   |                  |                 |                     | 10,000 sq. ft.      |
|                   |                  |                 |                     | over 40,000         |
|                   |                  |                 |                     | sq. ft.             |
+-------------------+------------------+-----------------+---------------------+---------------------+
| Rooster           | 0                | 0               | 0                   | 0                   |
+-------------------+------------------+-----------------+---------------------+---------------------+
| Small Livestock   | 0                | 0               | 4 plus 1 additional | 8 plus 1 additional |
|                   |                  |                 | animal for each     | animal for each     |
|                   |                  |                 | 5,000 sq. ft.       | 5,000 sq. ft.       |
|                   |                  |                 | over 20,000         | over 40,000         |
|                   |                  |                 | sq. ft.             | sq. ft.             |
+-------------------+------------------+-----------------+---------------------+---------------------+
1See SMC 7.04.050
(Ord. 2193, 2010)
+-------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------+----------------------+
|  Type of Animal   | Type of Dwelling/Property |                       |                      |
+-------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------+----------------------+
|                   |    Dwelling with < 120    |  Dwelling located at  | Dwelling located at  |
|                   |     sq. ft. adjacent,     |   ground level with   |  ground level with   |
|                   |     private yard area     |  120 – 1,999 sq. ft.  |  ≥ 2,000 sq. ft. of  |
|                   |                           | of adjacent, private  |  adjacent, private   |
|                   |                           |       yard area       |      yard area       |
+-------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------+----------------------+
| Beehive           | 0                         | 0                     | 0                    |
+-------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------+----------------------+
| Dog or Cat        | 2 dogs or 2 cats with     | 2 dogs or 3 cats with | 2 dogs, 3 cats, with |
|                   | a combined maximum        | a combined maximum    | a combined maximum   |
|                   | of 2                      | of 3                  | of 4                 |
+-------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------+----------------------+
| Exotic animal     | 1                         | 1                     | 1                    |
+-------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------+----------------------+
| Female fowl under | 0                         | 0                     | 0                    |
| 5 pounds          |                           |                       |                      |
+-------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------+----------------------+
| Livestock         | 0                         | 0                     | 0                    |
+-------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------+----------------------+
| Rooster           | 0                         | 0                     | 0                    |
+-------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------+----------------------+
| Small Livestock   | 0                         | 0                     | 0                    |
+-------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------+----------------------+
1See SMC 7.04.050
(Ord. 2193, 2010)

7.04.070 Prohibited Conduct.
A. Offenses Relating to Safety and Sanitation. It is unlawful for any person to:
    1. Allow the accumulation of animal feces in any open area, run, cage, or yard wherein animals are kept and to fail to remove or dispose of feces at least once every twenty-four hours in a sanitary manner;
    2. Fail to remove the fecal matter deposited by his/her animal on public or private property of another before the owner and/or animal leaves the immediate area where the fecal matter was deposited;
    3. Fail to have in his/her possession the equipment necessary to remove his/her animal’s fecal matter when accompanied by said animal on public property or public easement;
    4. Have possession or control of any animal sick or afflicted with any infectious or contagious disease and fail to provide treatment for such disease, or suffer or permit such diseased or infected animal to run at large, or come in contact with other animals, or drink at any public or common watering trough or stream accessible to other animals; or
    5. Owners of duly licensed “service dogs” are exempted from subsections (A)(2) and (A)(3) of this section.
B. Offenses Relating to Control. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
    1. Permit any animal to be at large, except domestic cats. No animal except domestic cats shall be allowed to run at large during any hour of the day or night upon any unenclosed lands, public or private, within the limits of the City, or upon any public street, avenue, alley, or other public place in the City.
    2. Permit an animal to be unattended on public premises, property or right-of-way except in those areas specifically designated to permit animals. Animals must be confined to such restricted areas. Domestic cats are exempted.
    3. Fail to keep every female dog or cat in heat confined in a building or secure enclosure in such a manner that such female dog or cat cannot come into contact with another animal except for planned breeding.
    4. Be in possession of property and knowingly permit frequent, continuous, or repetitive barking or noise made by any animal, which originates from the property, and which unreasonably disturbs or interferes with the peace, comfort, and repose of property owners or possessors, except that such sounds made in animal shelters, or veterinary hospitals licensed under and in compliance with this Chapter and Land Use Code Title 14, shall be exempt from this subsection.
    5. Permit any animal to damage public property or the private property of another.
    6. Permit a service animal to be without a harness, to be unleashed or untethered, if these devices interfere with the service animal’s work or the individual’s disability prevents using these devices. In that case, the individual must maintain control of the animal through voice, signal, or other effective controls.
    7. Exemption – Police Dogs. All police dogs owned by a public law enforcement agency or its agent and being used for training by such agency or agent shall be exempt from all provisions of the Snohomish Municipal Code relating to animal control, with the exception of Section 7.08.060 B, Rabies Control. If a police dog is required under Section 7.08.060 B to be quarantined, such dog will be remanded to the control of its handler. Police dogs so controlled may be used in the line of duty. Follow-up procedures prescribed by the Humane Society/health department will apply.
C. Offenses Relating to Cruelty. It is unlawful for any person to:
    1. Abandon an animal by intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal negligence leave a domesticated animal at a location without providing for the animal’s continued care. It is no defense to abandonment to abandon an animal at or near an animal shelter, veterinary clinic, or other place of shelter if reasonable arrangements for the care of the animal were not made by the person abandoning the animal.
    2. Fail to provide an animal with sufficient good wholesome food and a constant source of clear potable water, proper shelter and protection from the weather, veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering, and with humane care and treatment.
    3. Leave an animal unattended for more than twenty-four consecutive hours.
    4. Beat, cruelly treat, torment, overload, overwork, or otherwise abuse an animal, or cause, instigate, or permit any dogfight, cockfight, bullfight, or other combat between animals or between animals and humans. Anyone who permits such conduct on premises under his control, and any person present as a spectator at such exhibition, shall also be deemed a violator of this subsection and subject to punishment thereof.
    5. Give away any live animal as a prize for, or as an inducement to enter, any contest, game, or other competition, or as an inducement to enter a place of amusement; or offer such animals as an incentive to enter any business agreement whereby the offer was for the purpose of attracting trade.
    6. As the operator of a motor vehicle, which strikes a domestic animal, fail to stop at once and render such assistance as may be possible and fail to immediately report such injury or death to the animal’s owner. In the event that the owner cannot be ascertained and located, such operator shall at once report the accident to the Snohomish Police Department.
    7. Lay out or expose any kind of poison for animals or leave exposed any poisoned food, drink, or any substance or fluid whatsoever, whereon or wherein there is or shall be deposited or mingled any kind of poison, or poisonous or deadly substance or fluid whatsoever, on the premises of another, or in any unenclosed place, or to aid or abet any person in so doing. This does not apply to homeowner or home occupant use of household products or chemicals, including lawn and garden chemicals and fertilizers, in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations for the use of the product or chemical. This also does not apply to State-licensed pest control operators performing within the scope of employment.
    8. Permit an animal exhibition or circus to perform in which animals are induced or encouraged to perform through the use of chemical, mechanical, electrical, or manual devices in a manner which will cause, or is likely to cause, physical injury or suffering.
    9. Confine, without adequate ventilation, any animal in any box, container or vehicle.
    10. Confine an animal within or on a motor vehicle at any location under such conditions as may endanger the health or well being of the animal, including but not limited to extreme temperatures, lack of food, water or attention, or confinement with a dangerous animal. Any animal control or police officer is authorized to remove any animal from a motor vehicle, at any location, when he/she reasonably believes it is confined in such conditions as described above. Any animal so removed shall be delivered to the animal control shelter after the removing officer leaves written notice of such removal and delivery, including the officer’s name, in a conspicuous location on or within the vehicle.
    11. Tease, tantalize, or provoke any animal with the intent to cause fear or anger.
    12. Tether or confine any animal in such a manner or such a place as to cause injury or pain or to endanger an animal; or to keep an animal in quarters that are injurious to the animal due to inadequate protection from heat or cold, or that are of insufficient size to permit the animal to move about freely.
    13. Tether or confine an animal in such a manner that it can become entangled so that it cannot move freely, cannot reach shelter or water, or such that it can become entangled with another animal. The area where the animal is tethered or confined must be free of extraneous material that may cause it injury (such as, but not limited to, glass, sharp metal, nails, etc.). Tether must be a minimum length of three times the length of the animal as measured from the tip of its nose to the base of its tail.
    14. Transport an animal in or on a vehicle in such a manner that it can exit the vehicle while the vehicle is in motion. The animal must be contained or secured in a manner so as to prevent the possibility of an inadvertent exit by the animal from the vehicle. It is further unlawful for any person to transport any living animal on the running board; fenders; hood; unrestrained in a convertible, in an unenclosed bed of a pickup or flatbed truck, or other outside part of any vehicle, unless suitable harness, cage or enclosure is provided and so attached as to protect the animal from falling or being thrown therefrom.
    15. To possess cockspurs, slashers, gaffs, or other tools, equipment, devices or training facilities for the purpose of training and/or engaging an animal in combat with another animal.
    16. Set out any leg hold traps in the City unless approved by animal control. (Ord. 1915, 1999; Ord. 1935, 1999; Ord. 2193, 2010; Ord. 2266, 2014)

7.04.080 Penalties.
Any person, firm, or corporation convicted of a violation of this Chapter except sections 7.04.070 C 1, 7.04.070 C2, 7.04.070 C4 or 7.04.070 C16, shall be guilty of a civil infraction and punished by a fine of not to exceed one hundred dollars. Any person, firm or corporation convicted of a violation of sections 7.04.070 C1, 7.04.070 C2, 7.04.070 C4 or 7.04.070 C16 of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by a fine not to exceed $500 and or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day of operation in violation hereof shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 1915, 1999)

7.04.090 Severability.
Should any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance or its application to any person or situation be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance or its application to any other person or situation. The City Council of the City of Snohomish hereby declares that it would have adopted this ordinance and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, clauses, phrases or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 1915, 1999)

7.04.100 Third Party Liability.
It is expressly the purpose of this ordinance to provide for and promote the health, safety and welfare of the general public and not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited by the terms of this ordinance. (Ord. 1915, 1999)

7.04.110 Statutes Incorporated by Reference.
The provisions of the following state statutes are incorporated by reference in this chapter: RCW 16.52.207 Animal cruelty in the second degree. (Ord. 2229, 2011)

Chapter 7.08 DANGEROUS DOGS

Sections:
7.08.010     Created
7.08.020     Definitions
7.08.030     Potentially Dangerous Dog or Dangerous Dog Outside Enclosure
7.08.040     Dangerous Dogs and Potentially Dangerous Dogs – Certificate of Registration Required – Prerequisites
7.08.050     Dangerous Dogs Required to be Microchipped
7.08.060     Declaration of Potentially Dangerous or Dangerous Dog – Procedure and Notification Requirements
7.08.070     Appeal of Notice of Potentially Dangerous Dog or Dangerous Dog
7.08.080     Dangerous Dogs/Potentially Dangerous Dogs – Confiscation - Offenses
7.08.090     Severability
7.08.100     Third Party Liability

7.08.010 Created.
The Chapter is created to provide for the regulation of Dangerous Dogs and Potentially Dangerous Dogs and provide policy, power and authority within the City of Snohomish as set out in this Chapter. (Ord. 1915, 1999)

7.08.020 Definitions.
Terms used in this Chapter are defined pursuant to SMC Section 7.04.020.

7.08.030 Potentially Dangerous Dog or Dangerous Dog Outside Enclosure.
It is unlawful for an owner of a potentially dangerous dog or dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside the proper enclosure unless the dog is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash and under physical restraint of a responsible person. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration, but shall prevent it from biting any person or animal. (Ord. 2100, 2005)

7.08.040 Dangerous Dogs and Potentially Dangerous Dogs – Certificate of Registration Required – Prerequisites.
A. It is unlawful for an owner to have a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog in the City of Snohomish without a certificate of registration issued under this section. This section shall not apply to police dogs.
    1. The owners of all dangerous dogs or potentially dangerous dogs shall obtain a certificate of registration from the City of Snohomish immediately on the next business day, upon the animal moving to the City. This includes dogs found to be dangerous or potentially dangerous in other jurisdictions that move to the City of Snohomish.
    2. After paying the registration fee and registering a potentially dangerous dog with the City of Snohomish, the owners of potentially dangerous dogs labeled so by another jurisdiction based solely on breed classification alone without any aggressive acts, may request review by the Community Services Officer/Animal Control Officer to determine if that specific breed classified potentially dangerous dog will be considered a potentially dangerous dog for registration purposes in the City of Snohomish.
        a. The owner of the potentially dangerous dog shall make their request in writing to the Community Services Officer/ Animal Control Officer and will have the responsibility to provide written documentation that the animal was determined to be a potentially dangerous dog based solely on breed, without any aggressive acts.
        b. The Community Services Officer/Animal Control Officer will make the determination of whether the dog will be considered a potentially dangerous dog for registration purposes. There is no appeal of that decision.
        c. The Community Services Officer/Animal Control Officer will make her decision based upon contact with the jurisdiction declaring the potentially dangerous dog to determine whether the dog was declared a potentially dangerous dog solely based upon breed or whether there is record of any aggressive behavior or acts. If the record shows no aggressive behavior or acts and that the declaration was based solely upon breed, then the dog will not be required to be registered as a potentially dangerous dog in the City of Snohomish. If there is any record of aggressive behavior or acts then the dog will be required to be registered as a potentially dangerous dog in the City of Snohomish.
        d. The Community Services Officer/Animal Control Officer will provide her decision in writing whether the potentially dangerous dog will be considered a potentially dangerous dog for registration purposes in the City of Snohomish. If the Community Services Officer/Animal Control Officer’s decision is that the dog will not be considered a potentially dangerous dog for registration purposes in the City of Snohomish then the fees will be refunded and the dog shall have regular licensing requirements.
B. The City of Snohomish shall issue a certificate of registration to the owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog upon payment of a registration fee set by resolution of the City Council, if the owner presents to the City of Snohomish sufficient evidence of:
    1. A proper enclosure to confine a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog and the posting of the premises with a clearly visible warning sign that there is a dangerous dog on the property. In addition, the owner shall conspicuously display a sign with a warning symbol that informs children of the presence of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog; and
    2. Either:
        a. A surety bond issued by a surety insurer qualified under RCW 48.28 in a form acceptable to the City of Snohomish and the City Attorney in the sum of at least two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000), payable to any person injured or owner of an animal injured by the dangerous dog; or
        b. A policy of liability insurance, such as homeowner’s insurance, issued by an insurer qualified under RCW Title 48 in the amount of at least two hundred and fifty thousand dollars ($250,000), insuring the owner for any personal injuries inflicted or injuries to an animal inflicted by the dangerous dog.
C. The term for a certificate of registration is one year from the date of issuance or until the dog is moved to another address outside the corporate limits of the City of Snohomish, whichever is less. The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog must renew the certificate of registration annually, unless the dog is moved to another address outside the corporate limits of the City of Snohomish. (Ord. 2100, 2005; Ord. 2299, 2016)

7.08.050 Dangerous Dogs Required to be Microchipped.
Any dog which is declared to be a dangerous dog pursuant to this Chapter or RCW Chapter 16.08 shall be required to be microchipped by a veterinarian of the owner’s choice, at the owner’s expense. This shall be in addition to the normal requirements for licensing as defined within this title. This must be accomplished within thirty (30) days after receipt of the dangerous dog declaration issued by the Animal Control Officer or the Hearing Examiner, in the event of an appeal, pursuant to SMC 7.08.060.

7.08.060 Declaration of Potentially Dangerous or Dangerous Dog – Procedure and Notification Requirements.
A. The Animal Control Officer shall identify and classify potentially dangerous dogs and dangerous dogs. The Animal Control Officer may find and declare a dog potentially dangerous or dangerous if the Animal Control Officer has probable cause to believe that the dog falls within the definitions set forth in SMC 7.04.020. Probable cause may be based upon:
    1. The written complaint of a citizen who is willing to testify that he or she witnessed the dog acting in a manner which causes it to fall within the definition of potentially dangerous dog or dangerous dog.
    2. Dog bite reports filed with the Animal Control Officer.
    3. Actions of the dog witnessed by any Animal Control or Law Enforcement Officer.
    4. Other substantial evidence.
B. Rabies Control. 
    1. In the event that any animal has bitten a human being, the designated animal control agent may order quarantine of such animal for a period up to fourteen days. In the event that the agent has reason to suspect that an animal is rabid, the appropriate officials of the Washington State Department of Health and Snohomish County Department of Health shall be notified and the designated animal control agent shall coordinate any further activities with the agencies which have jurisdiction rabies prevention and control. The provisions of Chapter 246-100 WAC, together with amendments thereto, are incorporated in this chapter by reference and prevail over any conflicting provision of this chapter in any suspected rabies matter.
    2. The quarantined animal must not be kept in any area that is accessible to other animals or persons, but shall be kept indoors in a secluded room. Should the order of quarantine be broken, the animal may be impounded and held by a designated custodian of animals at owner and/or custodian expense for the remainder of the quarantine period. Redemption is subject to payment of any fees allowable under this chapter. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any owner or custodian to whom an order of quarantine is issued to knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal negligence permit the order of quarantine to be broken.
C. Upon determining that probable cause exists to believe that a dog is potentially dangerous or dangerous, the Animal Control Officer may issue a written notice to the owner of the dog. The notice shall contain the following:
    1. The name and address of the owner of the dog;
    2. A brief description of the dog;
    3. A brief statement of why the dog has been found to be a potentially dangerous dog or dangerous dog;
    4. The specific provision or provisions of SMC 7.08.060(A) under which the Animal Control Officer has found the dog to be a potentially dangerous dog or dangerous dog;
    5. The requirements for restraint of the dog, if applicable, as determined by the Animal Control Officer, and when these requirements must be complied with;
    6. The criminal penalty for violation of the requirements for restraint imposed by the Animal Control Officer, including a statement that, if the requirements are not timely met, the Animal Control Officer shall have the authority of issue a criminal citation or report such non-compliance to the City Attorney’s Office, which shall have the authority to initiate a criminal action, all as set out in 7.08.080 hereof; and
    7. A statement advising:
        a. That the notice may be appealed to the City of Snohomish Hearing Examiner.
        b. That the failure to file a timely and complete notice of appeal will constitute a waiver of all rights to an appeal under this chapter.
D. The notice shall be served on the owner in one of the following methods:
    1. First class mail to the owner’s last known address; or
    2. Personally. If the notice of hearing is personally served, proof of personal service of notice of hearing shall be made by a written declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the person effecting service, declaring the time, date and manner in which service was made.
E. Duty of owner to notify animal control agency of change in status of potentially dangerous or dangerous dog.
    1. The owner of a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog shall immediately notify the animal control agency when the dog:
        a. is loose or unconfined off the premises of the owner;
        b. has bitten or injured a human being or another animal;
        c. is sold, given away, or moved to another address; or
        d. dies.
    2. If a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog is sold, given away, or moved to another location, the owner shall provide the name, address, and telephone number of the new owner, or the address and telephone number of the new location if retained by the same owner, to the animal control agency prior to moving the dog, whether within or outside Snohomish County. All requirements of this chapter must be met by the new owner prior to moving the dog if the dog remains within Snohomish County. If the dog is retained by the same owner, but moved to another address, the requirements of this chapter must be met prior to moving the dog.
    3. If a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog dies, the owner shall supply to the animal control agency within 30 days of death, a veterinarian certificate of death or other proof that the dog has died.
F. If the owner cannot be located as provided in paragraph (D) (1) or (2) of this subsection, notification shall be attempted by publication in a newspaper of general circulation. (Ord. 2266, 2014)

7.08.070 Appeal of Notice of Potentially Dangerous Dog or Dangerous Dog.
A. Any owner of a dog which has been declared potentially dangerous or dangerous by the Animal Control Agency may appeal the notice by filing a written notice of appeal at the City of Snohomish, within fourteen (14) days from the date of the notice. Said written notice of appeal shall be on a form provided for that purpose by the Animal Control Agency or other written notice, but must contain the following items:
    1. A caption reading: “Appeal of___________________________,” giving the name of the appellant.
    2. A brief statement of the finding being appealed, together with any material facts claimed to support the contentions of the appellant.
    3. A brief statement of the relief sought, and the reasons why the finding should be reversed, modified, or otherwise set aside.
    4. The current address of the appellant.
    5. A verification, by declaration under penalty of perjury, made by the appellant as to the truth of the matters stated in the appeal.
B. Failure to file a timely and complete notice of appeal constitutes a waiver of all rights to an appeal under this chapter.
C. Upon receipt of a timely filed and completed notice of appeal, a notice of hearing shall be sent to the appellant, setting the date, time, and place of the appeal hearing.
D. The hearing shall be set no less than 10 nor more than 30 business days following receipt of a timely filed and complete notice of appeal. The filing of a notice of appeal shall not stay the requirements for restraint of the dog provided to the owner pursuant to SMC Section 7.08.060(B)(5).
E. The hearing shall be before the City of Snohomish Hearing Examiner who is authorized by this chapter and section to conduct such hearing.
F. At the hearing, the owner of the dog found to be a potentially dangerous dog or dangerous dog shall be permitted to present evidence in support of their position at the hearing. A representative or representatives of the City also shall be permitted to present evidence in support of declaring the dog a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog.
G. Hearing. 
    1. Dogs shall be declared potentially dangerous or dangerous by the Hearing Examiner upon proof that they are animals as defined by Section 7.04.020. If a threat, injury, or damage sustained by a person forms part of the proof that the dog is dangerous, it shall be an affirmative defense to be proved by the owner that the dog’s threat, injury, or damage was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner of the dog, or was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog or has, in the past been observed or reported to have tormented, abused, or assaulted the dog, or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. Upon proof of such affirmative defense no declaration that the dog is dangerous shall be made.
    2. At the hearing, the burden shall be on the owner of the dog, by a preponderance of the evidence, that one or more of the circumstances set forth in subsection (G)(1) of this section exist.
    3. The affirmative defense set out in Subsection (G)(1) of this section shall not apply in actions to declare the dog to be potentially dangerous dog.
H. Hearing Examiner/Official Decision:
    1. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Hearing Examiner/Official shall issue written findings, conclusions and a decision.
    2. At the conclusion of a hearing to determine whether a dog is to be declared dangerous, the decision of the Hearing Examiner/Official may be:
        a. The dog in question is declared to be a dangerous dog;
        b. The dog in question is declared to be a potentially dangerous dog;
        c. The dog in question is declared to be a potentially dangerous dog, with additions, deletions and/or modifications made to the restrictions initially proposed to be placed on the dog by the Animal Control Officer; or
        d. The dog in question is declared to be neither dangerous nor potentially dangerous.
    3. At the conclusion of a hearing to determine whether a dog is to be declared potentially dangerous, the decision of the Hearing Examiner may be:
        a. The dog in question is declared to be a potentially dangerous dog;
        b. The dog in question is declared to be a potentially dangerous dog, with additions, deletions, and/or modifications made to the restrictions initially proposed to be placed on the dog by the City of Snohomish Animal Control; or
        c. The dog in question is declared to not be a potentially dangerous dog.
    4. The decision of the Hearing Examiner/Official shall be final.
        a. The Hearing Examiner’s decision shall be final and conclusive with right of appeal to the Superior Court of Snohomish County.
        b. Notice of the appeal and any other pleadings required to be filed with the court shall be served as required by law.
        c. The cost of transcribing and preparing all records ordered certified by the court or desired by the appellant for such appeal shall be borne by the appellant. The city, upon appeal to the Superior Court and payment by the appellant of the costs thereof, will prepare the record and transcribe the tape thereof and will deliver the same to the Court. Any appeal will be conducted on the record before the hearing examiner as if an appeal from a court of limited jurisdiction in accordance with the Rules of Appeal from Limited Jurisdictions (RALJ). (Ord. 1931, 1999)

7.08.080 Dangerous Dogs/Potentially Dangerous Dogs – Confiscation - Offenses.
A. Grounds for confiscation. Any dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall be immediately confiscated by the Animal Control Officer if:
    1. The dog is not validly registered under this chapter or RCW 16.08.080;
    2. The owner does not secure the liability insurance coverage required under this Chapter or RCW 16.08.080;
    3. The dog is not maintained in the proper enclosure; or
    4. The dog is outside of the dwelling of the owner, or outside of the proper enclosure, and not under physical restraint of a responsible person.
B. The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall be guilty of a gross misdemeanor in any of the following circumstances:
    1. The owner does not validly register and/or maintain a valid registration for the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog;
    2. The owner does not secure and/or maintain liability insurance required by this Chapter or RCW 16.08.080;
    3. The owner does not maintain the dog in a proper enclosure; or
    4. The owner or a responsible person does not physically restrain the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog while the dog is outside the dwelling of the owner, or the dog is outside the proper enclosure required by this Chapter or RCW 16.08.
C. If a dangerous dog of an owner with a prior conviction under this chapter or RCW 16.08.100, attacks or bites a person or another domestic animal, the dog’s owner is guilty of a class C felony, punishable in accordance with RCW 9A.20.021. The matter shall be referred to the County Prosecutor for prosecution. In addition, the dangerous dog shall be immediately confiscated by an Animal Control Authority, placed in quarantine for the proper length of time, and thereafter destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner.
D. The owner of any dog that aggressively attacks and causes severe injury or death of any human, whether or not the dog has previously been declared potentially dangerous or dangerous, shall be guilty of a class C felony punishable in accordance with RCW 9A.20.021. The matter shall be referred to the County Prosecutor for prosecution. In addition, the dog shall be immediately confiscated by an Animal Control Authority, placed in quarantine for the proper length of time, and thereafter destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner.
E. The owner of any dog that has been confiscated, quarantined, and/or destroyed shall be responsible for all of the associated costs. The same may be assessed as restitution in any misdemeanor or felony prosecution. The City in addition shall have the right to pursue an action in a court with jurisdiction to collect the associated costs. In any such action the City shall be entitled to recover its costs and reasonable attorneys fees. (Ord. 2100, 2005)

7.08.090 Severability.
Should any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance or its application to any person or situation be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance or its application to any other person or situation. The City Council of the City of Snohomish hereby declares that it would have adopted this ordinance and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, clauses, phrases or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional.

7.08.100 Third Party Liability.
It is expressly the purpose of this ordinance to provide for and promote the health, safety and welfare of the general public and not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited by the terms of this ordinance. (Ord. 1915, 1999)

Chapter 7.12 LICENSING AND IMPOUNDMENT

Sections:
7.12.010     Licensing
7.12.020     Kennels, Catteries, Shelters, and Boarding Facilities
7.12.030     Impoundment Procedures
7.12.040     Shelter Operation
7.12.050     Facilities, Licensing, Requirements – Regulations and Procedures
7.12.060     Change in Classification
7.12.070     Right of Inspection
7.12.080     Denial or Revocation of a License
7.12.085     Penalties
7.12.090     Citizen Right to Appeal
7.12.100     Severability
7.12.110     Third Party Liability

7.12.010 Licensing.
Fees for licensing shall be set by resolution.
A. All adult dogs, harbored, kept, or maintained within the City shall be licensed annually, and within thirty days of being moved into the City.
B. Licenses shall be issued upon payment of the appropriate fee as set by resolution and upon proof of current vaccination for rabies from a licensed veterinarian.
C. All allowed exotic animals harbored, kept, or maintained within the City shall be licensed.
D. Licenses.
    1. License tags shall be securely displayed at all times, except when the animal is displayed in any official exhibition. A license, with registration number, shall be supplied by the City of Snohomish.
    2. Licenses are not transferable to another animal. License information may be transferred to a new owner upon payment of the applicable fee.
    3. Lifetime licenses shall only be issued for altered pets.
    4. With the exception of lifetime licenses, all licenses provided for in this section shall expire on December 31st of each year.
    5. Animal license fees shall be specified by resolution.
E. Any dog which is declared to be a “dangerous dog” as defined by SMC Section 7.04.020 shall be required to be micro-chipped by a veterinarian of the owner’s choice, at the owner’s expense pursuant to this title and also be licensed. The owner shall provide proof of micro-chip installation. (Ord. 1915, 1999; Ord. 2022, 2003; Ord. 2193, 2010)

7.12.020 Kennels, Catteries, Shelters, and Boarding Facilities.
A. All kennels and catteries shall be licensed as provided by Chapter 7.04 and this chapter. No such facility may lawfully operate except upon lawful issuance of a license. Issuance of such license shall not constitute approval of the land use, nor evidence of compliance with applicable land use regulations.
B. Kennels shall conform to regulations established in SMC Title 14, Land Use.
C. Exceptions of subsection (A): a kennel license shall not be required for the following animal facilities:
    1. Licensed veterinary hospitals and clinics.
    2. Temporary animal exhibitions located within the City limits for a period of up to fifteen (15) days.
    3. Approved animal shelters maintained for the care and keeping of impounded or stray animals. (Ord. 1915, 1999; Ord. 2193, 2010)

7.12.030 Impoundment Procedures.
A. Any animal may be impounded and held when it is the subject of a violation of this title, when an animal requires protective custody and care due to mistreatment or neglect by its lawful owner, or when otherwise ordered impounded by a court.
B. An animal is deemed to be impounded from the time the Animal Control Officer or his/her designee, including the Snohomish Police personnel and contracted agents (such as on-call veterinarian hospitals), takes physical custody of such animal.
C. An Animal Control Officer or police officer may enter the private unenclosed property of another, with or without warrant, when in hot pursuit, to take possession of any animal observed at large.
D. Regulations for Keeping a Found Dog.
    1. Any person who finds a dog or cat, which is not lawfully on their property and/or without knowing the animal owner’s identity, shall notify the Animal Control Authority and furnish a description of the animal. The finder may surrender the animal to the animal control shelter or retain its possession, subject to the discretion of the Animal Control Authority.
    2. Records of reported findings shall be maintained by the Animal Control Authority and made available to the public.
    3. If, within thirty days of the finding report made to animal control, no person makes claim upon the finder for return of the animal, the finder who chooses to retain possession of the animal shall obtain a license as required in this chapter, and thus shall become the legal owner.
    4. Animals held by the City for periods prescribed in this chapter, and not redeemed by the owner, shall become the property of the City.
E. Holding period and notice requirements:
    1. Any animal wearing a current license tag from a jurisdiction within the state shall be held for one hundred forty-four hours (six days) from time of impoundment. The impounding officer shall make reasonable effort by telephone to give notice of impoundment to the owner and if unsuccessful, shall mail written notice to the last known address of the owner advising of the impoundment and the date by which redemption must be made.
    2. Any animal not wearing a current license shall be held for seventy-two hours (three days) from time of impoundment before any disposition may be made of such animal.
    3. Litters of kittens and puppies, brought in as abandoned, may be disposed of immediately upon custody, at the discretion of the shelter manager.
    4. Animals delivered for impoundment by a police officer who removed such animal from possession of a person in custody of the police officer shall be held for the period prescribed in section (1) of this subsection.
F. Release from Impoundment and Disposition of Animals. 
    1. Payment of applicable fees, penalties, fines, and forfeitures shall be required prior to the release of an animal.
    2. Any impounded animal shall be released to the owner unless in the discretion of the Animal Control Authority or his/her designee there is an ongoing investigation of a violation of this chapter or state law. Positive identification of the owner shall be provided to animal control prior to release.
    3. Any animal held for the prescribed period and not redeemed by its owner, and which is neither dangerous nor unhealthy, may be released for adoption, subject to the following conditions:
        a. The adoptive owner agrees to furnish proper care to the animal in accordance with this chapter;
        b. Payment of required fees, including any medical care costs incurred during impoundment;
        c. In case of an unaltered animal, a spay/neuter deposit shall be made for dogs and cats that is only refundable upon proof that such animal has been rendered sexually unreproductive within the allotted time period; and
        d. In the case of animals under six months of age, the execution of a written agreement by the adoptive owner to render any adopted dog or cat sexually unreproductive within sixty days of adoption, or upon the animal attaining sexual maturity (six months), whichever event occurs last. Failure to perform the terms of the agreement shall be a violation, and shall be a forfeiture of the spay/neuter deposit and the manager may require return of the adopted animal to the shelter.
    4. The owner of any animal retained at the shelter pending legal action pertaining to violations of this chapter and/or other judicial actions or hearings, pertaining to his/her ownership/responsibilities regarding the animal, shall upon conviction be liable for all fees prescribed by the fee schedule.
    5. The shelter manager shall dispose of animals by means of euthanasia or adoption. However, irrespective of a prescribed holding period, the manager, upon advice of a licensed veterinarian, may immediately euthanize a sick or injured impounded animal.
    6. The decision of whether to release an animal to an individual for the purposes of adoption shall be at the discretion of the Animal Control Authority. In making the determination the Animal Control Authority or his/her designee shall base his/her decision on what is in the best interest of the animal and what is in the best interest of public safety. (Ord. 1915, 1999; Ord. 2022, 2003; Ord. 2193, 2010)

7.12.040 Shelter Operation.
A. The shelter manager shall operate, maintain, or provide an adequate facility to receive and care for any animal delivered to his/her custody for disposition under the provisions of this chapter, which facility shall be accessible to the public during reasonable hours for the conduct of necessary business concerning impounded animals.
B. The City Council may authorize the Mayor to contract with another agency or entity for impoundment and shelter services. (Ord. 1915, 1999; Ord. 2193, 2010; Ord. 2340, 2018)

7.12.050 Facilities, Licensing, Requirements – Regulations and Procedures.
A. Applications for a kennel license shall be made upon forms furnished by the Police Department, including all information required therein, and shall be accompanied by payment of the required fee as set by resolution.
B. An initial kennel license shall expire one year from the date of application. Applications for renewal must be filed one month prior to the expiration of the kennel license. All renewals will refer back to the original date of expiration.
C. Facilities shall be located and conform to Title 14 SMC.
D. Facilities including all animal runs, buildings, and structures devoted primarily to housing animals must be located at least thirty (30) feet from all external property lines. (Ord. 1915, 1999; Ord. 2193, 2010)

7.12.060 Change in Classification.
Any person who has a change in the category under which a permit was issued is subject to reclassification. (Ord. 2193, 2010)

7.12.070 Right of Inspection.
It is a condition of issuance of any permit under this chapter that the Animal Control Officer is permitted to inspect all animals and the premises where the animals are kept at any reasonable time. (Ord. 2193, 2010)

7.12.080 Denial or Revocation of a License.
A. The Animal Control Officer may deny an application or renewal for a license, or may revoke any license issued under this chapter, for any failure to meet the requirements of the chapter.
B. In the event that a license application or renewal is denied or a license is revoked for a kennel, the applicant and/or operator may not make a new application for a kennel or facility until such applicant and/or operator meets the requirements of this chapter to the satisfaction of the Animal Control Authority.
C. No person who has been convicted of cruelty to animals shall be issued a permit to operate any type of kennel or boarding facility. Any such permit which has been issued will be automatically revoked upon proof of conviction of the holder for cruelty to animals.
D. The City of Snohomish may revoke any permit under this chapter if the person holding the permit refuses or fails to comply with the ordinance codes in this title, or any law governing the protection and keeping of animals, or if the person holding a permit has withheld or falsified any information on the application for such permit. Such revocation of permit shall not affect the permit holder’s liability to prosecution under this title. (Ord. 2193, 2010)

7.12.085 Penalties.
A. The first and second offense for violation of this Chapter shall be considered a civil violation pursuant to SMC 1.01.080 and Chapter 1.14 SMC, except as otherwise provided therein.
B. The third offense of this chapter within a 365 day period shall be a misdemeanor subject to a jail term not more than 90 days, a fine of not more than $1,000.00, or both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 1935, 1999; Ord. 2155, 2008; Ord. 2193, 2010)

7.12.090 Citizen Right to Appeal.
Any applicant and/or operator aggrieved by a decision of the Animal Control Authority to deny or revoke a license may file an administrative appeal to the hearing examiner within 14 days after receiving a notice of violation, or being denied a license pursuant to this Chapter. Failure to file an appeal within 14 days will constitute a waiver of all rights to an administrative hearing and determination of the matter. (Ord. 2193, 2010)

7.12.100 Severability.
Should any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this ordinance or its application to any person or situation be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance or its application to any other person or situation. The City Council of the City of Snohomish hereby declares that it would have adopted this ordinance and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, clauses, phrases, or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 1915, 1999)

7.12.110 Third Party Liability.
It is expressly the purpose of this ordinance to provide for and promote the health, safety, and welfare of the general public and not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited by the terms of this ordinance. (Ord. 1915, 1999)

Title 8 HEALTH AND SANITATION
Chapter 8.08 Watershed
    8.08.010     Territory Described
    8.08.020     Rules and Regulations
Chapter 8.12 Collection and Disposal of Solid Waste
    8.12.010     Mandatory Collection, Rationale – Exceptions
    8.12.020     Definitions
    8.12.030     Contract Services, Billing, and Scheduling
    8.12.035     Scavenging Prohibited
    8.12.040     Collection Fees – Determination
    8.12.050     Special Rates and Special Services
    8.12.060     Solid Waste Service Board Established – Special Rate Determination
    8.12.070     Enforcement of Payment
    8.12.080     Vacancy Credits – Residential
    8.12.090     Vacancy Credits – Commercial
    8.12.100     Administration
    8.12.110     Container Requirements
    8.12.120     Garbage – Draining, Wrapping, and Sanitary Conditions Required
    8.12.130     Disposal of Dead Animals
    8.12.140     Unacceptable Solid Waste
    8.12.150     Solid Waste Burning Prohibited – Exceptions
    8.12.160     Solid Waste – Burying Prohibited
    8.12.170     Inspection Authorized, Abatement of Nuisance
    8.12.180     Violations – Notice
    8.12.190     Violations – Penalty
Chapter 8.16 Public Disturbance Noise
    8.16.010     Definitions
    8.16.020     Exemptions
    8.16.030     Infraction
    8.16.040     Enforcement
    8.16.050     Separate Offenses
    8.16.060     Punishment
    8.16.070     Evidence in Proceedings
    8.16.080     Severability
Chapter 8.20 Uniform Litter Control Code
    8.20.010     Short Title
    8.20.020     Definitions
    8.20.030     Litter in General
    8.20.040     Receptacles – Placement
    8.20.050     Receptacles – Use
    8.20.060     Receptacles – Damaging
    8.20.070     Removal of Litter
    8.20.080     Mandatory Litter Bags
    8.20.090     Sweeping Litter into Gutter Prohibited
    8.20.100     Merchants’ Duty to Keep Sidewalks Free of Litter
    8.20.110     Owner to Maintain Premises Free of Litter
    8.20.112     Maintaining Premises to Be Free of Vegetation That Creates a Public Safety Hazard
    8.20.120     Throwing or Distributing Commercial Handbills in Public Places
    8.20.130     Placing Commercial and Non-commercial Handbills on Vehicles
    8.20.140     Depositing Commercial and Non-commercial Handbills on Uninhabited or Vacant Property
    8.20.150     Prohibiting Distribution of Handbills where Properly Posted
    8.20.160     Distributing Commercial and Non-commercial Handbills at Inhabited Private Residences
    8.20.170     Litter Thrown by Persons in Vehicles
    8.20.180     Vehicle Loading
    8.20.190     City Inspections for Litter Receptacles
    8.20.200     Enforcement Officers and Procedures
    8.20.210     Purpose
    8.20.220     Interpretation
    8.20.230     Penalties
Chapter 8.21 Reusable Bags
    8.21.010     Definitions
    8.21.020     Regulations
    8.21.030     Exemptions
    8.21.040     Violations
    8.21.050     Severability
    8.21.060     General Duty

Chapter 8.08 WATERSHED

Sections:
8.08.010     Territory Described
8.08.020     Rules and Regulations

8.08.010 Territory Described.
The watershed from which is obtained the public water supply for the City of Snohomish is hereby particularly defined and described as constituting the following area:
Beginning at the northerly end of the crest of the dam which is the headworks of the Snohomish water supply, situated in the Southeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter of Section 9, Township 29 North, Range 7 East W. M.; thence northwesterly in a straight line to the northwest corner of said SE 1/4 of NE 1/4 of said Section 9; thence northerly following the one sixteenth line through the middle of the North  of the NE 1/4 of said Section 9 and continuing northerly along the sixteenth line which is the center line of the East  of Section 4 in said township and range, to the north line of said township; thence east along township line to the quarter corner on the south line of Section 34, Township 30 North, Range 7 East W. M.; thence north along the center line of said Section 34 to the quarter corner on the north side thereof; thence northwesterly to a point 660 feet east of the quarter corner on the west line of Section 27, Township 30 North, Range 7 East W. M.; thence north parallel to the west line of said Section 27, to the north line thereof; thence west along section line to the southwest corner of the SE 1/4 of the SE 1/4 of Section 21, Township 30 North, Range 7 East W. M.; thence north along the sixteenth line which is the center line of the East  of said Section 21 and of Section 16, said township and range, to the sixteenth corner at the center of the NE 1/4 of said Section 16; thence east to the southeast corner of the NE 1/4 of the NW 1/4 of Section 15, Township 30 North, Range 7 East W. M.; thence southeasterly in a straight line to the southeast corner of the NE 1/4 of said Section 15; thence east along the east and west center line of Sections 14 and 13, said township and range to the ridge or offshoot of Mt. Pilchuck, which forms the divide between Pilchuck River and the South Fork of the Stillaguamish River; thence following said ridge and divide to and across said Mt. Pilchuck and continuing southeasterly along said ridge and divide through Sections 14 and 13, Township 30 North, Range 7 East E. M. and through Sections 19, 20, 29, 28, 27, 34 and 35, Township 30 North, Range 8 East W. M.; thence following ridge and divide leading to and upon Bald Mountain, through Sections 2, 1 and 12, Township 29 North, Range 8 East W. M. and through Sections 7, 8 and 17, Township 29 North, Range 9 East W. M., to the east line of last named Section 17; thence South along the east line of Sections 17 and 20 to the southeast corner of Section 20, Township 29 North, Range 9 East W. M.; thence West to the southeast corner of Section 23, Township 29 North, Range 8 East W. M.; thence northwesterly to the quarter corner on the west line of last named Section 23; thence west along center line of Sections 22, 21 and 20, Township 29 North, Range 8 East W. M. to the center of last named Section 20; thence northwesterly in a straight line to the quarter corner on the east line of Section 12, Township 29 North, Range 7 East W. M.; thence West along the center line of Sections 12, 11 and 10, Township 29 North, Range 7 East W. M., to center of said Section 10; thence southwesterly in a straight line to a point 535 feet south of the northeast corner of the NW 1/4 of the SW 1/4 of said Section 10; thence west to a point 60.6 feet east of the west line of said Section 10; thence south for 400 feet more or less, to a point 25 feet north of the north bank of the present revised channel of Purdy Creek; thence westerly parallel to said revised channel of Purdy Creek to a point due south of point of beginning of this description; thence north to point of beginning, all within Snohomish County, State of Washington. (Ord. 686, 1939)

8.08.020 Rules and Regulations.
The above area and all of same is hereby placed under and made subject to all existent and future rules and regulations of the State Board of Health of the State of Washington, pertaining and in anywise applicable to sanitation of public water supplies. (Ord. 686, 1939)

Chapter 8.12 COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF SOLID WASTE

Sections:
8.12.010     Mandatory Collection, Rationale – Exceptions
8.12.020     Definitions
8.12.030     Contract Services, Billing, and Scheduling
8.12.035     Scavenging Prohibited
8.12.040     Collection Fees – Determination
8.12.050     Special Rates and Special Services
8.12.060     Solid Waste Service Board Established – Special Rate Determination
8.12.070     Enforcement of Payment
8.12.080     Vacancy Credits – Residential
8.12.090     Vacancy Credits – Commercial
8.12.100     Administration
8.12.110     Container Requirements
8.12.120     Garbage – Draining, Wrapping, and Sanitary Conditions Required
8.12.130     Disposal of Dead Animals
8.12.140     Unacceptable Solid Waste
8.12.150     Solid Waste Burning Prohibited – Exceptions
8.12.160     Solid Waste – Burying Prohibited
8.12.170     Inspection Authorized, Abatement of Nuisance
8.12.180     Violations – Notice
8.12.190     Violations – Penalty

8.12.010 Mandatory Collection, Rationale – Exceptions.
A. No place of human habitation nor business within the City shall be permitted to refuse to subscribe to and pay for the solid waste disposal service provided by this chapter. The City Council finds that mandatory disposal of solid waste through a City organized solid waste disposal utility is just as important to the health and welfare of the citizens of the City as mandatory use of City provided sewer and water utilities. The City Council finds that all citizens benefit from the orderly and sanitary disposal of solid waste even though some residences and businesses generate little or no solid waste subject to disposal by the solid waste utility. Therefore, the fact that a dwelling or business generates no solid waste shall not exempt the property owner or tenant from the payment of the regular charges established for the solid waste disposal service.
B. The City Council further finds that because the City is providing for the health and welfare of its citizens by providing water, sewer, and solid waste utility services to its citizens, the citizens should be required to compensate the City or its contractor for all services in order to receive any of said services. Therefore, the City Council shall provide in Chapter 15.05 for the termination of all City utility services to a residence or business which does not meet the obligation to compensate the City or its contractor for all of said services.
C. The City Council may, upon a finding that a particular business or residence receives no direct or indirect benefit from the City’s solid waste utility, except such business or residence from the mandatory requirements of this chapter.
D. It is unlawful for anyone other than the City solid waste collection and disposal utility or the City’s contractor to collect solid waste in the City for compensation. (Ord. 1543, 1985)

8.12.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
A. “Contractor” means any authorized person or entity contracting with the City to dispose of solid waste from within the City. It also means any commercial refuse collector authorized to continue collection of solid waste in newly annexed areas of the City pursuant to RCW 35.13.280.
B. “Garbage” means all putrescible animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food in any private dwelling, multiple dwelling, hotel, restaurant, building, or institution.
C. “Rubbish” is defined as follows:
    1. “Bulk rubbish” means discarded household furniture, appliances, bedding, and mattresses, and similar large items.
    2. “Commercial rubbish” means garbage and all other solid waste originating in and around businesses and publicly owned facilities.
    3. “Normal rubbish” means all cardboard, plastic, metal, glass, waste paper, rags, sweepings, small pieces of wood, rubber, leather, and similar waste materials that ordinarily accumulate around a home, business, or industry, including lawn cuttings. It does not include tree and hedge trimmings, dead animals, hazardous materials, industrial waste, or building waste resulting from construction or alterations.
    4. “Yard rubbish” means tree trimmings and hedge trimmings and includes limbs, trunks, and stumps.
D. “Solid waste” means both garbage and rubbish. (Ord. 1543, 1985)

8.12.030 Contract Services, Billing, and Scheduling.
A. The City Council may, from time to time, as provided by RCW 35.21.120, award a contract or contracts for the collection of solid waste based upon competitive bids. The City may contract with the contractor for services, including the service of billing for the charges incurred in providing the solid waste collection and disposal service by contract. The provisions of Chapter 15.05 with respect to the enforcement of the collection of utility charges shall apply whether the City or the contractor does the billing for solid waste utility services.
B. If the City provides solid waste collection and disposal by contract, the contractor shall be required to schedule such services and notify City customers of pickup schedules and changes in schedules; provided, that the minimum service for residential customers shall be once weekly collection. (Ord. 1543, 1985)

8.12.035 Scavenging Prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation, other than the City, the City’s recycling contractor, or a private disposal company franchised by the City to scavenge, remove, or collect any garbage, refuse, or recyclable materials or yard waste materials once they are set out on the curbside or other approved location. Once such materials have been set out on the curbside or such other location as authorized by the City, ownership of those materials passes to the City, recycling contractor, or private disposal company, as the case may be. (Ord. 1727, 1992)

8.12.040 Collection Fees – Determination.
The City Council shall, from time to time, by resolution, determine the collection fees and container use fees to be charged by the City if the City operates the utility or by the contractor if the City contracts for the solid waste utility service. (Ord. 1543, 1985)

8.12.050 Special Rates and Special Services.
A. Residences and businesses desiring pickup of bulk rubbish or yard rubbish or solid waste in excess of the amounts allowed by regular collection, or in excess of the frequency of regular collection, shall use the City or contractor solid waste disposal service, and shall be required to pay for the additional services at rates specified by the Mayor if the City operates the utility or by the contractor if the utility is operated by contract; provided, however, that if the utility is provided by contract the solid waste service board may review and adjust charges made for special services upon receipt of an application for review of charges from the customer.
B. The City or the contractor may provide special services and/or special rates for low income senior citizens or low income disabled persons. Applications for special services or special rates shall be approved only if the applicant meets the criteria established by the City Council or, at the election of the City Council, criteria established by the solid waste service board. Applications for special rates or special services shall be made to the Mayor or his/her designee, and appeals from the decision of the Mayor or his/her designee shall be made to the Utility Hearing Examiner. (Ord. 1543, 1985; Ord. 2341, 2017)

8.12.060 Solid Waste Service Board Established – Special Rate Determination.
A. If the City solid waste utility is run by contract there shall be established a solid waste service board which shall be composed of five members, one of whom shall be an owner of the contractor, one of whom shall be appointed by the contractor, one of whom shall be a City Council person, one of whom shall be a City employee selected by the Mayor, and one of whom shall be appointed by the City Council. The decision of the majority of the board shall be binding.
B. When the utility is run by contract, the solid waste service board shall make the final determination with respect to rates charged for special services and with respect to applications for special rates or special services from low income senior citizens and low income handicapped. (Ord. 1543, 1985; Ord. 2341, 2017)

8.12.070 Enforcement of Payment.
A. Whether the solid waste utility is operated by the City or by a contractor, all dwellings, businesses, and public agencies within the City shall be required to subscribe to the solid waste disposal service.
B. The solid waste disposal service shall not be terminated by reason of nonpayment, but rather all water, sewer, and solid waste utility services shall be terminated in the event of nonpayment pursuant to the procedures established by Chapter 15.05 of this code. (Ord. 1543, 1985)

8.12.080 Vacancy Credits – Residential.
Single dwellings and multiple dwelling accounts shall be eligible for vacancy credits for any vacancy of thirty days or longer. Credits shall not be computed for a fraction of a month, but will be rounded off to the nearest multiple of thirty. The City will provide a vacancy credit application in the event the City operates the utility, and the contractor will provide a vacancy credit application in the event a contractor operates the utility. No credit of less than two dollars will be given for any one billing period. Persons filing vacancy credit applications found to be false shall, in addition to any other penalties, be ineligible to receive future vacancy credits. (Ord. 1543, 1985)

8.12.090 Vacancy Credits – Commercial.
Business and public and agency accounts shall be eligible for temporary suspension of service for a period of thirty days or more if an application for temporary suspension of service is made in advance of the period of temporary suspension of service. The application shall be based upon the vacancy of the property and shall be made upon a form provided by the City if the City operates the utility or upon a form provided by the contractor if the utility is operated by contract. Failure to apply for continuation of services within ten days of the renewed occupancy of the premises shall result in charges being imposed for solid waste services without regard for any period of vacancy. (Ord. 1534, 1984)

8.12.100 Administration.
The administration of the disposal and hauling of solid waste in the City shall be under the supervision of the Mayor; provided, that the Mayor may delegate the duty of administration to the Director of Public Works. (Ord. 1534, 1984; Ord. 2341, 2017)

8.12.110 Container Requirements.
A. Required. It shall be the duty of every person in possession, charge, or control of any single family dwelling, multiple dwelling, commercial establishment, or public agency where solid waste is created or accumulated, at all times to keep or cause to be kept portable containers as described herein, and to deposit or cause to be deposited said solid waste therein.
B. Waste containers shall be provided as follows:
    1. Single family. For single family buildings and duplex residential buildings, household refuse containers shall be provided by the owner or occupant and shall not be more than thirty gallons, fitted with two handles and a tight cover with a handle.
    2. Multifamily. Multifamily dwelling units shall be furnished with and charged for at least one thirty gallon container per unit. Such container is to be furnished by the owner and/or occupants, provided that bulk containers may be used at the request of the owner.
    3. Commercial. Commercial users generating solid waste may be required to use bulk refuse containers. If the City operates the utility, the type of container used for commercial accounts shall be determined by the Mayor or his/her designee, with appeal from the decision being to the City utilities hearing examiner. If the utility is operated by the City by contract, the type of container used for commercial accounts shall be determined by the contractor, with appeal from the decision being to the solid waste service board.
C. Maximum Weight. Solid waste containers not designated for lifting by mechanical means shall have a maximum gross weight of 75 pounds.
D. Container Identification. All solid waste containers shall bear the address of the premises served by the container in permanent lettering with a minimum height of three inches.
E. Location. No container shall be kept or stored within the confines of any street or public alley in a residential area. In blocks in which there are alleys, such containers shall be kept on private property in a convenient and accessible location adjacent to such alley. In blocks in which there are no alleys, such containers shall be kept on private property without interfering with the reasonable enjoyment of such private property or adjoining property. On the day that solid waste is normally collected, containers shall be placed in a readily accessible location not farther than ten feet from the traveled roadway.
F. Mobile Home Parks. Mobile home parks shall be required to provide central storage areas throughout the mobile home park for the location of solid waste containers. Containers shall be located so that no mobile home is more than one hundred fifty feet from the closest container.
G. Special Containers. All solid waste containers, other than those can type containers used principally for residential purposes, will be provided and maintained by the City if the City provides the solid waste disposal service or by the contractor if the contractor provides the solid waste disposal service. The rates schedule established by resolution by the City Council shall include the charge for use of such containers.
H. Deteriorated Containers. Containers that have deteriorated to the extent of being hazardous to the collectors in handling such containers, or to the extent that lids will not fit tightly or securely, or are so badly damaged and bent that they will not allow free discharge of the solid waste or do not meet the general specifications of this chapter will be replaced by the owner of the container.
I. Frequency of Collection. Residential solid waste collection service shall be provided on a weekly basis. The customer and the Director of Public Works if the City provides the service, or the contractor if the contractor provides the service, shall determine the frequency of collection required for accounts other than residential accounts; provided, that disputes regarding the frequency of service required shall be resolved by the City Utility Hearing Examiner if the utility is operated by the City or by the solid waste service board if the utility is operated by a contractor. (Ord. 1543, 1985; Ord. 2341, 2017)

8.12.120 Garbage – Draining, Wrapping, and Sanitary Conditions Required.
All garbage shall be drained of liquids and wrapped in paper or other material before being deposited in the solid waste disposal container. The solid waste utility may refuse to collect undrained garbage of a liquid or semi-liquid state, unwrapped, and improperly placed. The owner and tenant shall maintain garbage containers in a clean and sanitary condition. (Ord. 1543, 1985)

8.12.130 Disposal of Dead Animals.
Dead dogs and cats and other animals upon the public ways will be collected and disposed of upon call to the City if the City operates the solid waste utility and to the contractor if the utility is operated by contract. Such service shall be provided at no extra charge. Dead animals in excess of one hundred pounds, condemned animals, or parts of animals from slaughterhouses or similar places, regardless of size, will not be collected and disposed of by the City solid waste utility. Dead animals shall not be placed in solid waste containers. (Ord. 1543, 1985)

8.12.140 Unacceptable Solid Waste.
The following solid wastes shall be considered unacceptable for collection without the special permission of the Director of Public Works if the City operates the solid waste utility or the contractor if the utility is operated by contract:
A. Hazardous waste, dangerous materials, or substances such as poisons, acids, caustics, infected materials and explosives;
B. Unusual quantities of materials resulting from the repair, excavation, construction of buildings;
C. Materials which have not been prepared for collection according with these regulations;
D. Solid waste resulting from industrial processes; and
E. Manure or animal droppings. (Ord. 1543, 1985)

8.12.150 Solid Waste Burning Prohibited – Exceptions.
It is unlawful for any person to burn any solid waste in the City limits; provided, that solid waste may be burned by permit issued by the Director of Public Works, approved by the Fire Chief, and where required by state law, only if a permit is also obtained from the Puget Sound Air Pollution Control Agency. (Ord. 1543, 1985)

8.12.160 Solid Waste – Burying Prohibited.
It is unlawful to bury solid waste in any place in the City. (Ord. 1543, 1985)

8.12.170 Inspection Authorized, Abatement of Nuisance.
The Mayor or his/her designee shall have the power to enter upon private property at reasonable times for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. Should the Mayor or his/her designee determine that there exist accumulations of solid waste detrimental to the public health, and in violation of the requirements of this chapter, the Mayor may cause the solid waste to be removed at the expense of the owner of the property upon which the nuisance is found. (Ord. 1543, 1985; Ord. 2341, 2017)

8.12.180 Violations – Notice.
Whenever the Mayor or his/her designee may determine that there is a violation of any provision of this chapter, notice shall be given to the owner and/or occupant of the premises upon which the alleged violation has occurred. Such notice shall state the nature of the violation and a reasonable time for correcting such violation. Such notice shall be given by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested. (Ord. 1543, 1985; Ord. 2341, 2017)

8.12.190 Violations – Penalty.
Violation of this Chapter shall be considered a civil violation pursuant to SMC 1.01.080 and Chapter 1.14 SMC, except as otherwise provided therein. (Ord. 1543, 1985; Ord. 1927, 1999; Ord. 2155, 2008)

Chapter 8.16 PUBLIC DISTURBANCE NOISE

Sections:
8.16.010     Definitions
8.16.020     Exemptions
8.16.030     Infraction
8.16.040     Enforcement
8.16.050     Separate Offenses
8.16.060     Punishment
8.16.070     Evidence in Proceedings
8.16.080     Severability

8.16.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
“Public disturbance noise” shall mean the following sources of sound unless exempted by SMC 8.16.020:
A. Frequent, repetitive or continuous sound from any horn or siren attached to a motor vehicle except as a warning of danger or specifically permitted or required by law;
B. Frequent, repetitive or continuous sound in connection with the starting, operating, repairing, rebuilding or testing of any motor vehicle, motorcycle, off-highway vehicle, or internal combustion engine in any residential zone which unreasonably interferes with the peace, comfort and repose of owners or occupants of real property in the residential zone;
C. Loud or raucous sound from any activity which unreasonably interferes with the operation of any school, church, hospital, sanitarium or nursing or convalescent facility;
D. Frequent, repetitive or continuous sound which emanates from a building, structure or property, and created by musical instrument, whistle, sound amplifier, stereo, jukebox, radio, television or other device capable of reproducing or creating sound, such as sounds originating from a band session, tavern operation or commercial sales lot which unreasonably interferes with the peace, comfort and repose of owners or occupants of nearby property;
E. Sound from a motor vehicle audio sound system, such as a radio, tape player or compact disc player, when the volume is such that the sound can be clearly heard by a person of normal hearing at a distance of more than fifty (50) feet from the vehicle itself;
F. Sound from carried or transported portable audio sound equipment, such as a radio, tape player or compact disc player, when the volume is such that the sound can be clearly heard by a person of normal hearing at a distance of more than fifty (50) feet from the source of the sound;
G. Frequent, repetitive or continuous sound which emanates from a residence structure or property, and created by audio sound equipment, musical instruments or social gatherings which unreasonably interferes with the peace, comfort and repose of owners or occupants of neighboring residential properties;
H. Sound from squealing or screeching of motor vehicle tires in contact with the ground or other roadway surface because of rapid acceleration, braking or excessive speed around corners except such sounds which arise from actions to avoid danger;
I. Sound originating from a motor vehicle on the public highway when the vehicle is operated without a muffler in good working order and in accordance with applicable laws and regulations;
J. Sound from yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on or near the public streets occurring between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. which unreasonably interferes with the peace, comfort and repose of owners or occupants of real property;
K. Sound originating from residential real property relating to temporary projects for the maintenance or repair of homes, grounds or appurtenances, including sounds from hammering, power lawnmowers, power hand tools, snow removal equipment and the like when the same occurs between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. weekdays and 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on weekends and legal holidays;
L. Sounds originating from construction sites and activities, including but not limited to sounds from staging (on and near the construction site) and the warming up and operation of heavy construction equipment, power tools and hammering between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. weekdays and 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on weekends and legal holidays, except such sounds which arise from emergency construction work to protect public or personal health and safety;
M. Continuing and/or ongoing sounds from nonemergency motor vehicles or other motorized or nonmotorized equipment such as leaf blowers, sweepers, or the like, audible more than twenty-five (25) feet away from the vehicle or other noise emitting source located on or in the vicinity of residential property which occurs in the presence of a commissioned police officer or which sounds reasonably cause the annoyance or disturbance of two (2) or more neighbors not residing at the same address, due to the ongoing or repetitive nature of the sounds, during the hours described below shall be presumed to be public disturbance noise. The two (2) complaints must be received by the Police Department within twenty-four (24) hours from the time the noise occurred in order for an enforcement action to proceed.
For the purposes hereof, the sounds generally described above occurring after 10:00 p.m. at night or before 7:00 a.m. on any day of the week shall be presumed to be a public disturbance except for noises that occur between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., if the business is open to the public during that time, and it occurs in the course of normal, reasonable, and essential business activities to service retail customers present during that time. Further provided, that the presumption of a public disturbance noise occurring between the hours of 10:00 p.m. at night or before 7:00 a.m. shall only be rebutted upon a showing before the adjudicatory body that the noise was caused by circumstances of an unforeseen and emergency nature. (Ord. 2326, 2017; Ord. 2355, 2018)

8.16.020 Exemptions.
Though the following sources of sound may fall within the definitions of a “public disturbance noise” as defined in the previous section, the following sounds shall be exempt and shall not be public disturbance noise:
A. Noise originating from aircraft in flight, and sounds which originate in airports and are directly related to flight operations;
B. Noise created by safety and protective devices, such as relief valves where noise suppression would defeat the safety relief intent of the device;
C. Noise created by fire or security alarms, or noise created by emergency equipment;
D. Noise created by auxiliary equipment on motor vehicles used for highway maintenance;
E. Noise created by a special event as defined in and regulated by Chapter 5.10 SMC so long as the event is in compliance with the terms and conditions of its special event permit;
F. Noise created by natural phenomenon;
G. Noise created by public utility facilities including electrical substations;
H. Noise created from school marching bands while practicing;
I. Noise created by bells, chimes or carillon not operated for more than five (5) minutes in any one (1) hour from the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., but not including such noise as is artificially created and amplified and broadcast via loudspeaker;
J. Noise created by the operation of equipment or facilities of surface carriers engaged in commerce by railroad; and
K. Noise originating from construction sites and activities for a City, state, or federal public works or emergency repair project. (Ord. 2326, 2017; Ord. 2355, 2018)

8.16.030 Infraction.
It is unlawful and a civil infraction for:
A. Any person to cause a nonexempt public disturbance noise as defined by this chapter; or
B. Any person who allows to be emitted a nonexempt public disturbance noise as defined by this chapter from a property, facility, business, or building managed or controlled by such person.
The public disturbance noise prohibitions as defined in SMC 8.16.010 constitute a civil infraction and need not occur in the citing officer’s presence to be enforced pursuant to IRLJ 2.2, as hereby adopted by reference as currently enacted, or as hereafter amended, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 2355, 2018)

8.16.040 Enforcement.
Where this chapter defines “public disturbance noise” as sound unreasonably interfering with the peace, comfort and repose of owners or possessors of real property or neighboring property, only after a complaint has been made by such a person, except for public disturbance noise as defined by SMC 8.16.010(M) which requires two (2) complaints to be made, may the Police Department issue a civil infraction notice. However, nothing herein precludes the Police Department from issuing a civil infraction notice should the “public disturbance noise” occur in the presence of a commissioned police officer.
In all other instances of a “public disturbance noise” a civil infraction notice may be issued without a complaint. (Ord. 2355, 2018)

8.16.050 Separate Offenses.
For enforcement purposes, sound emitted during separate days shall be deemed a separate violation. A day is a twenty-four (24) hour period beginning at 12:01 a.m. (Ord. 2355, 2018)

8.16.060 Punishment.
A. Violations Related to SMC 8.16.010(A) through (L). A first violation and infraction of SMC 8.16.010(A) through (L) shall be punished with a penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00). A second violation and infraction of SMC 8.16.010(A) through (L) shall be punished with a penalty of two hundred dollars ($200.00). A third and/or subsequent violation and infraction of SMC 8.16.010(A) through (L) shall be punished with a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
B. Violations Related to SMC 8.16.010(M). A first violation and infraction of SMC 8.16.010(M) shall be punished with a penalty of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). The penalty for a second or subsequent violation within a two (2) year period shall be a civil penalty of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00); provided, however, that if the same violator is found, in any forums, to have committed violations hereof three (3) or more separate times occurring at the same location within the same twelve (12) month period, any further violation shall be punishable by a civil monetary penalty of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 2355, 2018)

8.16.070 Evidence in Proceedings.
In any proceeding under this chapter, evidence of sound level through the use of sound level meter readings shall not be necessary to establish the commission of the violation. (Ord. 2355, 2018)

8.16.080 Severability.
Should any provision of this chapter or of any section of this chapter be held invalid, the remainder of the section and/or this chapter shall not be affected. (Ord. 1912, 1999; Ord. 2355, 2018)

Chapter 8.20 UNIFORM LITTER CONTROL CODE

Sections:
8.20.010     Short Title
8.20.020     Definitions
8.20.030     Litter in General
8.20.040     Receptacles – Placement
8.20.050     Receptacles – Use
8.20.060     Receptacles – Damaging
8.20.070     Removal of Litter
8.20.080     Mandatory Litter Bags
8.20.090     Sweeping Litter into Gutter Prohibited
8.20.100     Merchants’ Duty to Keep Sidewalks Free of Litter
8.20.110     Owner to Maintain Premises Free of Litter
8.20.112     Maintaining Premises to Be Free of Vegetation That Creates a Public Safety Hazard
8.20.120     Throwing or Distributing Commercial Handbills in Public Places
8.20.130     Placing Commercial and Non-commercial Handbills on Vehicles
8.20.140     Depositing Commercial and Non-commercial Handbills on Uninhabited or Vacant Property
8.20.150     Prohibiting Distribution of Handbills where Properly Posted
8.20.160     Distributing Commercial and Non-commercial Handbills at Inhabited Private Residences
8.20.170     Litter Thrown by Persons in Vehicles
8.20.180     Vehicle Loading
8.20.190     City Inspections for Litter Receptacles
8.20.200     Enforcement Officers and Procedures
8.20.210     Purpose
8.20.220     Interpretation
8.20.230     Penalties

8.20.010 Short Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be commonly referred to and cited as the “Uniform Litter Control Code.” (Ord. 1228, 1974)

8.20.020 Definitions.
As used in this Uniform Litter Control Code, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following terms have the following meanings. All words used in the present tense include the future and past tense; all words in the plural number include the singular number, and all words in the singular number include the plural number. The word “shall” is always mandatory and not merely directory.
A. “City” means the City of Snohomish, Washington.
B. “Commercial handbill” is any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature, excluding newspapers:
    1. Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity, or thing; or
    2. Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; or
    3. Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind for which an admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; but the terms of this clause shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, when either of the same is held, given, or takes place in connection with the dissemination of information which is not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety, and good order; provided that nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving, or taking place of any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, without a license, where such license is or may be required by any law of this state, or under any ordinance of this City; or
    4. Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
C. “Highway” for the purpose of this chapter is synonymous with and includes street, road, and alley.
D. “Litter” means all solid wastes including but not limited to containers, packages, wrapping, printed matter, or other material thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, but not including the wastes of the primary processes of mining, logging, sawmilling, farming, or manufacturing.
E. “Litter bag” means a bag, sack, or other container made of any material which is large enough to serve as a receptacle for litter inside the vehicle or watercraft of any person.
F. “Litter receptacle” means those containers meeting minimum requirements of state regulations of the State Department of Ecology.
G. “Newspaper” is any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office Department of the United States, in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and in addition thereto, means and includes any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four issues per year, and sold to the public.
H. “Non commercial handbill” is any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of a commercial handbill or newspaper.
I. “Park” is a park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center, or any other area in the City, devoted to active or passive outdoor recreation.
J. “Person” is any individual, political subdivision, government agency, municipality, industry, public or private corporation, co partnership, association, firm, or other entity, whatsoever.
K. “Private residence” means any privately owned yard, grounds, walk, driveway, dwelling, house, building, or other structure, including appurtenant porches, steps, or vestibules used or designed either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether single family, duplex, or multiple, and whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant.
L. “Public place” means any area that is used or held out for use by the public whether owned or operated by public or private interests.
M. “Road” for the purpose of this chapter is synonymous with and includes street, highway, and alley.
N. “Solid waste” means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid and semisolid wastes including garbage, rubbish, ashes, industrial wastes, swill, demolition and construction wastes, abandoned vehicles or parts thereof, and discarded commodities.
O. “State regulations” means the regulations duly promulgated and adopted by the State Department of Ecology pursuant to Chapter 34.04 RCW and codified or prepared for codification as part of the Washington Administrative Code, copies of the applicable portions of which are marked as Exhibit “A” and by this reference are incorporated herein as if set forth in full.
P. “Street” for the purpose of this chapter is synonymous with and includes road, highway, and alley.
Q. “Vehicle” includes every device capable of being moved upon a public street and in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public street, excepting devices moved by human or animal power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
R. “Watercraft” means any boat, ship, vessel, barge, or other floating craft. (Ord. 1228, 1974)

8.20.030 Litter in General.
No person shall throw, drop, deposit, discard, or otherwise dispose of litter upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or any other public place in the City or upon a private residence or other private property not owned by him, or in any waters within the jurisdiction of the City whether from a vehicle or otherwise except:
A. When such property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or the City for the disposal of garbage and refuse, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to so use such property; or
B. Into a litter receptacle or other container in such manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried away or deposited by the elements upon any part of said public place, private residence, or other private property; or
C. When such person is the owner or does have control or custody of the property, or has prior consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of said owner or tenant and provided said litter will not cause a public nuisance or be in violation of any other state or local laws, rules, or regulations.
Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and the fine or bail forfeiture for such violation shall not be less than ten dollars for each offense, and, in addition thereto, in the sound discretion of the court, such person may be directed by the court to pick up and remove from any public place or any private residence or other property, with permission of the legal owner or other person having legal possession, upon which it is established by competent evidence that such person has deposited litter, any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence. (Ord. 1228, 1974)

8.20.040 Receptacles – Placement.
A. Litter receptacles shall be placed in all parks, trailer parks in respect to the service of transient habitation, gasoline service stations, tavern parking lots, shopping centers, grocery store parking lots, marinas, boat launching areas, beaches, bathing areas, and other such public places in numbers appropriate to need as specified by state regulation.
B. It shall be the responsibility of any person owning or operating any establishment or public place in which litter receptacles are required by this section to procure and place and maintain such litter receptacles at their own expense on the premises in accord with such state regulations.
C. Penalty. Any person who fails to place such litter receptacles on the premises in the numbers and design required by state regulation, violating the provisions of this section, shall be subject to a fine of ten dollars for each day of violation. (Ord. 1228, 1974)

8.20.050 Receptacles – Use.
A. Persons placing litter in litter receptacles shall do so in such manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place or upon any private residence or other private property.
B. Litter receptacles placed on sidewalks and other public places shall be used only for such litter material as persons may have for disposal while passing along the street or other public places and in no event shall be used for the disposal of other solid waste accumulated in residences or places of business. (Ord. 1228, 1974)

8.20.060 Receptacles – Damaging.
A. It is unlawful for any person to willfully damage or deface any litter receptacle of another person.
B. Penalty. Upon conviction for such violation such violator shall be subject to a fine of one hundred dollars for each such violation. (Ord. 1228, 1974)

8.20.070 Removal of Litter.
It shall be the responsibility of the local municipality, other agency, or person owning or maintaining the same for the removal of litter from litter receptacles placed in parks, beaches, campgrounds, and other public places. (Ord. 1228, 1974)

8.20.080 Mandatory Litter Bags.
The owner and person in possession of all vehicles or watercraft shall keep and use a litter bag in said vehicle or watercraft at all times, which litter bag shall be maintained in such vehicle or watercraft in a place in which the same may be viewed from the outside of such vehicle or watercraft whether or not said vehicle or watercraft is locked or otherwise secured from entry. (Ord. 1228, 1974)

8.20.090 Sweeping Litter into Gutter Prohibited.
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, alley, or other public place the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalks in front of their premises free of litter. (Ord. 1228, 1974)

8.20.100 Merchants’ Duty to Keep Sidewalks Free of Litter.
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, or other public place the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business within the City shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business premises free of litter. (Ord. 1228, 1974)

8.20.110 Owner to Maintain Premises Free of Litter.
The owner or person in control of any private residence or other private property shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter. (Ord. 1228, 1974)

8.20.112 Maintaining Premises to Be Free of Vegetation That Creates a Public Safety Hazard.
A. Trees, shrubs, grass, weeds, and other landscaping shall not overhang the public sidewalk by less than nine (9) feet or grow in such a manner as to impede pedestrian circulation.
B. Trees, shrubs, grass, weeds, and other landscaping shall not overhang the public street by less than twelve (12) feet or grow in such a manner as to impede vehicular circulation.
C. Brush, grass, weeds, and other landscaping on private property shall not be allowed to reach a condition so that it constitutes a fire hazard or otherwise constitutes a menace to the public safety, health or welfare.
D. Areas within five (5) feet of an emergency vehicle access road or driveway shall be kept clear of non-fire-resistant vegetation growth.
E. The owner and the occupant of private property shall be responsible for compliance with these requirements. The owner and the occupant of property abutting a public street shall be responsible for compliance with these requirements upon any property lying between the private property line and the paved portion of a public right-of-way. (Ord. 1507, 1982; Ord. 2374, 2019)

8.20.120 Throwing or Distributing Commercial Handbills in Public Places.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or non-commercial handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street, or other public place within the City. Nor shall any person hand out or distribute or sell any commercial handbill in any public place; provided however, that it is not unlawful on any sidewalk, street, or other public place within the City for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any non-commercial handbill to any person willing to accept it. (Ord. 1228, 1974)

8.20.130 Placing Commercial and Non-commercial Handbills on Vehicles.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or non-commercial handbill in or upon any vehicle; provided however, that it is not unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute without charge to the receiver thereof, a non-commercial handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing to accept it. (Ord. 1228, 1974)

8.20.140 Depositing Commercial and Non-commercial Handbills on Uninhabited or Vacant Property.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or non-commercial handbill in or upon any private residence or other private property which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant. (Ord. 1228, 1974)

8.20.150 Prohibiting Distribution of Handbills where Properly Posted.
No person shall throw, deposit, or distribute any commercial or non-commercial handbill upon any private residence or other private property, if requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on said residence or property in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof, a sign bearing the words: “No Trespassing, “No Peddlers or Agents,” “No Advertisement” or any similar notice, indicating in any manner that the occupants of said residence or property do not desire to be molested or have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any such handbills left upon such premises. (Ord. 1228, 1974)

8.20.160 Distributing Commercial and Non-commercial Handbills at Inhabited Private Residences.
A. No person shall throw, deposit, or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon a private residence which is inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant, or other person then present in or upon such private residence; provided however, that in case of an inhabited private residence which is not posted, as provided in this chapter such person, unless requested by anyone upon such residence not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private residence, if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such residence or sidewalks, streets, or other public places, and except that mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by federal postal law or regulations.
B. Exemption for Mail and Newspapers. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers (as defined herein) except that newspapers shall be placed on private residences or other private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place or upon private residences or other private property. (Ord. 1228, 1974)

8.20.170 Litter Thrown by Persons in Vehicles.
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or otherwise deposit litter upon any street or other public place or upon any private residence or private property. (Ord. 1228, 1974)

8.20.180 Vehicle Loading.
A. No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any public street unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of its load from dropping, shifting, leaking, or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand or gravel may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or water or other substance may be sprinkled on a roadway surface in the cleaning or maintaining of such roadway by public authority having jurisdiction for the same or by persons under contract or other authorization by such public authority.
B. Any person owning or operating a vehicle from which any glass or other objects of its load have fallen or escaped, which would constitute an obstruction or injure a vehicle or otherwise endanger travel upon such public street shall immediately cause said public street to be cleaned of all such glass or other objects and shall pay any cost therefor. (Ord. 1228, 1974)

8.20.190 City Inspections for Litter Receptacles.
A. At such times as the fire department or other local fire control agency makes routine or other fire inspections within the City, it shall also be the duty of the fire department to inspect all such inspected premises to assure compliance with the requirements for placing and maintaining litter receptacles as required by this chapter. In the event violations of this chapter are found, members of the fire department are authorized to issue citations and the other legal process authorized in this chapter as in the case of police and other law enforcement personnel.
B. The building department shall not approve occupancy of any building, structure, or other improvement for new construction or modification to any existing building, structure, or other improvement for which a building permit is required, nor give final inspection approval to any such building, structure, or other improvement, until litter receptacles as herein required have been set in place on the subject property. In the event violations of this chapter are found, members of the building department are authorized to issue citations and other legal process authorized in this chapter as in the case of police and other law enforcement personnel. (Ord. 1228, 1974)

8.20.200 Enforcement Officers and Procedures.
Enforcement of this chapter may be by any police officer or other law enforcement officer, fire department, and building department personnel, jurisdictional health department personnel, and those public employees charged with the responsibility of operating and maintaining all public places within the provisions of this chapter. All such enforcement officers are hereby empowered to issue citations to and/or arrest without warrant, persons violating the provisions of this chapter. Said enforcement officers may serve and execute all warrants, citations, and other process issued by the courts. In addition, mailing by registered mail of such warrant, citation or other process to the last known place of residence of the offender shall be deemed as personal service upon the person charged. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit citizens' complaints or arrests as may be otherwise permitted under applicable state regulations, state statute, ordinance, or court rule. (Ord. 1228, 1974)

8.20.210 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to accomplish litter control in the City and pursuant to the general laws of the State of Washington to adopt basically uniform and coordinated litter control local legislation throughout the state. This chapter is intended to place upon all persons within the City, in a cooperative and coordinated statewide effort, the duty of contributing to the public cleanliness of the City and appearance in order to promote the public health, safety, and welfare and to protect the economic interests of the people of the City against unsanitary and unsightly conditions. It is further the intent of this chapter to protect the people against the health and safety menace and the expense incident to the littering of the streets and public places by the promiscuous and uncontrolled distribution of advertising matter and commercial and noncommercial handbills. (Ord. 1228, 1974)

8.20.220 Interpretation.
In the event any other City ordinance, whether or not codified, is in conflict with any of the terms of this chapter, the more stringent provisions shall be construed as applicable. (Ord. 1228, 1974)

8.20.230 Penalties.
Violation of this Chapter shall be considered a civil violation pursuant to SMC 1.01.080 and Chapter 1.14 SMC, except as otherwise provided therein. (Ord. 1507, 1982; Ord. 2155, 2008)

Chapter 8.21 REUSABLE BAGS

Sections:
8.21.010     Definitions
8.21.020     Regulations
8.21.030     Exemptions
8.21.040     Violations
8.21.050     Severability
8.21.060     General Duty
Code reviser’s note: Section 5 of Ord. 2360 provides, “This Ordinance shall become effective January 1, 2020.”

8.21.010 Definitions.
A. “Compostable” means that the product completely breaks down into a stable product due to the action of microorganisms in a controlled, aerobic commercial process that results in a material safe and desirable as a soil amendment meeting the compost quality standards found under WAC 173-350-220 (as currently enacted or later amended) for metals, physical parameters, pathogens, manufactured inert material, and other testing parameters set by the local Health Department, has been found to degrade satisfactorily at the composting facility receiving the material, meets standard specification ASTM D6400, and has been certified as compostable by the Biodegradable Products Institute or similar national or international certification authority.
B. “Carryout bag” means any bag that is provided by a retail establishment at the check stand, cash register, point of sale or other point of departure to a customer for use to transport or carry away purchases such as merchandise, goods or food from the retail establishment. Carryout bags do not include:
    1. Bags used by consumers inside stores to package bulk items, such as fruit, vegetables, nuts, grains, candy, greeting cards or small hardware items such as nails, bolts or screws, contain or wrap frozen foods, meat or fish regardless of whether they are prepackaged, contain or wrap flowers, potted plants or other items where dampness may be a problem, contain unwrapped prepared foods or bakery goods, contain prescription drugs; or
    2. A bag used to protect a purchased item from damaging or contaminating other purchased items when placed in a recyclable paper bag or reusable bag, such as prepared take-out foods or prepared liquids intended for consumption away from the retail establishment; or
    3. Newspaper bags, door-hanger bags, tire bags, laundry-dry cleaning bags or bags sold in packages containing multiple bags for uses such as food storage, garbage, pet waste or yard waste.
C. “Recycled paper carryout bag” means a paper carryout bag provided by a store to a customer at the point-of-sale that meets all of the following requirements:
    1. Except as provided in subsection (C)(2) of this section, the paper carryout bag contains at least an average of forty (40) percent postconsumer recycled materials;
    2. An eight (8) pound or smaller recycled paper bag shall contain a minimum of twenty (20) percent postconsumer recycled material;
    3. The paper carryout bag is accepted for recycling in curbside programs in a majority of households that have access to curbside recycling programs in the City;
    4. The paper carryout bag is capable of composting, consistent with the timeline and specifications of the American Society of Testing and Material (ASTM) Standard D6400, as published in Master Environmental Assessment on Single Use and Reusable Bags, March 2010; and
    5. Printed on the paper carryout bag is the minimum percentage of postconsumer content.
D. “Retail establishment” means any person, corporation, partnership, business, facility, vendor, organization or individual that sells or provides merchandise, goods, or materials, including, without limitation, clothing, food, or personal items of any kind, directly to a customer: retail establishment includes, by way of example, and not limitation, any grocery store, department store, hardware store, pharmacy, liquor store, restaurant, catering truck, convenience store, and any other retail store or vendor, including temporary ones at farmers markets, street fairs, and festivals.
E. “Reusable carryout bag” means a bag made of cloth or other material with handles that is specifically designed and manufactured for long-term multiple reuse and meets all of the following requirements:
    1. Has a minimum lifetime of one hundred twenty-five (125) uses, which for purposes of this subsection, means the capacity of carrying a minimum of twenty-two (22) pounds one hundred twenty-five (125) times over a distance of at least one hundred seventy-five (175) feet;
    2. Is machine washable or made from a material that can be cleaned or disinfected; and
    3. If made of film plastic, in a minimum of at least 2.25 mils thick.
F. “Single-use plastic carryout bag” means any bag that is less than 2.25 mils thick and is made from plastic or any nonrenewable resource.
G. “Pass-through charge” means a charge to be collected by retailers from their customers when providing plastic or recycled paper carryout bags, and retained by retailers to offset the cost of bags and other costs related to the pass-through charge. (Ord. 2360, 2019)

8.21.020 Regulations.
A. No retail establishment in the City shall provide a carryout bag to a customer unless otherwise permitted pursuant to this chapter.
B. No retail establishment shall distribute a carryout bag at any City facility, City-managed concession, City-sponsored event, or City-permitted event unless otherwise permitted pursuant to this chapter.
C. Retail establishments in the City may, subject to this ordinance, provide to a customer at the point-of-sale a reusable carryout bag or a recycled paper carryout bag.
D. No retail establishment in the City shall provide a paper carryout bag with a manufacturer’s stated capacity of one-eighth (1/8) barrel(eight hundred eighty-two (882) cubic inches) or larger that is not a recycled paper carryout bag.
E. A retail establishment may make reusable carryout bags available to customers through sale.
F. No retail establishment in the City shall use or provide polyethylene or other noncompostable plastic film bags tinted green or brown for customers to bag products in stores, as carryout bags, or for home delivery.
G. Any film bags meeting the definition of compostable that retail establishments provide to customers for food or other products, such as vegetables bagged in stores prior to checkout, must be tinted green or brown and shall be clearly labeled “COMPOSTABLE,” including language following the Federal Trade Commission’s “Green Guides.”
H. No film bag that retail establishments provide to customers to bag products in stores, as carryout bags, or for home delivery may be labeled with the term “biodegradable,” “degradable,” “decomposable,” or any similar terms, or in any way imply that the product will break down, fragment, biodegrade, or decompose in a landfill or other environment.
I. Each retail establishment that provides a customer with a paper recyclable carryout bag shall collect a pass-through charge of not less than ten cents ($0.10) for each recyclable paper carryout bag provided. (Ord. 2360, 2019)

8.21.030 Exemptions.
A. Notwithstanding the requirements contained in this ordinance, a retailer may not collect a pass-through charge from anyone with a voucher or electronic benefits card issued under programs including, but not limited to, Women Infants and Children (WIC); Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF); Federal Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), also known as Basic Food; and the Washington State Food Assistance Program (FAP).
B. Food banks and other food assistance programs are exempt from the requirements of this chapter.
C. The Mayor or designee may exempt a retail establishment from the requirements of this chapter for up to a one (1) year period, upon a written request by the retail establishment showing that the conditions of this chapter would cause undue hardship. An “undue hardship” shall only be found in:
    1. Circumstances or situations unique to the particular retail establishment, such that there are no reasonable alternatives to single-use plastic carryout bags or a pass-through charge cannot be collected; or
    2. Circumstances or situations unique to the retail establishment, such that compliance with the requirements of this chapter would deprive a person of a legally protected right.
D. If a retail establishment requires an exemption beyond the initial exemption period, the retail establishment must reapply prior to the end of the exemption period and must demonstrate continued undue hardship as to why the exemption should be extended. Extensions may only be granted for intervals not to exceed one (1) year.
E. An exemption request shall include all information necessary for the City to make its decision, including, but not limited to, documentation showing the factual support for the claimed exemption. The Mayor or designee may require the applicant to provide additional information to permit the City to determine facts regarding the exemption request.
F. The Mayor or designee may, in his or her sole discretion, approve the exemption request, in whole or in part, with or without conditions.
G. Exemption decisions are effective immediately. A party aggrieved by a final decision concerning the request for an exemption may appeal or seek review of the decision in accordance with applicable law. Unless another period of time applies under applicable law or court rule, an appeal of the decision must be filed within twenty-one (21) calendar days from the date the final decision was served personally or placed in the United States mail, postage prepaid and properly addressed.
H. The City Council may, by resolution, establish a fee for exemption requests. The fee shall be sufficient to cover the costs of processing the exemption request. (Ord. 2360, 2019)

8.21.040 Violations.
A. It shall be unlawful and shall constitute a civil infraction to violate or be in conflict with this ordinance. Each day, defined as the twenty-four (24) hour period beginning at 12:01 a.m., in which violation of this ordinance occurs, shall constitute a separate violation.
B. Any person, firm, business, corporation, or association or any agent thereof who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the provisions of SMC 1.01.080.
C. Upon a first violation of any part of this chapter, a notice of violation may issue to the offending person, firm, business, corporation, or association or any agent thereof. The notice of violation shall contain the date of and alleged type of violation. The notice of violation shall be regarded as a warning and no other sanctions shall be implemented. Notice shall be served upon the premises to the highest ranking employee of the business currently on duty at the time of delivery.
D. If after the issuance of a first notice of violation the offender commits subsequent violations, the penalty for each offense shall be a maximum fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
E. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any retail establishment to penalize, discipline, or discriminate against any employee for performing any duty necessary to comply with this chapter. (Ord. 2360, 2019)

8.21.050 Severability.
Should any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance or its application to any person or situation be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance or its application to any other person or situation. The City Council of the City of Snohomish hereby declares that it would have adopted this ordinance and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, clauses, phrases or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 2360, 2019)

8.21.060 General Duty.
It is expressly the purpose of this ordinance to provide for and promote the health, safety and welfare of the general public and not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited by the terms of this ordinance. It is the specific intent of this ordinance that no provision or any term used in this ordinance is intended to impose any duty whatsoever upon the City or any of its officers or employees. Nothing contained in this ordinance is intended nor shall be construed to create or form the basis of any liability on the part of the City, or its officers, employees or agents, for any injury or damage resulting from any action or inaction on the part of the City related in any manner to the enforcement of this ordinance by its officers, employees or agents. (Ord. 2360, 2019)

Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY
Chapter 9.04 General Provisions
    9.04.010     Short Title
    9.04.020     Effective Date
    9.04.030     Not Retroactive
    9.04.040     Severability
    9.04.050     Classification of Crimes – Penalties
    9.04.060     Restitution
    9.04.070     Collection of Judgment
    9.04.080     Civil Contempt
    9.04.090     Costs of Prosecution – Credit for Work or Imprisonment
    9.04.100     Age of Capacity
    9.04.110     Statute of Limitations
    9.04.120     Presumption of Innocence
    9.04.130     Arrests – Citations – Warrants
    9.04.140     Adoption of State Statutes by Reference
    9.04.150     Automatic Amendments
    9.04.160     Definitions
    9.04.170     Fingerprinting
    9.04.175     Background Checks
    9.04.180     False Fire Alarm Response
Chapter 9.08 Principles of Liability
    9.08.005     Statutes incorporated by reference
Chapter 9.12 Insanity
    9.12.005     Statute incorporated by reference
Chapter 9.16 Defenses
    9.16.005     Statutes incorporated by reference
Chapter 9.28 Anticipatory Offenses
    9.28.005     Statutes incorporated by reference
Chapter 9.36 Assault
    9.36.005     Statutes Incorporated by Reference
Chapter 9.37 Harassment
    9.37.010     Statutes Incorporated by Reference
Chapter 9.38 Domestic Violence
    9.38.010     Statutes Incorporated by Reference
    9.38.020     Statutes Incorporated by Reference
Chapter 9.41 Weapons Control
    9.41.005     Statutes Incorporated by Reference
    9.41.010     Disposition of Confiscated and Forfeited Firearms Proceeds
Chapter 9.48 Arson, Reckless Burning and Malicious Mischief
    9.48.005     Statutes incorporated by reference
Chapter 9.52 Trespass Vehicle Prowling
    9.52.005     Statutes incorporated by reference
Chapter 9.56 Theft - Shoplifting
    9.56.005     Statutes Incorporated by Reference
Chapter 9.60 Fraud
    9.60.005     Statutes incorporated by reference
Chapter 9.68 Obscenity
    9.68.005     Statutes incorporated by reference
Chapter 9.72 Interference with Official Proceedings
    9.72.005     Statutes Incorporated by Reference
    9.72.010     Criminal contempt
Chapter 9.76 Obstructing Governmental Operation
    9.76.005     Statutes incorporated by reference
    9.76.010     Possessing Contraband
Chapter 9.77 Abuse of Office
    9.77.010     Statute Incorporated by Reference
Chapter 9.84 Public Disturbance Disorderly Conduct
    9.84.005     Statutes incorporated by reference
    9.84.030     Disorderly conduct
Chapter 9.86 Crimes Relating to United States and State Flags
    9.86.005     Statutes incorporated by reference
    9.86.011     Penalty
Chapter 9.88 Public Indecency Prostitution Sex Crimes
    9.88.005     Statutes Incorporated by Reference
Chapter 9.89 Alcoholic Beverage Control
    9.89.010     Statutes Incorporated by Reference
Chapter 9.90 Offenses By and Against Juveniles
    9.90.005     Statutes incorporated by reference
    9.90.010     Leaving Children Under Age Seven (7) in a Parked Vehicle
    9.90.040     Minor misrepresenting age
    9.90.060     Violators under eighteen
Chapter 9.91 Registration of Sex Offenders
    9.91.010     Registration of Sex Offenders
Chapter 9.92 Controlled Substance
    9.92.005     Statutes Incorporated by Reference
Chapter 9.94 Public Nuisances
    9.94.010     Definitions
    9.94.020     Prohibited Conduct
    9.94.030     Nuisances Declared
    9.94.050     Liability for Continuing Nuisance
    9.94.070     Civil Penalties
    9.94.100     Severability
    9.94.110     No Special Duty Created
Chapter 9.96 Graffiti Nuisance
    9.96.010     Graffiti Deemed Nuisance
    9.96.020     Definitions
    9.96.030     Continued Presence of Graffiti an Infraction
    9.96.040     Graffiti – Notice of Removal
    9.96.050     Appeal
    9.96.060     Removal by City
    9.96.070     City Cost Recoverable – Debt – Lien
    9.96.075     Sale or Gift of Aerosol Paint and Indelible Markers
    9.96.077     Rewards
    9.96.080     Severability
Chapter 9.98 Camping
    9.98.010     Unlawful Camping
    9.98.020     Storage of Personal Property in Public Places
    9.98.030     Definitions
    9.98.040     Penalty for Violations
    9.98.050     No Specific Duty Created
Chapter 9.100 Cannabis Nuisances
    9.100.010    Cannabis Activities Deemed Nuisances
    9.100.020    Definitions
    9.100.030    Cannabis Nuisances Declared
    9.100.040    Civil Remedy
    9.100.050    Enforcement
    9.100.060    No Special Duty
    9.100.070    Severability
Chapter 9.110 Pedestrian or Vehicular Interference
    9.110.010    Purpose
    9.110.020    Definitions
    9.110.030    Pedestrian or Vehicular Interference Prohibited
    9.110.040    Penalty

Chapter 9.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:
9.04.010     Short Title
9.04.020     Effective Date
9.04.030     Not Retroactive
9.04.040     Severability
9.04.050     Classification of Crimes – Penalties
9.04.060     Restitution
9.04.070     Collection of Judgment
9.04.080     Civil Contempt
9.04.090     Costs of Prosecution – Credit for Work or Imprisonment
9.04.100     Age of Capacity
9.04.110     Statute of Limitations
9.04.120     Presumption of Innocence
9.04.130     Arrests – Citations – Warrants
9.04.140     Adoption of State Statutes by Reference
9.04.150     Automatic Amendments
9.04.160     Definitions
9.04.170     Fingerprinting
9.04.175     Background Checks
9.04.180     False Fire Alarm Response

9.04.010 Short Title.
This title shall be known and may be cited as the Snohomish Criminal Code. (Ord. 1390, 1978)

9.04.020 Effective Date.
The provisions of this title shall apply to any offense committed on or after March 7, 1978 which is defined in this title, unless otherwise expressly provided or unless the context otherwise requires, and shall also apply to any defense to prosecution for such offense. (Ord. 1390, 1978)

9.04.030 Not Retroactive.
The provisions of this title do not apply to or govern the construction of and punishment for any offense committed prior to the effective date of this title, or to the construction and application of any defense to a prosecution for such an offense. Such an offense must be construed and punished according to the provisions of law existing at the time of the commission thereof in the same manner as if this title had not been enacted. (Ord. 1390, 1978)

9.04.040 Severability.
If any provision of this title, or its application to any person or circumstances held invalid, the remainder of the title, or the application of the provision to other persons or circumstances is not affected, and to this end the provisions of this title are declared to be severable. (Ord. 1390, 1978)

9.04.050 Classification of Crimes – Penalties.
All offenses defined by this title or by any state statute which is incorporated herein by reference, constitute crimes:
1. Any person convicted of a gross misdemeanor shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $5,000.00 or by imprisonment in jail for a term not to exceed 364 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
2. Unless otherwise provided, any person convicted of violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or by imprisonment in jail for a term not to exceed 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 1390, 1978; Ord. 2229, 2011)

9.04.060 Restitution.
If a person has gained money or property or caused a victim to lose money or property through the commission of a crime, upon conviction thereof the court, in lieu of imposing the fine authorized by Section 9.04.050 of this section, may order the defendant to pay an amount, fixed by the court, not to exceed double the amount of the defendant's gain or the victim's loss from the commission of a crime. Such amount shall be used to provide restitution to the victim at the order of the court. In such case the court shall make a finding as to the amount of the defendant's gain or victim's loss from the crime, and if the record does not contain sufficient evidence to support such finding, the court may conduct a hearing upon the issue. For the purposes of this section, the terms “gain” or “loss” refer to the amount of money or the value of property or services gained or lost. (Ord. 1390, 1978)

9.04.070 Collection of Judgment.
Upon a judgment for fine and costs rendered on a conviction, execution may be issued against the property of a defendant and returned in the same manner as in civil actions. (Ord. 1390, 1978)

9.04.080 Civil Contempt.
A court may, in its discretion, treat any intentional failure to comply with a court order in respect to fines or costs or both, upon conviction, as civil contempt. (Ord. 1390, 1978)

9.04.090 Costs of Prosecution – Credit for Work or Imprisonment.
Whenever anyone is convicted of an offense under this title, in addition to the fine imposed, he must pay the costs of prosecution. Costs of prosecution include any or all of the following: cost of docketing, cost of issuing the warrant, cost for mileage in processing the warrant, a fee for a personal recognizance bond, and costs for witness fees. If in default, the defendant may be imprisoned until such fine and costs of prosecution are paid or worked out at a community service project designated by the court or the city. A defendant shall be given credit for ten dollars per each full day of imprisonment or twenty-four dollars for each full day of work on a community service project. (Ord. 1390, 1978)

9.04.100 Age of Capacity.
Children under the age of eight years are incapable of committing crime. Children of eight and under twelve years of age are presumed to be incapable of committing crime, but this presumption may be removed by proof that they have sufficient capacity to understand the act or neglect, and to know that it was wrong. Whenever in legal proceedings it becomes necessary to determine the age of a child, he may be produced for inspection, to enable the court or jury to determine the age thereby; and the court may also direct his examination by one or more physicians, whose opinion shall be competent evidence upon the question of his age. (Ord. 1390, 1978)

9.04.110 Statute of Limitations.
A. Prosecutions for criminal offenses shall not be commenced after the periods proscribed in this section.
    1. No gross misdemeanor may be prosecuted more than two years after its commission.
    2. No misdemeanor may be prosecuted more than one year after its commission.
B. The periods of limitation proscribed in subsection 1 of this section do not run during any time when the person charged is not usually and publicly resident within in this state.
C. If, before the end of a period of limitation proscribed in subsection 1 of this section, an indictment has been found or a complaint or information has been filed, and the indictment, complaint, or information is set aside, then the period of limitation is extended by a period equal to the length of time from the finding or filing to the setting aside. (Ord. 1763, 1994)

9.04.120 Presumption of Innocence.
Every person charged with the commission of a crime is presumed innocent unless proved guilty. No person may be convicted of a crime unless each element of such crime is proved by competent evidence beyond a reasonable doubt. (Ord. 1390, 1978)

9.04.130 Arrests – Citations – Warrants.
A peace officer may arrest a person without a warrant if the officer has probable cause to believe that such person has:
A. Committed a crime in the officer's presence; or
B. Committed a crime not in the officer's presence if allowed by RCW 10.31.100 as now or hereafter amended.
Whenever a person is arrested for a violation of the law, the arresting officer, or any other authorized peace officer, may serve upon the arrested person a citation and notice to appear, in lieu of continued custody, as provided by the Criminal Rules for Courts of Limited Jurisdiction, as now or hereafter amended.
Warrants shall issue and bail be set for persons who violate their promise to appear in court as provided by the Criminal Rules for Courts of Limited Jurisdiction, as now or hereafter amended. The Criminal Rules for Courts of Limited Jurisdiction shall apply to procedures relating to arrests, citations, warrants and other criminal proceedings. (Ord. 1763, 1994)

9.04.140 Adoption of State Statutes by Reference.
Statutes of the state of Washington specified in this title are adopted by reference as and for a portion of the criminal code of the City of Snohomish as if set forth in full, with the exception of the penalty provisions thereof which are superseded by the penalty provisions of this title as set forth in Section 9.04.050 of this chapter. (Ord. 1390, 1978)

9.04.150 Automatic Amendments.
The amendment or repeal by the Washington State Legislature of any of the statutes adopted in this title by reference shall be deemed to automatically amend this title in conformity therewith, and it shall not be necessary for the legislative authority of the City to take any action with respect to such amendments or repealers. (Ord. 1390, 1978)

9.04.160 Definitions.
The provisions of RCW 9A.04.110 (Definitions) are adopted by reference. (Ord. 1390, 1978)

9.04.170 Fingerprinting.
Any person that requires fingerprinting shall pay the appropriate fee as set by resolution of the City Council. The fee shall cover two cards. (Ord. 2299, 2016)

9.04.175 Background Checks.
Any person that requires a background check shall pay the fee set by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 2299, 2016)

9.04.180 False Fire Alarm Response.
Any person that causes a response to a false fire alarm shall pay the appropriate fee as set by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 2299, 2016)

Chapter 9.08 PRINCIPLES OF LIABILITY

Sections:
9.08.005     Statutes incorporated by reference

9.08.005 Statutes incorporated by reference.
The provisions of the following state statutes are incorporated by reference in this chapter:
+---------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.08.010 | (general requirements of culpability).                 |
+---------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.08.020 | (liability for conduct of another complicity).         |
+---------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.08.030 | (criminal liability of corporations and persons acting |
|               | or under a duty to act in their behalf).               |
+---------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
(Ord. 1390, 1978)

Chapter 9.12 INSANITY

Sections:
9.12.005     Statute incorporated by reference

9.12.005 Statute incorporated by reference.
The provisions of RCW 9A.12.010, defense of insanity, are incorporated by reference in this chapter. (Ord. 1390, 1978)

Chapter 9.16 DEFENSES

Sections:
9.16.005     Statutes incorporated by reference

9.16.005 Statutes incorporated by reference.
The provisions of the following state statutes are incorporated by reference in this chapter:
+---------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.16.010 | (definitions)                                          |
+---------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.16.020 | (use of force when lawful)                             |
+---------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.16.060 | (duress)                                               |
+---------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.16.070 | (entrapment)                                           |
+---------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.16.080 | (action for being detained on mercantile establishment |
|               | premises for investigation “reasonable grounds” as     |
|               | defense)                                               |
+---------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.16.090 | (intoxication)                                         |
+---------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
(Ord. 1390, 1978)

Chapter 9.28 ANTICIPATORY OFFENSES

Sections:
9.28.005     Statutes incorporated by reference

9.28.005 Statutes incorporated by reference.
The provisions of the following state statutes are incorporated by reference in this chapter:
+---------------+--------------------------+
| RCW 9A.28.020 | (criminal attempt).      |
+---------------+--------------------------+
| RCW 9A.28.030 | (criminal solicitation). |
+---------------+--------------------------+
| RCW 9A.28.040 | (criminal conspiracy).   |
+---------------+--------------------------+
(Ord. 1390, 1978)

Chapter 9.36 ASSAULT

Sections:
9.36.005     Statutes Incorporated by Reference

9.36.005 Statutes Incorporated by Reference.
The provisions of the following state statutes are incorporated by reference in this chapter:
+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.36.041 | Assault in the Fourth Degree               |
+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.36.050 | Reckless Endangerment                      |
+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.36.070 | Coercion                                   |
+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.42.035 | Criminal Mistreatment in the Third Degree  |
+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.42.037 | Criminal Mistreatment in the Fourth Degree |
+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
(Ord. 1390, 1978; Ord. 1763, 1994; Ord. 2229, 2011)

Chapter 9.37 HARASSMENT

Sections:
9.37.010     Statutes Incorporated by Reference

9.37.010 Statutes Incorporated by Reference.
The following statutes regarding harassment are incorporated by reference:
+---------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9.61.230  | Telephone Calls to Harass, Intimidate, Torment or Embarrass |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9.61.240  | Permitting Telephone to be Used to Harass                   |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9.61.250  | Where Telephone Offense is Deemed to be Committed           |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9.61.260  | Cyberstalking                                               |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.46.010 | A Legislative Finding                                       |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.46.020 | Definition Penalties                                        |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.46.030 | Place Where Committed                                       |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.46.040 | Court Ordered Requirements Upon Person Charged With         |
|               | Crime Violation                                             |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.46.050 | Arraignment No Contact Order                                |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.46.060 | Crimes Included in Harassment                               |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.46.070 | Enforcement of Orders Restricting Contact                   |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.46.080 | Order Restricting Contact Violation                         |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.46.090 | Non Liability of Peace Officer                              |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.46.100 | Convicted Time When                                         |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.46.110 | Stalking                                                    |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 10.14.020 | Definitions                                                 |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 10.14.120 | Disobedience of Order Penalties                             |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 10.14.170 | Criminal Penalty                                            |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
(Ord. 2229, 2011)

Chapter 9.38 DOMESTIC VIOLENCE

Sections:
9.38.010     Statutes Incorporated by Reference
9.38.020     Statutes Incorporated by Reference

9.38.010 Statutes Incorporated by Reference.
The following statutes regarding Domestic Violence are incorporated by reference in this chapter:
+------------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 10.99.040(4) | Violation of a Pretrial No Contact Order in a Criminal     |
|                  | Domestic Violence Case                                     |
+------------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 10.99.050    | Violation of a No Contact Order Which is Part of a         |
|                  | Sentence in a Criminal Violence Case                       |
+------------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 26.09.300    | Violation of a Restraining Order Issued in a Dissolution   |
|                  | Proceeding                                                 |
+------------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 26.50.110    | Violation of a Protective Order Issued in a Civil Domestic |
|                  | Violence Proceeding                                        |
+------------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
Chap. 248, Sec. 3, Laws of 1996 Interfering with the reporting of domestic violence. (Ord. 1806, 1996)

9.38.020 Statutes Incorporated by Reference.
The following statutes regarding Custodial Interference in the Second Degree are incorporated by reference in this chapter:
+---------------+-------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.40.010 | Definitions                                     |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.40.070 | Custodial Interference in the Second Degree     |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.40.080 | Assessment of Costs; Defenses; Consent by Child |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------------+

Chapter 9.41 WEAPONS CONTROL

Sections:
9.41.005     Statutes Incorporated by Reference
9.41.010     Disposition of Confiscated and Forfeited Firearms Proceeds

9.41.005 Statutes Incorporated by Reference.
The provisions of the following state statutes are incorporated by reference in this chapter:
+---------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9.41.050  | Carrying Concealed Weapon                              |
+---------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9.41.060  | Exception                                              |
+---------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9.41.080  | Delivery to Minors and Others Forbidden                |
+---------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9.41.100  | Dealers to be Licensed                                 |
+---------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9.41.120  | Certain Transfers Forbidden                            |
+---------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9.41.130  | False Information Forbidden                            |
+---------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9.41.140  | Alterations of Identifying Marks                       |
+---------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9.41.150  | Exceptions                                             |
+---------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9.41.160  | Penalty                                                |
+---------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9.41.170  | Aliens Licensed to Carry Firearms                      |
+---------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9.41.230  | Aiming or Discharging Firearms                         |
+---------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9.41.240  | Use of Firearms by Minors                              |
+---------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9.41.250  | Dangerous Weapons                                      |
+---------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9.41.260  | Dangerous Exhibitions                                  |
+---------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9.41.270  | Carrying, Exhibiting, Displaying or Drawing Weapons    |
|               | Apparently Capable of Producing Bodily Harm            |
+---------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9.41.280  | Students Carrying Dangerous Weapons on School premises |
+---------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9.41.300  | Firearms Prohibited in Certain Places                  |
+---------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 77.16.250 | Loaded Firearms in Vehicles                            |
+---------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 77.16.260 | Shooting Firearms From Public Highway                  |
+---------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 77.16.290 | Law Enforcement Officers Exempt                        |
+---------------+--------------------------------------------------------+

9.41.010 Disposition of Confiscated and Forfeited Firearms Proceeds.
A. All firearms taken into custody of the Snohomish Police Department prior to July 1, 1993, and legally forfeited, shall be disposed of by the Snohomish Police Department as authorized by RCW 9.41.098(2)(b).
B. Firearms taken into custody of the Snohomish Police Department on or after July 1, 1993, and legally forfeited, shall be disposed of as follows:
    1. Firearms illegal for any person to possess shall be destroyed;
    2. Antique firearms and firearms recognized as curios, relics, and firearms of particular historical significance by the United States Treasury Department of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms shall be disposed of by auction or trade to licensed dealers and the proceeds thereof shall be used for the purchase of law enforcement equipment;
    3. Of the remaining firearms, at the option of the Chief of Police, the Snohomish Police Department may retain ten percent (10%) of the legally forfeited firearms for department use; and
    4. The balance of the firearms shall be sold or traded by the Snohomish Police Department to a legally qualified buyer or trader to acquire law enforcement equipment for the department.
C. This ordinance and the amendment creating Snohomish Municipal Code 9.41.010 shall apply to all firearms in the possession of the Snohomish Police Department on the effective date of this ordinance. (Ord. 2003, 2002)

Chapter 9.48 ARSON, RECKLESS BURNING AND MALICIOUS MISCHIEF

Sections:
9.48.005     Statutes incorporated by reference

9.48.005 Statutes incorporated by reference.
The provisions of the following state statutes are incorporated by reference in this chapter:
+---------------+----------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.48.010 | Definitions                                  |
+---------------+----------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.48.050 | Reckless burning                             |
+---------------+----------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.48.060 | Reckless burning defense                     |
+---------------+----------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.48.090 | Malicious mischief                           |
+---------------+----------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.48.100 | Malicious mischief “physical damage” defined |
+---------------+----------------------------------------------+
(Ord. 1390, 1978)

Chapter 9.52 TRESPASS VEHICLE PROWLING

Sections:
9.52.005     Statutes incorporated by reference

9.52.005 Statutes incorporated by reference.
The provisions of the following state statutes are incorporated by reference in this chapter:
+---------------+----------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.52.010 | Definitions                            |
+---------------+----------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.52.060 | Burglar Tools                          |
+---------------+----------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.52.070 | Criminal Trespass in the First Degree  |
+---------------+----------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.52.080 | Criminal Trespass in the Second Degree |
+---------------+----------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.52.090 | Criminal Trespass Defenses             |
+---------------+----------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.52.100 | Vehicle Prowling                       |
+---------------+----------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.52.120 | Computer Trespass                      |
+---------------+----------------------------------------+

Chapter 9.56 THEFT - SHOPLIFTING

Sections:
9.56.005     Statutes Incorporated by Reference

9.56.005 Statutes Incorporated by Reference.
The provisions of the following state statutes are incorporated by reference in this chapter:
+---------------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.56.010       | Definitions                                                |
+---------------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.56.020       | Theft Definition, Defense                                  |
+---------------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.56.050(1)    | Theft in the Third Degree                                  |
+---------------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.56.060(1)(3) | Unlawful Issuance of Checks or Drafts                      |
+---------------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.56.170       | Possessing stolen property in the Third Degree             |
+---------------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.56.180       | Obscuring Identity of a Machine                            |
+---------------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.56.220       | Theft of Cable Television Services                         |
+---------------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.56.230       | Unlawful Sale of Cable Television Services                 |
+---------------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.56.240       | Forfeiture and Disposal of Device Used to Commit Violation |
+---------------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.56.260       | Connection of Cable Converter                              |
+---------------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.56.270       | Shopping Cart Theft                                        |
+---------------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.56.330       | Possession of Another’s Identification                     |
+---------------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
(Ord. 1763, 1994; Ord. 2229, 2011)

Chapter 9.60 FRAUD

Sections:
9.60.005     Statutes incorporated by reference

9.60.005 Statutes incorporated by reference.
The provisions of the following state statutes are incorporated by reference in this chapter:
+------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.60.010    | Definitions                                               |
+------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.60.040(1) | Criminal Impersonation                                    |
+------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.60.050(1) | False Certification                                       |
+------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9.04.010     | False Advertising                                         |
+------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9.45.060     | Selling or Removing Encumbered, Leased or Rented Property |
+------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9.45.062     | Failure to Deliver Leased Property                        |
+------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9.45.070     | Mock Auctions                                             |
+------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9.45.080     | Fraudulent Removal of Property                            |
+------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9.45.090     | Knowingly Receiving Fraudulent Conveyance                 |
+------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9.45.100     | Fraud in Assignment for Benefit of Creditors              |
+------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9.45.120     | Using False Weights and Measures                          |
+------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9.45.150     | Concealing Foreign Matter in Merchandise                  |
+------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9.45.180     | Fraud in Operating Coin Box Telephone or Other Receptacle |
+------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9.45.190     | Manufacture or Sale of Slugs to be Used for Coins         |
+------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9.45.240(1)  | Fraud in Obtaining Telephone or Telegraph Service         |
+------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9.45.250     | Fraud in Obtaining Cable Television Services              |
+------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9.12.010     | Barratry                                                  |
+------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 48.30.270    | Insurance Fraud                                           |
+------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
(Ord. 1763, 1994)

Chapter 9.68 OBSCENITY

Sections:
9.68.005     Statutes incorporated by reference

9.68.005 Statutes incorporated by reference.
The provisions of the following state statutes are incorporated by reference in this chapter:
+--------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9.68.015 | Obscene Literature, Shows, Etc. Exemptions          |
+--------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9.68.030 | Indecent Articles, Etc.                             |
+--------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9.68.050 | Erotic Material Definitions                         |
+--------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9.68.060 | Sale, Distribution or Exhibition of Erotic Material |
+--------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9.68.070 | Affirmative Defenses                                |
+--------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9.68.080 | Unlawful Acts Relating to Minors                    |
+--------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9.68.100 | Exceptions for Libraries                            |
+--------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9.68.110 | Exceptions for Motion Picture Projectionists        |
+--------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9.68.130 | Display of Sexually Explicit Material               |
+--------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
(Ord. 1763, 1994)

Chapter 9.72 INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL PROCEEDINGS

Sections:
9.72.005     Statutes Incorporated by Reference
9.72.010     Criminal contempt

9.72.005 Statutes Incorporated by Reference.
The provisions of the following state statutes are incorporated by reference in this chapter:
+---------------+----------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.72.140 | Jury Tampering                   |
+---------------+----------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.72.150 | Tampering With Physical Evidence |
+---------------+----------------------------------+

9.72.010 Criminal contempt.
A person shall be guilty of criminal contempt by willfully committing one or more of the following acts:
A. Disorderly, contemptuous, or insolent behavior committed during the sitting of the Snohomish City Council, in its immediate view and presence and directly tending to interrupt its proceedings; or
B. Breach of the peace, noise, or other disturbance directly tending to interrupt the proceedings of the Snohomish City Council.
Criminal contempt is a gross misdemeanor. (Ord. 1763, 1994)

Chapter 9.76 OBSTRUCTING GOVERNMENTAL OPERATION

Sections:
9.76.005     Statutes incorporated by reference
9.76.010     Possessing Contraband

9.76.005 Statutes incorporated by reference.
The provisions of the following state statutes are incorporated by reference in this chapter:
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9.69.100  | Withholding Knowledge of Offense Against Child      |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.76.010 | Definitions                                         |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.76.020 | Obstructing a Law Enforcement Officer               |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.76.030 | Refusing to Summon Aid for a Peace Officer          |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.76.040 | Resisting an Arrest                                 |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.76.050 | Rendering Criminal Assistance Definitions           |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.76.060 | Relative Defined.                                   |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.76.080 | Rendering Criminal Assistance in the Second Degree. |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.76.090 | Rendering Criminal Assistance in the Third Degree   |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.76.100 | Compounding                                         |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.76.130 | Escape in the Third Degree                          |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.76.160 | Introducing Contraband                              |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.76.170 | Bail Jumping                                        |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.76.175 | Making a false or misleading statement to a public  |
|               | servant.                                            |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------+

9.76.010 Possessing Contraband.
Every person possessing contraband, as defined in RCW 9A.76.010, while said person is confined in the City jail, or in the custody of jail officers, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1763, 1994; Ord. 1806, 1996)

Chapter 9.77 ABUSE OF OFFICE

Sections:
9.77.010     Statute Incorporated by Reference

9.77.010 Statute Incorporated by Reference.
The following statutes regarding Abuse of Office is incorporated by reference.
+------------------+---------------------+
| RCW 9A.80.010(1) | Official Misconduct |
+------------------+---------------------+

Chapter 9.84 PUBLIC DISTURBANCE DISORDERLY CONDUCT

Sections:
9.84.005     Statutes incorporated by reference
9.84.030     Disorderly conduct

9.84.005 Statutes incorporated by reference.
The provisions of the following state statutes are incorporated by reference in this chapter:
+------------------+---------------------+
| RCW 9A.84.010(1) | Riot                |
+------------------+---------------------+
| RCW 9A.84.020    | Failure to Disperse |
+------------------+---------------------+
| RCW 9A.84.040(1) | False reporting     |
+------------------+---------------------+
(Ord. 1763, 1994)

9.84.030 Disorderly conduct.
A person is guilty of disorderly conduct if he or she:
A. Uses abusive, vulgar, profane, obscene or indecent language, or conducts himself or herself in an indecent manner, when such language or conduct intentionally creates a risk of assault; or
B. Intentionally disrupts any lawful assembly or meeting of persons without lawful authority; or
C. Intentionally obstructs vehicular or pedestrian traffic on streets or sidewalks without lawful authority; or
D. Fights or quarrels in a public place; or
E. Urinates or defecates in any public place other than a wash room or toilet; or
F. Suffers or permits in any building or place owned by him or her or under his or her control riotous or disorderly conduct or drunkenness or fighting to the annoyance of the public; or
G. Hitches or ties any animal or thing to, or obstructs, injures, connects with or opens, any fire hydrant in the City without a permit from the Chief of the Fire Department or other municipal officer; or
H. Drives or rides a horse or horses or other livestock in the City in such a manner as to endanger or to be likely to endanger any person or property, or drives or rides a horse or horses or other livestock upon any sidewalk in the city, except across a sidewalk on a street; or
I. Removes, destroys, tears down or defaces, either in whole or in part, or marks or writes upon, changes, obliterates or mars, or in any manner alters or changes the writing, printing or signature, or any part of the writing, printing or signature, upon any bulletin, legal notice or advertisement, poster or paper writing of the City lawfully posted or placed in the City, unless such person be an officer or employee of the City and is duly authorized to perform such acts. (Ord. 1763, 1994)

Chapter 9.86 CRIMES RELATING TO UNITED STATES AND STATE FLAGS

Sections:
9.86.005     Statutes incorporated by reference
9.86.011     Penalty

9.86.005 Statutes incorporated by reference.
The provisions of the following state statutes are incorporated by reference in this chapter:
+--------------+---------------------------------+
| RCW 9.86.010 | “Flags” defined                 |
+--------------+---------------------------------+
| RCW 9.86.020 | Improper use of flag prohibited |
+--------------+---------------------------------+
| RCW 9.86.030 | Desecration of flag             |
+--------------+---------------------------------+
| RCW 9.86.040 | Application of provisions       |
+--------------+---------------------------------+

9.86.011 Penalty.
Any violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars. (Ord. 1390, 1978)

Chapter 9.88 PUBLIC INDECENCY PROSTITUTION SEX CRIMES

Sections:
9.88.005     Statutes Incorporated by Reference

9.88.005 Statutes Incorporated by Reference.
The provisions of the following state statutes are incorporated by reference in this chapter:
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.44.010 | Definitions for Sex Offenses                        |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.44.096 | Sexual Misconduct With a Minor in the Second Degree |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.44.120 | Admissibility of Child's Statement                  |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9.68A.011 | Definitions                                         |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9.68A.080 | Processing Depictions of Minors Engaged in Sexually |
|               | Explicit Conduct                                    |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9.68A.090 | Communication With a Minor for Immoral Purposes     |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.88.010 | Indecent exposure.                                  |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.88.030 | Prostitution.                                       |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.88.050 | Prostitution Sex of Parties Immaterial No Defense   |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.88.060 | Promoting prostitution--Definitions.                |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.88.090 | Permitting Prostitution                             |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9A.88.110 | Patronizing a Prostitute                            |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
(Ord. 1806, 1996)

Chapter 9.89 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL

Sections:
9.89.010     Statutes Incorporated by Reference

9.89.010 Statutes Incorporated by Reference.
The provisions of the following state statutes are incorporated by reference in this chapter:
+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 66.04.010    | Definitions                                              |
+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 66.44.100    | Opening or Consuming Liquor in a Public Place Prohibited |
+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 66.44.130    | Sale of Liquor by Drink or Bottle                        |
+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 66.44.140    | Unlawful Manufacture, Sale or Transportation of Liquor   |
+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 66.44.150    | Buying Liquor Illegally                                  |
+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 66.44.160    | Illegal Possession and Transportation of Alcoholic       |
|                  | Beverages                                                |
+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 66.44.170    | Illegal Possession of Liquor With Intent to Sell         |
+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 66.44.200    | Sale to Persons Apparently Under the Influence of Liquor |
+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 66.44.210    | Obtaining Liquor for Ineligible Person                   |
+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 66.44.240    | Drinking in Public Conveyance Penalty Against Carrier    |
+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 66.44.250    | Drinking in Public Conveyance Penalty Against Individual |
+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 66.44.265    | Candidates Giving or Purchasing Liquor on Election       |
|                  | Day                                                      |
+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 66.44.270    | Furnishing Liquor to Minors Use and Possession of Liquor |
|                  | by Minors                                                |
+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 66.44.290    | Minor Purchasing or Attempting to Purchase Liquor        |
+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 66.44.291    | Penalty Against Persons Between the Ages of 18 and       |
|                  | 21 inclusive                                             |
+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 66.44.300    | Giving or Purchasing Liquor for a Minor                  |
+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 66.44.310(1) | Serving Liquor to Minors; Minors Frequenting Taverns;    |
|                  | Minors Misrepresenting Their Age                         |
+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 66.44.320    | Sale of Liquor to Minors                                 |
+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 66.44.325    | Unlawful Transfer to a Minor of an Identification of     |
|                  | Age                                                      |
+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 66.44.328    | Counterfeit or Facsimile Identification Cards            |
+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 66.44.370    | Resisting or Opposing a Peace Officer                    |
+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------+

Chapter 9.90 OFFENSES BY AND AGAINST JUVENILES

Sections:
9.90.005     Statutes incorporated by reference
9.90.010     Leaving Children Under Age Seven (7) in a Parked Vehicle
9.90.040     Minor misrepresenting age
9.90.060     Violators under eighteen

9.90.005 Statutes incorporated by reference.
The provisions of the following state statutes are incorporated by reference in this chapter:
+----------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 9.68A.150  | Allowing a Minor on Minor on Premises of Live Erotic    |
|                | Performance; Allowing Minors to Enter and Remain in     |
|                | Certain Adult Establishments;                           |
+----------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 26.28.080  | Selling a Minor Tobacco Products, and Selling a Minor   |
|                | Firearms; and                                           |
+----------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 70.155.080 | Purchasing, possessing, or obtaining tobacco by persons |
|                | under the age of 18.                                    |
+----------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
(Ord. 1763, 1994; Ord. 1914, 1999)

9.90.010 Leaving Children Under Age Seven (7) in a Parked Vehicle.
A. No person, while in charge of a motor vehicle, shall park or willfully allow such vehicle to stand upon a highway, road or street, or any place open to the public leaving a child under the age of seven unattended therein, except when another responsible person of at least 12 years of age has immediate control over such child and is physically present in the vehicle.
B. Penalty for violation of this section. Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be guilty of criminal misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or by imprisonment in jail for not more than ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 1390, 1978; Ord. 1534, 1984; Ord. 1763, 1994)

9.90.040 Minor misrepresenting age.
It is unlawful for any minor to misrepresent his or her age for the purpose of aiding, abetting, or benefiting from any of the acts prohibited in this chapter. (Ord. 1390, 1978; Ord. 1763, 1994)

9.90.060 Violators under eighteen.
Any persons under the age of eighteen years violating sections of this chapter shall be cited to the Snohomish County juvenile court for investigation, and in the event that persons are remanded to the city authorities by the judge of juvenile court, they may be tried and punished as otherwise provided in this criminal code. (Ord. 1390, 1978; Ord. 1763, 1994)

Chapter 9.91 REGISTRATION OF SEX OFFENDERS

Sections:
9.91.010     Registration of Sex Offenders

9.91.010 Registration of Sex Offenders.
A person who knowingly fails to register as required by RCW 9A.44.130 as now or hereafter amended, is guilty of a gross misdemeanor if the crime for which the individual was convicted was other than a Class A Felony under the laws of this state, or a federal or out of state conviction for an offense that under the laws of this state would be a Class A Felony. (Ord. 1763, 1994)

Chapter 9.92 CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE

Sections:
9.92.005     Statutes Incorporated by Reference

9.92.005 Statutes Incorporated by Reference.
The provisions of the following state statutes are incorporated by reference in this chapter:
+------------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 69.41.030    | Sale, Delivery, or Possession of Legend Drug without   |
|                  | Prescription or Order Prohibited—Exceptions—Penalty    |
+------------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 69.50.101    | Definitions                                            |
+------------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 69.50.102    | Definitions-Paraphernalia                              |
+------------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 69.50.201    | Authority to Control                                   |
+------------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 69.50.202    | Nomenclature.                                          |
+------------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 69.50.204    | Marijuana defined as a Controlled Substance            |
+------------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 69.50.309    | Containers                                             |
+------------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 69.50.401(e) | Possession of 40 Grams or Less of Marijuana Prohibited |
+------------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 69.50.412    | Possession of Drug Paraphernalia Prohibited            |
+------------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 69.50.425    | Mandatory Sentences                                    |
+------------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 69.50.505    | Forfeiture of Controlled Substances and Equipment and  |
|                  | Vehicles Associated Therewith.                         |
+------------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
(Ord. 1763, 1994; Ord. 2229, 2011)

Chapter 9.94 PUBLIC NUISANCES

Sections:
9.94.010     Definitions
9.94.020     Prohibited Conduct
9.94.030     Nuisances Declared
9.94.050     Liability for Continuing Nuisance
9.94.070     Civil Penalties
9.94.100     Severability
9.94.110     No Special Duty Created

9.94.010 Definitions.
The following words and phrases used in this Chapter, unless the context otherwise clearly indicates, shall have the following meanings:
“Abate” means to repair, replace, remove, destroy, or otherwise remedy a condition which constitutes a violation of this Chapter by such means and in such a manner and to such an extent as the applicable department director determines is necessary in the interest of the general health, safety, and welfare of the community.
“Building materials” means and includes lumber, plumbing materials, wallboard, sheet metal, plaster, brick, cement, asphalt, concrete block, roofing material, cans of paint, and similar materials.
“Enforcement Officer” means the Mayor of the City of Snohomish or his or her designee.
“Owner” means and includes any agent, lessee, owner, tenant, or other person occupying or having charge or control of any premises. An owner or agent is deemed to have control if he or she has actual or constructive knowledge of the maintenance upon the premises of any nuisance as defined in this Chapter.
“Person” means and includes, individual, firm, partnership, corporation, and all associations of natural persons, whether acting by themselves or by an agent or employee.
“Premises” means any building, lot, parcel, real estate, or land or portion of land whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips and any lake, river, stream, drainage way, or wetland. (Ord. 2155, 2008; Ord. 2341, 2017)

9.94.020 Prohibited Conduct.
It is a violation of this chapter for any person to permit, create, maintain, or allow, upon any premises, any of the acts or things declared in section 9.94.030 to be a public nuisance or to fail to abate such a nuisance pursuant to lawful notice given under section 1.14.020 of the Snohomish Municipal Code.

9.94.030 Nuisances Declared.
The following specific acts, omissions, places, and conditions are declared to be public nuisances:
A. Erecting, continuing, or using any building or other place in the City for the exercise of any trade, employment, or manufacture, which by occasioning noxious exhalation, offensive smells, or other annoyances, becomes injurious and dangerous to the health, comfort, or property of individuals or the public.
B. Causing or allowing any offal, filth, poison, or noisome substance to be collected or to remain in any place, street, highway, or alley in the City to the prejudice of others.
C. Building or maintaining any structure in such condition as to be dangerous to the health of the citizens of the City.
D. Obstructing or encroaching upon or rendering unsafe for passage any public highway, private way, street, alley, park, square, driveway, lake, or stream in the City.
E. Carrying on, within the City limits, a business of manufacturing gunpowder, nitroglycerin, or other highly explosive substance, or mixing or grinding the materials therefore, in any place within two hundred fifty yards of any building in existence at the time such business may be commenced.
F. Any wrecked, inoperable, abandoned, or disassembled trailer, house trailer, boat, tractor, automobile, or other vehicle, or any parts thereof. A junk vehicle includes apparently inoperable, immobile, disassembled, or extensively damaged vehicles. Evidence of inoperability and damage includes, but is not limited to a buildup of debris that obstructs use, a broken window or windshield, a missing wheel, a flat tire, a non-functional motor or transmission, missing bumpers, or missing license plates; provided nothing herein shall prevent the keeping or storage of any vehicle on private property which is screened from view.
G. Camping, placing, standing, or locating any occupied trailer, house car, camp car, or mobile home on any street, alley, or highway, within the City, except within a trailer camp. Trailers, house cars, camp cars, or mobile homes shall not be located for more than twenty-four hours on any street, alley, or highway within the City, subject to any other regulations or restrictions for that street, alley, or highway, and may not be used for living and/or sleeping accommodations.
H. Placing, depositing, keeping, having, or leaving in or upon any private lot, building, structure, or premises, or in or upon any street, avenue, park, parkway, or public or private place in the City, any one (1) or more of the following conditions, places, or things:
    1. Any putrid, unsound, or unwholesome bones, meat, hides, skins, or the whole or any part of any dead animal, fish, or fowl.
    2. Privies, vaults, cesspools, sumps, pits, or like places which are not securely protected from flies or rats, or which are foul or malodorous.
    3. Filthy or littered trash-covered cellars, house yards, factory yards, vacant areas in rear of stores, vacant lots, houses, buildings, or premises.
    4. Animal manure in any quantity which is not securely protected from flies and the elements, or which is kept or handled in violation of any ordinances of the City.
    5. Poison oak or poison ivy (whether growing or otherwise), liquid household waste, human excreta, garbage, butcher’s trimmings and offal, parts of fish, or any other vegetable or animal matter in any quantity; provided nothing in this chapter shall prevent the temporary retention of waste in receptacles in the manner approved by the City or the dumping of non-putrifying waste in a place and manner approved by the City.
    6. Tin cans, bottles, glass cans, small pieces of scrap iron, wire, material, bric-a-brac, broken crockery, broken glass, broken plaster, scrap building materials, and all such trash or abandoned material unless the same be kept in covered bins or galvanized iron receptacles.
    7. Trash, litter, weeds or grass, rags, accumulations of empty barrels, boxes, crates, packing cases, mattresses, bedding, excelsior, packing straw, or other packing materials, lumber not piled, scrap iron, abandoned stoves, kitchen appliances, tin and other metal not neatly piled, or anything whatsoever in which flies or rats may breed or multiply or which may be a fire danger.
    8. Any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator, freezer, or other container having an air-tight door or lid and a snap lock or other locking device which may not be easily released from the inside when such lid or door is in a closed position.
    9. Allowing trees and shrubs to overhang the public sidewalk with less than nine (9) feet of vertical clearance; or allowing trees and shrubs to overhang the public street with less than twelve (12) feet of vertical clearance; or allowing brush, grass, weeds and other landscaping to reach a condition so that it constitutes a fire hazard or otherwise constitutes a menace to the public safety, health or welfare; or allowing non-fire-resistant vegetation to grow within five (5) feet of an emergency vehicle access road or driveway, pursuant to SMC 8.20.112.
    10. Allowing trees, shrubs, or other objects, improvements, or obstructions to exist in visibility triangles to be kept clear to preserve sight clearance for vehicular and pedestrian travel. A visibility triangle shall be maintained for all corner lots in all residential districts. If the property corner does not have a radius, the visibility triangle shall be determined by measuring lines from the intersection of the property lines abutting two (2) intersecting streets, or an intersecting alley and street, for a distance of fifteen (15) feet in both directions. The terminus of the two (2)  line segments shall be connected by a third line to complete the area of the triangle in which sight obstruction shall be prohibited and be a public nuisance. If the property does have a radius, the visibility triangle shall be determined by extending the opposing lines from their points of curvature creating a point of intersection, then measuring from said intersection of the property lines abutting two (2) intersecting streets, or an intersecting alley and street, for a distance of fifteen (15) feet in both directions. The terminus of the two (2) line segments shall be connected by a third line to complete the area of the triangle in which sight obstruction shall be prohibited and be a public nuisance.
    11. Discharging, directly or indirectly, into the City’s storm drain system or into the waters of any stream, lake, wetland, or similar area within the City any material that shall cause or tend to cause a polluted condition of such system or waters, including but not limited to any organic substance or chemical compound which causes or contributes to the violation of applicable state water quality standards, as set forth in Chapter 173-201A WAC, which is hereby adopted by reference, except that the following discharges shall not be considered nuisances:
        a. Flushing of water lines or other potable water sources;
        b. Flushing of residential hot tubs or residential swimming pools;
        c. Landscape irrigation or lawn watering;
        d. Diverted stream flows pursuant to required permits;
        e. Crawl space pumping;
        f. Non-commercial washing of vehicles;
        g. Fire-fighting activities;
        h. Discharges specified in writing of the City to be necessary to protect the public health and safety;
        i. Dye-testing that is verbally authorized by the City before the test; and
        j. Discharges permitted under an NPDES permit and in compliance with all permit requirements.
    12. Causing or allowing any other nuisance as defined in this section or other provision of the Snohomish Municipal Code.
    13. Any other act, omission, condition, or thing which:
        a. Unreasonably injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, or safety of others; or
        b. Offends public decency; or
        c. Is offensive to the senses of reasonable persons; or
        d. In any way renders other persons insecure in life or use of property. (Ord. 2074, 2005; Ord. 2076, 2005; Ord. 2374, 2019)

9.94.050 Liability for Continuing Nuisance.
Every successive owner or occupant of property who neglects to abate a continuing nuisance upon or in the use of such property caused by a former owner, is liable in the same manner as the owner who created it.

9.94.070 Civil Penalties.
Any person, firm, corporation, their agents, or servants, who shall violate any of the provisions of this Chapter, has committed a civil violation for which civil penalties may be assessed for each day or part of day that the violation continues, pursuant to section 1.01.080 and Chapter 1.14 SMC, except as otherwise provided therein. (Ord. 2155, 2008)

9.94.100 Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or word of this ordinance should be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality thereof shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of any other section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or word of this ordinance.

9.94.110 No Special Duty Created.
It is expressly the purpose of this Ordinance to provide for and promote the health, safety, and welfare of the general public and not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited a by the terms of this ordinance.
No provision or term used in this ordinance is intended to impose any duty whatsoever upon the City or any of its officer, agents, or employees for whom the implementation or enforcement of this ordinance shall be discretionary and not mandatory.
Nothing contained in this Ordinance is intended nor shall he construed to create or form the basis of any liability on the part of
the City, or its officers, employees, or agents, for any injury or damage resulting from any action or inaction on the part of the City, its officers, employees, or agents. (Ord. 1911, 1999)

Chapter 9.96 GRAFFITI NUISANCE

Sections:
9.96.010     Graffiti Deemed Nuisance
9.96.020     Definitions
9.96.030     Continued Presence of Graffiti an Infraction
9.96.040     Graffiti – Notice of Removal
9.96.050     Appeal
9.96.060     Removal by City
9.96.070     City Cost Recoverable – Debt – Lien
9.96.075     Sale or Gift of Aerosol Paint and Indelible Markers
9.96.077     Rewards
9.96.080     Severability

9.96.010 Graffiti Deemed Nuisance.
Graffiti and other defacement of public and private property including walls, rocks, bridges, fences, gates and other structures, trees, and other real and personal property within the City constitutes a nuisance. Although it is appropriate, where possible, to request that the courts require people who are convicted of acts of malicious mischief and vandalism involving the application of graffiti to public or private property to restore the property so defaced, damaged, or destroyed, oftentimes it is difficult to identify, or to identify and convict, the wrongdoer. The continued presence of graffiti is a blight on the community. While voluntary graffiti removal should be encouraged, where graffiti has not been promptly removed, graffiti should be removed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

9.96.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings:
“Abate” means the removal, painting over, or other obscuring of graffiti from view as directed by the notice provided for in SMC 9.96.040.
“Graffiti” means the defacing, damaging, or destroying by spraying of paint or marking of ink, chalk, dye, or other similar substances on public or private buildings, structures, facilities, natural features, and places.
“Graffiti nuisance property” means property upon which graffiti exists and where, after notice as provided by this chapter, the graffiti has not been abated by the deadline set in a notice as established by this chapter.
“Indelible marker” shall mean any marker, pen, or similar implement containing anything other than a solution which can be removed with water after it dries and having a flat, pointed, or angled writing surface of a width of 4 mm or greater.
“Owner” means any entity or entities having a legal or equitable interest in real or personal property including but not limited to the interest of a tenant or lessee.
“Pressurized container” shall mean any can, bottle, spray device, or other mechanism designed to propel liquid which contains ink, paint, dye, or other similar substance which is expelled under pressure either through the use of aerosol devices, pumps, or similar propulsion devices.
“Responsible party” means an owner, and also an entity or person acting as an agent for an owner, or an entity or a person who has dominion and control over a property. There may be more than one responsible party for a particular property.

9.96.030 Continued Presence of Graffiti an Infraction.
It shall be a civil infraction for a responsible party to allow a graffiti nuisance property to exist. Each day a graffiti nuisance property shall exist shall be a separate infraction. A civil infraction under this chapter shall be punishable by a penalty of $25.00 for each violation.

9.96.040 Graffiti – Notice of Removal.
A. Whenever graffiti exists and is visible to any person of normal eyesight utilizing any public road, parkway, alley, sidewalk, or other facility open to the general public, the responsible person shall abate such graffiti nuisance within 48 hours of the placement of such graffiti.
B. Whenever the responsible party fails to abate and remove graffiti as set forth in (A) above, and whenever the Mayor or his/her designated representative determines that graffiti exists, a notice shall be issued to the responsible person to abate the nuisance by a stated deadline which shall be no more than 48 hours after the date of the notice unless weather or seasonal conditions require a longer deadline.
C. The giving of notice as required by this section shall be accomplished by providing the notice to the responsible party in any one of the following ways:
    1. By personal service on the responsible party;
    2. By registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, properly addressed and mailed to the last known address of the responsible party and to the address of the party.
D. The notice shall be as established by the Chief of Police. The notice shall include a list of community resources and references where the property owner may seek assistance in the eradication of graffiti. (Ord. 2341, 2017)

9.96.050 Appeal.
The hearing examiner for the City of Snohomish hereby is given jurisdiction to hear appeals of a “Notice of Graffiti, of Graffiti Nuisance Property and Removal.”
An appeal shall be commenced by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within 10 days after the service of the “Notice of Graffiti, of Graffiti Nuisance Property and Removal” on the party or parties to whom the notice is directed. If no appeal is filed within said 10 days, the “Notice of Graffiti, of Graffiti Nuisance Property and Removal” shall become final and conclusive, and not subject to appeal or review in any forum.
In any appeal, the City shall have the burden to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the property contains graffiti, the named party is a responsible party, the deadline for abatement is reasonable and should not be adjusted for weather or seasonal conditions, and the manner of abatement is reasonable.
If the hearing examiner finds that the property contains graffiti and that the named party is a responsible party, but that either the manner of abatement is not reasonable, or the deadline should be extended for seasonal or weather conditions, then the hearing examiner shall modify the manner of abatement to make the same reasonable or extend the deadline a reasonable period to account for seasonal or weather conditions, as the case may be.
The hearing examiner shall issue a written decision containing the following information:
A. Findings of fact (which shall include the common address and legal description for the property) and conclusions of law;
B. The manner of any required abatement action and the deadline by which abatement must be completed;
C. A description of the civil penalty for an infraction which may accrue if the responsible party fails to abate the graffiti by the deadline established in the decision and order;
D. A statement that the decision of the hearing examiner becomes final 21 days after the date of the decision unless the decision of the hearing examiner is appealed to the Snohomish County Superior Court; and
E. A statement that if the graffiti is not abated by the deadline established in the decision and order that the City or its contractor may abate the graffiti and the cost of abatement will be a personal obligation of the responsible party and a lien against the graffiti nuisance property.
    1. The hearing examiner shall mail his/her decision to the named party by regular and certified mail, and a copy of the decision also shall be posted on the property in a conspicuous location.
    2. Any review of the decision of the hearing examiner must be by land use petition filed within 21 days of issuance of the decision and order in the Snohomish County Superior Court in accordance with the Land Use Petition Act.

9.96.060 Removal by City.
When the deadline established under this chapter has passed, and the property is deemed graffiti nuisance property, the City may abate the graffiti nuisance property. Either City resources or contractors may be used in abating the graffiti nuisance property. Using any lawful means, the City and its representatives may enter upon the graffiti nuisance property and abate the graffiti. The City may seek such judicial process or writ as is deemed necessary to carry out the abatement.

9.96.070 City Cost Recoverable – Debt – Lien.
If the City is required to remove graffiti and abate a graffiti nuisance property, the City shall bill the cost of removal and abatement to the responsible party. The costs billed shall be due and payable to the City within 10 calendar days of billing. The costs billed shall include the value of the use of City staff and resources at the current established hourly rate and all payments made to third parties.
If the costs billed are not paid when due, they shall be a personal debt of the responsible party and automatically the costs shall be a lien upon the graffiti nuisance property. The City may take all lawful action to collect the debt of the responsible party or to foreclose its lien upon the graffiti nuisance property.

9.96.075 Sale or Gift of Aerosol Paint and Indelible Markers.
On a voluntary basis, the Snohomish City Council requests and encourages all businesses within the City and all citizens to refrain from selling, offering to sell, cause to be sold, giving, or lending any aerosol paint or pressurized container of paint or any indelible marker to any minor under the age of 18 years. Businesses are encouraged to require picture identification for all persons who may be under the age of 18 years. All businesses who offer for sale aerosol paint or indelible markers are requested to voluntarily restrict access to those items from the public by either placing them behind a locked counter, cabinet, or other storage facility so that access to them cannot be gained without their being unlocked by an authorized employee or other authorized representative of such business or by placing them in a location where they can be in constant, uninterrupted view of an authorized employee or other authorized representative of such business. Within one year of the effective date of this ordinance, the City Council shall review the effectiveness of this section and shall consider whether such provisions shall be made mandatory rather than voluntary.

9.96.077 Rewards.
The City may offer a reward not to exceed $300.00 for information leading to the identification and apprehension of any person who willfully damages or destroys any public or private property by the use of graffiti. The actual amount awarded (not to exceed $300.00) shall be determined in the discretion of the Chief of Police. In the event of damage to public property, the offender or the parents or legal guardian of any unemancipated minor must reimburse the City for any reward paid. In the event of multiple contributors of information, the reward amount shall be divided by the City in the manner it shall deem appropriate. Claims for rewards under this section shall be filed with the Chief of Police or his designee in the manner specified by the Snohomish Police Department. No claim for a reward shall be allowed unless the City investigates and verifies the accuracy of the claim and determines that the requirements of this section have been satisfied.

9.96.080 Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are declared to be separate and severable. If any clause, sentence, paragraph, subdivision, section, subsection or portion of this chapter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held to be invalid, it shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this chapter, or the validity of its application to other persons or circumstances. (Ord. 2144, 2008)

Chapter 9.98 CAMPING

Sections:
9.98.010     Unlawful Camping
9.98.020     Storage of Personal Property in Public Places
9.98.030     Definitions
9.98.040     Penalty for Violations
9.98.050     No Specific Duty Created

9.98.010 Unlawful Camping.
It is unlawful for any person to engage in camping, occupy camp facilities, use camp paraphernalia, or build a fire in any of the following areas: in any park or playfield owned by the City, or on any sidewalk, street, alley, lane, public right-of-way, or under any bridge or viaduct, or in any other public place to which the general public has access, except in park areas explicitly provided in SMC Section 13.04.140 in conjunction with a Special Use Permit approved by the City of Snohomish or some other ordinance. (Ord. 2219, 2011)

9.98.020 Storage of Personal Property in Public Places.
It shall be unlawful for any person to store personal property, including camp facilities and camp paraphernalia, in the following areas: in any park or playfield owned by the City, or on any sidewalk, street, alley, lane, public right-of-way, or under any bridge or viaduct, or in any other public place to which the general public has access, except in park areas explicitly provided in SMC Section 13.04.140 in conjunction with a Special Use Permit approved by the City of Snohomish or some other ordinance. (Ord. 2219, 2011)

9.98.030 Definitions.
The following definitions are applicable in this chapter unless the context otherwise requires:
A. “Camp” or “Camping” means to pitch, create, erect, use, or occupy camp facilities, or to use camp paraphernalia or both for the purposes of habitation, or in such a way as will permit remaining overnight, or parking a trailer, camper, or other vehicle for the purpose of remaining overnight.
B. “Camp facilities” include, but are not limited to, tents, tarps, huts, temporary shelters, or vehicles if the vehicle is used as temporary living quarters.
C. “Camp paraphernalia” includes, but is not limited to tarpaulins, tarps, cots, beds, sleeping bags, hammocks, or cooking facilities, camp fires and similar equipment.
D. “Store” means to put aside or accumulate for use when needed, to put for safekeeping, to place or leave in a location.
E. “Park” means the same as defined in SMC section 13.04.030. (Ord. 2219, 2011)

9.98.040 Penalty for Violations.
Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a misdemeanor. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction of such violation, be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000) or by imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 2219, 2011)

9.98.050 No Specific Duty Created.
A. It is expressly the purpose of this ordinance to provide for and promote the health, safety, and welfare of the general public and not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons or individual who will or should be especially protected or benefited by the terms of this ordinance.
B. Nothing contained in this ordinance is intended nor shall be construed to create or form the basis of any liability on the part of the City, or its officers, employees, or agents, for any injury or damage resulting from any action or inaction on the part of the City related in any manner to the enforcement of this ordinance by its officers, employees, or agents. (Ord. 2219, 2011)

Chapter 9.100 CANNABIS NUISANCES

Sections:
9.100.010    Cannabis Activities Deemed Nuisances
9.100.020    Definitions
9.100.030    Cannabis Nuisances Declared
9.100.040    Civil Remedy
9.100.050    Enforcement
9.100.060    No Special Duty
9.100.070    Severability

9.100.010 Cannabis Activities Deemed Nuisances.
Producing, manufacturing, processing, delivering, distributing, possessing, and using cannabis are crimes under the Snohomish Municipal Code and federal law. Producing, manufacturing, processing, delivering, and distributing cannabis without a state license is illegal under state law. Except as provided in RCW Chapter 69.51A, possessing marijuana in excess of the quantities permitted under RCW Chapter 69.50 is illegal under state law.
The producing, manufacturing, processing, delivery, distribution, possession, or use of cannabis for medical purposes for which there is an affirmative defense under state law is hereby declared to be a nuisance by unreasonably annoying, injuring, or endangering the comfort, repose, health, or safety of others; by being unreasonably offensive to the senses; by being an unlawful act; by resulting in an attractive nuisance; or by otherwise violating the municipal code or state law. (Ord. 2253, 2013)

9.100.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings:
A. “Cannabis” or “marijuana” means all parts of the plant Cannabis, commonly known as marijuana, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin.
B. “Cannabis garden” means any place, area, or garden where cannabis is produced or processed and either (1) the person producing or processing the cannabis is not a qualifying patient or designated provider, (2) a copy or copies of the valid documentation of the qualifying patient(s) who own or share responsibility for the garden is not available at all times on the premises, or (3) the number of plants or usable cannabis on the premises exceeds the limits set forth in RCW 69.51A.040(1)(a), RCW 69.51A.040(1)(b), or RCW 69. 51A.085, or the garden is not otherwise in full compliance with RCW 69.51A. 040(1)(a), RCW 69.51A.040(1)(b), or RCW 69.51A.085. “Cannabis garden” does not include a place, area, or garden where cannabis is produced or processed if such activity is conducted pursuant to a license or permit issued by the state.
C. “Collective garden” means any place, area, or garden where qualifying patients (as defined in RCW 69.51A.010) share responsibility and engage in the production, processing, and/or delivery of cannabis for medical use, as set forth in RCW 69.51A.085, in full compliance with all limitations and requirements set forth in RCW 69.51A.085. “Collective garden” does not include any office, meeting place, or club associated with a collective garden which is not located within the same structure as the collective garden itself. “Collective garden” does not include a garden where members are replaced in less than 15 days or member-ship is otherwise manipulated to allow more than 10 qualifying patients to obtain cannabis from the same or substantially the same physical location, plants, operation, or enterprise. “Collective garden” does not include any garden where the cannabis has previously been part of another collective garden or part of a cannabis garden.
D. “Dispensary” means any place where cannabis is delivered, sold, or distributed or offered for delivery, sale, or distribution. “Dispensary” does not include a private residence where a designated provider delivers medical cannabis to his or her qualifying patient or a private residence where a member of a collective garden delivers medical cannabis to another member of the same collective garden. “Dispensary” does not include a collective garden, but does include any office, meeting place, club, or other place which is not located within the same structure as the collective garden itself where medial cannabis is delivered regardless of whether the delivery is made to another member of the collective garden. “Dispensary” does not include a place where cannabis is delivered, sold, or distributed or offered for delivery, sale, or distribution if such activity is conducted pursuant to a license or permit issued by the state.
E. “Medical cannabis garden” means any place, area, or garden where a qualifying patient or designated provider (as defined in RCW 69.51A.010) produces or processes cannabis for medical use as set forth in RCW 69.51A.040 and in full compliance with all limitations and requirements set forth in RCW 69.51A.040. “Medical cannabis garden” does not mean a site or building where the amount of cannabis exceeds the maximum for one qualifying patient and one designated provider as set forth in RCW 69.51A.040.
F. “Youth-oriented facility” means any establishment that advertises in a manner that identifies the establishment as catering to or providing services primarily intended for minors, or individuals who regularly patronize, congregate, or assemble at the establishment are predominantly minors. “Youth-oriented facility” does not include public parks, public or private elementary or secondary schools, day care or preschool facilities, or bus stops.
G. The definitions contained in Chapter 69.50 RCW and Chapter 69.51A RCW shall be used to define any term not otherwise defined in this chapter. (Ord. 2253, 2013)

9.100.030 Cannabis Nuisances Declared.
The following acts, omissions, places, and conditions are declared to be a public nuisance, including, but not limited to, any one or more of the following:
A. Any cannabis garden is a nuisance per se.
B. Any collective garden located in any of the following land use designations: OS, PP, UH, SF, LDR, MDR, HDR, CO, NB, HB, MU, or PD.
C. Any dispensary is a nuisance per se.
D. Any collective garden where there is one or more exterior indications of the use such as outdoor storage, noise, vibration, odors, smoke, glare, or the display of cannabis or cannabis products visible from public areas or property owned or leased by another person or entity.
E. Except as provided by Chapter 69.50 RCW, any place where cannabis can be seen or smelled from public property or from private property owned or leased by another person or entity.
F. Any collective garden located closer than the distance below to any of the following whether in or out of the City:
    1. Within 1,000 feet of any public or private elementary or secondary school;
    2. Within 500 feet of any daycare and preschool;
    3. Within 500 feet of any park;
    4. Within 500 feet of any youth-oriented facility; or
    5. Within 500 feet of any church, synagogue, temple, or mosque.
The separation required between the collective garden and any use identified in this subsection shall be measured from the nearest edge or corner of the property for each use. The establishment of a new use listed in this subsection within the offset radius of an existing collective garden shall not constitute exclusive grounds to determine the collective garden is a nuisance.
G. Any collective garden on a parcel or within a building that contains another collective garden, a medical cannabis garden, or a cannabis garden.
H. Any collective garden that is not fully enclosed within a structure.
I. Any collective garden within a mobile or portable structure.
J. Any collective garden where a person under 18 years of age is present or allowed to be present.
K. Any place where any violation of Chapter 69.50 RCW occurs and for which an affirmative defense created by Chapter 69.51A RCW would not apply.
L. Any place where any production, manufacture, processing, delivery, distribution, possession, or use of cannabis occurs for which there is not an affirmative defense under state law.
M. Any collective garden that does not comply with all other applicable City or state regulations, code requirements, and development standards, including, but not limited to, building, fire, utility, and electrical codes. (Ord. 2253, 2013)

9.100.040 Civil Remedy.
This chapter creates a civil remedy and does not alter or affect any criminal law governing the production, manufacture, processing, delivery, distribution, possession, or use of cannabis. (Ord. 2253, 2013)

9.100.050 Enforcement.
Any person, firm, corporation, their agents, or servants, who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter has committed a civil violation for which civil penalties may be assessed for each day or part of day that the violation continues, pursuant to Chapter 1.14 SMC, except as otherwise provided therein. Each day or part of day the violation continues shall be subject to a monetary penalty of five hundred dollars ($500). (Ord. 2253, 2013)

9.100.060 No Special Duty.
It is expressly the purpose of this chapter to provide for and promote the health, safety, and welfare of the general public and not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited by the terms of this chapter. It is the specific intent of this chapter that no provision or any term used in this chapter is intended to impose any duty whatsoever upon the City or any of its officers or employees for whom the implementation or enforcement of this chapter shall be discretionary and not mandatory. Nothing contained in this chapter is intended nor shall be construed to create or form the basis of any liability on the part of the City, or its officers, employees, or agents, for any injury or damage resulting from any action or inaction on the part of the City related in any manner to the enforcement of this chapter by its officers, employees, or agents. (Ord. 2253, 2013)

9.100.070 Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are declared to be separate and severable. If any clause, sentence, paragraph, subdivision, section, subsection, or portion of this chapter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held to be invalid, it shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this chapter, or the validity of its application to other persons or circumstances. (Ord. 2253, 2013)

Chapter 9.110 PEDESTRIAN OR VEHICULAR INTERFERENCE

Sections:
9.110.010    Purpose
9.110.020    Definitions
9.110.030    Pedestrian or Vehicular Interference Prohibited
9.110.040    Penalty

9.110.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and punish intentional acts of pedestrian or vehicular interference, as defined in this chapter, which the City Council finds pose a risk to the public health, safety, and welfare.

9.110.020 Definitions.
The following definitions apply in this chapter:
A. “Aggressively panhandle” means to beg with the intent to intimidate another person into giving money or goods.
B. “Intimidate” means to intentionally engage in conduct which would make a reasonable person fearful or feel compelled.
C. “Obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic” means to intentionally walk, stand, sit, lie, or place an object in such a manner as to block passage by another person or a vehicle, or to intentionally require another person or a driver of a vehicle to take evasive action to avoid physical contact. Acts authorized as an exercise of one’s constitutional right to picket or to legally protest, and acts authorized by a permit issued pursuant to chapter 12.12 or 12.14 of this code, shall not constitute pedestrian or vehicular interference.
D. “Public place” means an area generally visible to public view and includes alleys, bridges, buildings, driveways, parking lots, parks, plazas, sidewalks, and streets open to the general public, including those that serve food or drink or provide entertainment, and the doorways and entrances to buildings or dwellings and the grounds enclosing them.

9.110.030 Pedestrian or Vehicular Interference Prohibited.
A person is guilty of pedestrian or vehicular interference if, in a public place, he or she:
A. Intentionally obstructs pedestrian or vehicular traffic; or
B. Aggressively panhandles.

9.110.040 Penalty.
Pedestrian or vehicular interference is a misdemeanor. Any person convicted of pedestrian or vehicular interference shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or by imprisonment and jail for not more than 90 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 2274, 2014)

Title 10 (RESERVED)

Title 11 TRAFFIC
Chapter 11.04 Traffic Code
    11.04.005    Model Traffic Ordinance Adopted by Reference
    11.04.010    MTO Sections Not Adopted
    11.04.011    Traffic Engineer
    11.04.012    MTO – Copies on File
    11.04.015    Establish the Traffic Violations Bureau
    11.04.016    Definition of Highway
    11.04.044    Compression Brakes Prohibited
    11.04.045    Inattention to Driving
    11.04.046    Cutting Corner Prohibited
    11.04.050    Establishment of Zones
    11.04.110    Arterial Highways
    11.04.150    Railway Trains – Obstructing Streets – Speed
    11.04.225    Right Turns from Parking areas
    11.04.226    Portions of Fifth Street Designated as One-Way
    11.04.228    Disposition of Traffic Fines and Forfeitures
    11.04.229    Official Misconduct
    11.04.300    Impoundment of Vehicle Where Driver is Arrested for a Violation of RCW 46.20.005, 46.20.015, 46.20.342, 46.20.420, 46.61.502, 46.61.504 – Period of Impoundment
    11.04.310    Redemption of Impounded Vehicles
    11.04.320    Post-Impoundment Hearing Procedure
Chapter 11.06 Motorized Scooters
    11.06.010    Definitions
    11.06.020    Rules, Regulations, and Requirements for Operation of Motorized Foot Scooters
    11.06.030    Unsafe Use Prohibited – Penalties - Enforcement
    11.06.050    Severability
Chapter 11.08 Parking
    11.08.010    Purpose
    11.08.020    Definitions
    11.08.030    Stopping, Standing, or Parking Prohibited in Specified Places
    11.08.040    Chain Parking Prohibited
    11.08.050    Seventy-Two Hour Parking Limit
    11.08.060    Time-Limited Parking
    11.08.070    No-Parking Areas – Identification
    11.08.080    Method of Parking
    11.08.090    Parallel or Angle Parking – Method
    11.08.100    Back-In Parking
    11.08.110    Parking for Disabled Persons
    11.08.120    Improper Stopping, Standing, or Parking
    11.08.130    Parking for Certain Purposes Prohibited
    11.08.140    Standing in Passenger Loading Zone
    11.08.150    Standing in Loading Zone
    11.08.160    Alley Parking – Service Parking
    11.08.170    Parking Trailers, Campers, Motor Homes, and Trucks
    11.08.180    Regulations not Exclusive
    11.08.190    Enforcement of Parking Regulations
    11.08.200    Registered Owner Responsible – Lien
    11.08.210    Penalties
    11.08.220    Failure to Comply with Notice of Parking Violation
    11.08.230    Hearing to Contest Validity of Notices
    11.08.240    Notice to the State of Washington Department of Licensing
    11.08.250    Declaration of a Nuisance – Cost in Addition to Penalties
    11.08.260    Notification of Hearing for Declaration of Vehicle as a Nuisance
    11.08.270    Hearing on Declaration of Vehicles as Nuisance
    11.08.280    Order of Immobilization of Vehicle
    11.08.290    Immobilization of Vehicle
    11.08.300    Immobilization Fee
    11.08.310    Release from Immobilization
    11.08.320    Unlawful to Remove or Attempt to Remove an Immobilization Device
    11.08.330    Towing of Immobilized Vehicle
    11.08.340    Emergency Impounding Procedures
    11.08.350    Sale of Abandoned Vehicles
    11.08.360    Parking Administrative Hearing Examiner
    11.08.370    Parking Regulations
    11.08.380    Rules and Regulations
Chapter 11.10 Permit Parking
    11.10.010    Establishment of Zones
    11.10.020    Mayor – Authority to Establish Time Limit Regulations for Tow-Away Zones
    11.10.030    Permit Issuance Authority
    11.10.040    Permit – Use
    11.10.050    Permit – Unlawful Use
    11.10.060    Visitor’s Passes
    11.10.070    Permit – Eligibility
    11.10.080    Permit – Exemption
    11.10.090    Permit – Revocation – Conditions
    11.10.100    Enforcement – Impound of Vehicles Without Prior Notice
    11.10.110    How Impoundment Is To Be Effected
    11.10.120    Owner of Impounded Vehicle To Be Notified
    11.10.130    Redemption of Impounded Vehicles
    11.10.140    Post-Impoundment Hearing Procedure
    11.10.150    Violation – Penalty
    11.10.160    No Special Duty Created
    11.10.170    Priority of Chapter Over Conflicting Provisions
    11.10.180    Severability
Chapter 11.12 Truck Routes
    11.12.010    Truck Routes
    11.12.020    Truck Defined – Exceptions
    11.12.030    Truck Travel off of Truck Routes
    11.12.040    Special Permits
    11.12.050    Permit Fee
    11.12.060    Revocation of Permits
    11.12.070    Appeal from Administrative Determination
    11.12.080    Penalties for Violations
Chapter 11.36 Abandoned, Unauthorized and Junk Vehicles
    11.36.010    Abandoned, Unauthorized and Junk Vehicles Regulated by MTO
    11.36.020    Abandonment and Removal of Junk or Unauthorized Motor Vehicles or Parts Thereof From Private Property
    11.36.030    Penalties

Chapter 11.04 TRAFFIC CODE

Sections:
11.04.005    Model Traffic Ordinance Adopted by Reference
11.04.010    MTO Sections Not Adopted
11.04.011    Traffic Engineer
11.04.012    MTO – Copies on File
11.04.015    Establish the Traffic Violations Bureau
11.04.016    Definition of Highway
11.04.044    Compression Brakes Prohibited
11.04.045    Inattention to Driving
11.04.046    Cutting Corner Prohibited
11.04.050    Establishment of Zones
11.04.110    Arterial Highways
11.04.150    Railway Trains – Obstructing Streets – Speed
11.04.225    Right Turns from Parking areas
11.04.226    Portions of Fifth Street Designated as One-Way
11.04.228    Disposition of Traffic Fines and Forfeitures
11.04.229    Official Misconduct
11.04.300    Impoundment of Vehicle Where Driver is Arrested for a Violation of RCW 46.20.005, 46.20.015, 46.20.342, 46.20.420, 46.61.502, 46.61.504 – Period of Impoundment
11.04.310    Redemption of Impounded Vehicles
11.04.320    Post-Impoundment Hearing Procedure

11.04.005 Model Traffic Ordinance Adopted by Reference.
The “Washington Model Traffic Ordinance,” WAC 308-330, hereinafter referred to as the “MTO,” is adopted by reference as the traffic code for the City, ALONG WITH as SS 4, 5, 6, 7, 10, 11, 12, and 23 of Chapter 275, Laws of 1994 as now or hereafter amended, as if set forth in full in this section, except as provided in section 11.04.010 of this chapter. (Ord. 1764, 1994)

11.04.010 MTO Sections Not Adopted.
The following sections in or of the MTO are not adopted by reference and are expressly deleted: RCW 46.04.431 (definition of “highway”); WAC 308-330-210 (Police administration); WAC 308-330-215 (duty of traffic division); WAC 308-330-260 (Traffic engineer); WAC 308-330-275, (Traffic safety commission—Powers and duties); WAC 308-330-500, 308-330-525, 308-330-530, 308-330-535, 308-330-540, 308-330-560 (bicycle licensing); WAC 308-330-600, 308-330-610, 308-330-620, 308-330-630, 308-330-640, 308-330-650 (parking meters); WAC 308-330-660 (service parking). (Ord. 1764, 1994; Ord. 1954, 2000)

11.04.011 Traffic Engineer.
The office of Traffic Engineer is established: provided, that if there is no traffic engineer, then the engineer of the local authority shall serve as traffic engineer in addition to his/her other functions, and shall exercise the powers and duties with respect to traffic as provided in this chapter: provided further, that if there is no engineer in the local authority, then the appointing authority shall designate a person to exercise such powers and duties.
It shall be the general duty of the Traffic Engineer to determine the installation and maintenance of traffic control devices, to conduct engineering investigations of traffic conditions, to plan the operation of traffic on the highways of the local authority, to cooperate with other officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by any ordinances of the local authority. (Ord. 1954, 2000)

11.04.012 MTO – Copies on File.
Incident to the adoption of the MTO by reference by Section 11.04.005, copies of the text of the adopted MTO and of other adopted statutes shall be filed as required by RCW 35.21.180 for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 1498, 1982)

11.04.015 Establish the Traffic Violations Bureau.
There is hereby established pursuant to RCW 3.30.090 a Traffic Violations Bureau for the City of Snohomish, Washington.
The Traffic Violations Bureau herein established shall operate under the supervision of the Evergreen District Court to assist the court in processing traffic infractions. This ordinance shall confer authority upon the court in conjunction with jurisdictions and authority otherwise available to allow any and all traffic infractions issued by the City of Snohomish to be processed through the City of Snohomish Traffic Violations Bureau. Any traffic infraction may be by virtue of a City of Snohomish enactment, designated a traffic infraction which may be processed through the City of Snohomish Traffic Violations Bureau.
The Traffic Violations Bureau herein established shall be in conformance with Chapter 46.63 RCW and RCW 3.30.090. The Traffic Violations Bureau so established shall receive the posting of penalties for traffic infractions to the extent authorized by the Evergreen District court. The Traffic Violations Bureau shall issue a receipt therefor to the alleged violator acknowledging the posting thereof.
All penalties to the City of Snohomish Traffic Violations Bureau shall be placed in the City General Fund.
The Mayor shall appoint a Traffic Violations Bureau clerk, as approved by the Presiding Judge, who shall perform all duties assigned to the Traffic Violations Bureau.
If any part or portion of this ordinance shall be declared invalid for any reason, such declaration of invalidity shall not affect any remaining part or portions. This ordinance shall take effect five days after publication by posting as required by law. (Ord. 1667, 1989; Ord. 2341, 2017)

11.04.016 Definition of Highway.
“Highway” means the entire width of the right-of-way of every road, street, alley, lane, and boulevard and the entire width between the boundary lines of every parking lot and every way or place in the City of Snohomish, whether publicly or privately maintained, when any part thereof is open at any time to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. (Ord. 1498, 1982)

11.04.044 Compression Brakes Prohibited.
No person shall use motor vehicle brakes which are in any way activated or operated by the compression of the engine of any such motor vehicle or any unit or part thereof. Provided, however, that this prohibition shall not apply in the event that said compression brakes were applied in an emergency and were necessary for the protection of persons and/or property. Violation of this prohibition shall be a traffic infraction. (Ord. 1619, 1987)

11.04.045 Inattention to Driving.
It shall constitute a traffic infraction for any person to operate a motor vehicle in an inattentive manner over and along the highways of the City. For the purpose of this section, to “operate in an inattentive manner” means the operation of a vehicle in a manner which, without regard to speed, is not reasonable and prudent under the conditions and lacks full regard for the actual and potential hazards then existing. The offense of inattention to driving shall be considered to be a lesser offense than, but included in, the offense of operating a vehicle in a negligent manner, and any person charged with operating a vehicle in a negligent manner may be convicted of the lesser offense of operating a motor vehicle in an inattentive manner. (Ord. 1406, 1978; Ord. 1498, 1982)

11.04.046 Cutting Corner Prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person operating a motor vehicle upon any public roadway within the City to turn such vehicle either to the right or to the left upon approaching or leaving any intersection and to proceed across any property, whether publicly or privately owned and/or maintained, for the purpose of avoiding the intersection or any traffic-control sign or device controlling the intersection, unless so directed by proper authorities.
Violation of this section is a traffic infraction. The penalty for the infraction is the amount as established by the Washington State Court Rules for courts of limited jurisdiction IRLJ 6.2 (b) unscheduled infractions plus statutory assessments. (Ord. 2234, 2012)

11.04.050 Establishment of Zones.
For the protection of and in the public interest, to prevent traffic congestion or danger, and to maintain the most efficient use of the highways, the City Council shall, by resolution from time to time adopt existing and establish additional parking and/or angle parking zones, limited parking and/or limited angle parking zones, danger zones, safety zones, bus zones, loading zones, traffic lanes, school zones and crossings, and marked crosswalks and other means to give notice of such. (Ord. 830, 1955)

11.04.110 Arterial Highways.
Avenue D within the limits of the City; First Street within the limits of the City; Second Street within the limits of the City; Maple Street, the northern portion of which is commonly known and designated as the Machias Highway, within the limits of the City; Lincoln Street south from Second Street to the south City limits, Fourth Street from the west line of Avenue J to the west line of Pine Street, Pine Street north from Second Street to the north City limits; Glen Street from the north line of Fourth Street to the north line of Fifth Street; Terrace Street from Sixteenth Street to the north City limits; Seventy-Sixth Street from Avenue A to intersection with Pine Street; and Fifth Street from the west side of Maple to the east side of Avenue D and west of Avenue D to the east side of Avenue J; Tenth Street between Avenue D and Maple Street; all within the City of Snohomish, are hereby declared to be arterial highways, and it shall be the duty of all persons driving or operating any vehicle when approaching said arterial highways to bring such vehicles to a complete stop at the point of intersection, excepting, however, that the operators of vehicles shall not be required to bring same to a stop before entering First Street from either the north or south on Avenue D. The intersection of Glen Street and Pearl Street shall be regulated by the placement of a stop sign on Pearl Street on the northeast corner of that intersection. (Ord. 830, 1955; Ord. 903, 1960; Ord. 989, 1965; Ord. 1004, 1966; Ord. 1130, 1971; Ord. 1339, 1976)

11.04.150 Railway Trains – Obstructing Streets – Speed.
It shall be unlawful for the directing officer or the operator of any railway train or car to direct the operation of or to operate the same in such a manner as to prevent or interfere with the use of any street for purposes of travel for a period of time longer than five consecutive minutes, except that this provision shall not apply to trains or cars in motion other than those engaged in switching. (Ord. 830, 1955)

11.04.225 Right Turns from Parking areas.
Vehicles shall make a right turn only upon entering Union Avenue from the private parking area of Snohomish Branch, Seattle-First National Bank located on the west side of Union Avenue between First and Second Streets therein, upon entering Avenue D from the private parking area of the medical and dental clinic and offices located on the east side of Avenue D between Second and Third Streets therein, and upon entering Second Street from the private parking area of Snohomish Branch, First Federal Savings and Loan Association located on the north side of Second Street between Union Avenue and Avenue A therein, and the street superintendent shall place appropriate signs and/or paint appropriate directions at or near the points of exit from said private parking areas to aid in the enforcement of this section. (Ord. 830, 1955; Ord. 953, 1964)

11.04.226 Portions of Fifth Street Designated as One-Way.
Fifth Street between Avenue B and Avenue A, and between Cedar and Maple, shall be designated and signed for one-way traffic eastbound. (Ord. 1530, 1984)

11.04.228 Disposition of Traffic Fines and Forfeitures.
All fines or forfeitures collected upon adjudication or conviction or upon the forfeiture of bail of any person charged with the violation of any of the provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be paid into the general fund of the City. (Ord. 1498, 1982)

11.04.229 Official Misconduct.
Failure, refusal, or neglect on the part of any judicial or other officer or employee receiving or having custody of any fine and forfeiture of bail regulated in Section 11.04.228 shall constitute misconduct in office and shall be grounds for removal therefrom, provided appropriate removal action is taken pursuant to state law relating to removal of public officials. (Ord. 1498, 1982)

11.04.300 Impoundment of Vehicle Where Driver is Arrested for a Violation of RCW 46.20.005, 46.20.015, 46.20.342, 46.20.420, 46.61.502, 46.61.504 – Period of Impoundment.
A. Whenever the driver of a vehicle is arrested for a violation of RCW 46.20.005, 46.20.015, 46.20.342, 46.20.420, 46.61.502, 46.61.504, the vehicle is subject to impoundment at the direction of a police officer.
B. Whenever the driver of a vehicle is arrested or cited for a violation of RCW 46.20.005, 46.20.015, 46.20.342, 46.20.420, 46.61.502, 46.61.504, then the vehicle may be released as soon as all the requirements of SMC 11.04.310 are satisfied.
C. If a vehicle is impounded because the driver is arrested for a violation of RCW 46.20.342(1)(c) and the Washington Department of Licensing’s records show that the driver has been convicted one (1) time of a violation of RCW 46.20.342 or similar local ordinance within the past five (5) years, the vehicle shall be impounded for fifteen (15) days.
D. If a vehicle is impounded because the driver is arrested for a violation of RCW 46.20.342(1)(c) and the Washington Department of Licensing’s records show that the driver has been convicted two (2) or more times of a violation of RCW 46.20.342 or similar local ordinance within the past five (5) years, the vehicle shall be impounded for thirty (30) days.
E. If a vehicle is impounded because the driver is arrested for a violation of RCW 46.20.342(1)(a) or (b) and the Washington Department of Licensing’s records show that the driver has not been convicted of a violation of RCW 46.20.342(1)(a) or (b) or similar local ordinance within the past five (5) years, the vehicle shall be impounded for thirty (30) days.
F. If a vehicle is impounded because the driver is arrested for a violation of RCW 46.20.342(1)(a) or (b) and the Washington Department of Licensing’s records show that the driver has been convicted one (1) time of a violation of RCW 46.20.342(1)(a) or (b) or similar local ordinance once within the past five (5) years, the vehicle shall be impounded for sixty (60) days.
G. If a vehicle is impounded because the driver is arrested for a violation of RCW 46.20.342(1)(a) or (b) and the Washington Department of Licensing’s records show that the driver has been convicted of a violation of RCW 46.20.342(1)(a) or (b) or similar local ordinance two (2) or more times within the past five (5) years, the vehicle shall be impounded for ninety (90) days. (Ord. 1894, 1999)

11.04.310 Redemption of Impounded Vehicles.
Vehicles impounded by the City shall be redeemed only under the following circumstances:
A. Only the registered owner, a person authorized by the registered owner, or one who has purchased the vehicle from the registered owner, who produces proof of ownership or authorization and signs a receipt therefor, may redeem an impounded vehicle. A person redeeming a vehicle impounded pursuant to Section 11.04.300 SMC must prior to redemption establish that he or she has a valid driver’s license and is in compliance with RCW 46.30.020. A vehicle impounded pursuant to Subsection (3) to (7) of SMC 11.64.100 can be released only pursuant to a written order from the court.
B. Any person so redeeming a vehicle impounded by the City shall pay the towing contractor for costs of impoundment removal, towing, and storage prior to redeeming such vehicle, except as provided for by subsection (3) of this section. Such towing contractor shall accept payment as provided in RCW 46.55.120(1)(b) as now or hereafter amended. If the vehicle was impounded pursuant to Section 11.04.300 and was being operated by the registered owner when it was impounded, it may not be released to any person until all penalties, fines, or forfeitures owed by the registered owner have been satisfied.
C. The Evergreen District Court is authorized to release a vehicle impounded pursuant to SMC 11.04.300(3) prior to the expiration of any period of impoundment upon petition of the spouse of the driver based on economic or personal hardship to such spouse resulting from the unavailability of the vehicle and after consideration of the threat to public safety that may result from release of the vehicle including, but not limited to, the driver’s criminal history, driving record, license status, and access to the vehicle. If such release is authorized, the person redeeming the vehicle still must satisfy the requirements of SMC 11.04.310(1) and (2).
D. Any person seeking to redeem a vehicle impounded as a result of a parking or traffic citation has a right to a District Court hearing to contest the validity of an impoundment or the amount of removal, towing, and storage charges if such request for hearing is in writing, in a form approved by the Evergreen District Court and signed by such person, and is received by the Evergreen District Court within ten (10) days (including Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays) of the date the notice was given to such person by the registered tow truck operator pursuant to RCW 46.55.120(2)(a). Such hearing shall be provided as follows:
    1. If all of the requirements to redeem the vehicle, including expiration of any period of impoundment under SMC 11.04.300, have been satisfied, then the impounded vehicle shall be released immediately and a hearing as provided for in SMC 11.04.320 shall be held within ninety (90) days of the written request for hearing.
    2. If not all of the requirements to redeem the vehicle, including expiration of any period of impoundment under SMC 11.04.100, have been satisfied, then the impounded vehicle shall not be released until after the hearing provided pursuant to SMC 11.04.320, which shall be held within two (2) business days (excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays) of the written request to the court for hearing.
    3. Any person seeking a hearing who has failed to request such hearing within the time specified in SMC 11.04.310(4) may petition the Evergreen District Court for an extension of time to file a request for hearing. Such extension shall only be granted upon the demonstration of good cause as to the reason(s) the request for hearing was not timely filed. For the purposes of this section, good cause shall be defined as circumstances beyond the control of the person seeking the hearing that prevented such person from filing a timely request for hearing. In the event such extension is granted, the person receiving such extension shall be granted a hearing in accordance with this chapter.
    4. If a person fails to file a timely request for hearing and no extension to file such a request has been granted, the right to a hearing is waived, the impoundment and the associated costs of impoundment are deemed to be proper, and the City shall not be liable for removal, towing, and storage charges arising from the impoundment. (Ord. 1894, 1999)

11.04.320 Post-Impoundment Hearing Procedure.
Hearings requested pursuant to SMC 11.04.310 shall be held in the Evergreen District Court, which court shall determine whether the impoundment was proper and whether the associated removal, towing, and/or storage fees were proper.
A. At the hearing, an abstract of the driver’s driving record is admissible without further evidentiary foundation and is prima facie evidence of the status of the driver’s license, permit, or privilege to drive and that the driver was convicted of each offense shown on the abstract. In addition, a certified vehicle registration of the impounded vehicle is admissible without further evidentiary foundation and is prima facie evidence of the identity of the registered owner of the vehicle.
B. If the impoundment is found to be proper, the court shall enter an order so stating. In the event that the costs of impoundment, removal, towing, and storage have not been paid or any other applicable requirements of SMC 11.04.310(2) have not been satisfied or any period of impoundment under SMC 11.04.300 has not expired, the court’s order shall also provide that the impounded vehicle shall be released only after payment to the City of any fines imposed on any underlying traffic or parking infraction and satisfaction of any other applicable requirements of SMC 11.04.310(2).
C. If the impoundment is found to be improper, the court shall enter an order so stating and order the immediate release of the vehicle. If the costs of impoundment have already been paid, the court shall enter judgment against the City and in favor of the person who has paid the costs of impoundment in the amount of the costs of the impoundment.
D. In the event that the court finds that the impound was proper, but that the removal, towing, storage, fees charged for the impoundment were improper, the court shall determine the correct fees to be charged. If the costs of impoundment have been paid, the court shall enter a judgment against the City and in favor of the person who has paid the costs of impoundment for the amount of the overpayment.
E. No determination of facts made at a hearing under this section shall have any collateral estoppel effect on a subsequent criminal prosecution and such determination shall not preclude litigation of those same facts in a subsequent criminal prosecution.
F. As to any impoundment arising from an alleged violation of RCW 46.20.342 or 46.20.420, if it is determined to be improper, then the law enforcement officer directing the impoundment and the government employing the officer are not liable for damages if the officer relied in good faith and without gross negligence on the records of the department in ascertaining that the operator of the vehicle had a suspended or revoked driver’s license. (Ord. 1894, 1999)

Chapter 11.06 MOTORIZED SCOOTERS

Sections:
11.06.010    Definitions
11.06.020    Rules, Regulations, and Requirements for Operation of Motorized Foot Scooters
11.06.030    Unsafe Use Prohibited – Penalties - Enforcement
11.06.050    Severability

11.06.010 Definitions.
A. “Motorized foot scooter” means a device with no more than two 10-inch or smaller diameter wheels that has handlebars, is designed to be stood or sat upon by the operator, and is powered by an internal combustion engine or electric motor that is capable of propelling the device with or without human propulsion.
B. “Child” means any person under 18 years of age.
C. “Parent” means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, step-parent, or foster parent of a juvenile.
D. “Guardian” means (1) a person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a juvenile; or (2) a public or private agency with whom a juvenile has been placed by a court; or (3) a person who is at least eighteen (18) years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a juvenile.

11.06.020 Rules, Regulations, and Requirements for Operation of Motorized Foot Scooters.
A. It is unlawful to operate a motorized foot scooter upon any sidewalk, walkway or public trail, or any other place where motorized vehicles are prohibited within the City of Snohomish. No person shall operate a motorized foot scooter on any city-owned property. No person shall operate a motorized foot scooter in any city park.
B. Motorized foot scooters may only be operated on streets that are a posted speed limit of 25 miles per hour or less. However, it is unlawful to operate motorized foot scooters on Avenue D.
C. Motorized foot scooters may not exceed the posted speed limit on a street and shall in all circumstances be operated at a speed limit of 25 miles per hour or less.
D. Motorized foot scooters shall operate within a bicycle lane if a bicycle lane exists.
E. Any person operating a motorized foot scooter shall obey all rules of the road applicable to vehicle and pedestrian traffic, as well as the instructions to official traffic signals, signs and other control devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer or construction flagger.
F. All Left Turns by the operator of a motorized scooter shall be made as a pedestrian, on foot, crossing the roadway in the crosswalk if one is available. To make a left turn, the operator of a motorized foot scooter shall stop and dismount as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or right edge of the roadway and shall cross the roadway on foot, and shall be subject to the restrictions applicable to pedestrians.
G. Crossing an arterial street or street designated with a maximum speed limit greater than 25 miles per hour shall be as a pedestrian, on foot, crossing the roadway in the crosswalk if one is available. To cross an arterial or a street designated with a maximum speed limit greater than 25 miles per hour, the operator of a motorized foot scooter shall stop and dismount as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or right edge of the roadway and shall cross the roadway on foot, subject to the restrictions applicable to pedestrians.
H. Motorized foot scooters may only be operated during daylight hours. It is unlawful to operate a motorized scooter after dark or during the hours of darkness as defined in RCW 46.37.020.
I. It is unlawful to operate a motorized foot scooter with any passenger other than the operator.
J. Age Requirements and Restrictions.
    1. All persons age 16 and above shall be subject to rules and regulations of this chapter/ordinance.
    2. All persons ages 12-15 may use a motorized foot scooter only under the direct visual supervision of a parent or guardian and subject to the rules and regulations of this chapter/ordinance.
    3. All persons ages 11-0 are prohibited from using motorized foot scooters on any public way.
K. Parental Responsibility. It is unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having control or custody of a minor child to allow said child to operate a motorized foot scooter in violation of this chapter. A parent or guardian is responsible for requiring that a child under the age of 16 years old wears an approved motorcycle helmet and has the neck or chin strap of the helmet securely fastened while operating a motorized foot scooter.
L. Motorized foot scooters shall at all times be equipped with a muffler in good working order so as to prevent excessive or unusual noise. Use of any cutout, bypass, or similar muffler elimination device is prohibited and is unlawful.
M. The operator of a motorized foot scooter shall wear an approved motorcycle helmet. For purposes of this section, “motorcycle helmet” means a protective covering for the head consisting of a hard outer shell, padding adjacent to and inside the outer shell, and a neck or chin strap type retention system, with a sticker indicating that the motorcycle helmet meets standards established by the United States Department of Transportation.

11.06.030 Unsafe Use Prohibited – Penalties - Enforcement.
A. It is unlawful to operate a motorized foot scooter on a public roadway, sidewalk or on public property in a manner that could cause harm to the user, other persons or property, or in such manner that violates any civil traffic laws, criminal laws, or the provisions of this ordinance.
B. Penalties.
    1. For violations of this chapter for all age groups:
        a. The officer may in the officer’s discretion choose to issue a warning.
        b. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a traffic infraction and shall be punished by the imposition of a monetary penalty of not more than $250, exclusive of statutory assessments. The following monetary penalties shall apply.
            1. First offense $50.
            2. Second offense $80
            3. Third and future offenses $250
        c. In addition, violation of any Criminal Laws and additional Civil Traffic Laws may be cited as such upon officer discretion.
    2. Alternate Penalty for minor Children:
    In lieu of the penalties described above, a Police Officer may, in his/her discretion, utilize the following penalty for violations by minor children. For the purposes of this section the City Council finds that there is a compelling governmental interest in imposing the following discretionary penalty section for minor children, in order to encourage parental and guardian intervention and responsibility for the violation of this ordinance by minor children. The City further finds that impoundment is more likely to prevent repeat offenses by minors than the imposition of monetary penalties.
    1st offense: On the minor Child’s first offense in a 365-day period, the City shall issue a written warning and written notification to the child’s parents or guardians of the violation. Further, the officer may in the officer’s discretion cite the child’s parent or guardian for violation of the Parental Responsibility section of this chapter and shall include a civil fine, not to exceed $50 issued to the parent or guardian.
    2nd offense: On the minor Child’s second offense in a 365-day period, the City shall issue a written notice of the offense to the child’s parents or guardians and the investigating officer may take custody of the motorized foot scooter and hold for safekeeping until the child’s parent or guardian claims the motorized foot scooter. Further, the officer may in the officer’s discretion cite child’s parent or guardian for violation of the Parental Responsibility section of this chapter and shall include a civil fine, not to exceed $80 issued to the parent or guardian.
    3rd offense: On the minor Child’s third offense in a 365-day period, the arresting officer may take into custody the motorized scooter and hold for safekeeping for (30) days. Further, the officer may in the officer’s discretion cite child’s parent or guardian for violation of the Parental Responsibility section of this chapter and shall include a civil fine, not to exceed $250 issued to the parent or guardian.
    Motorized foot scooters unclaimed after sixty (60) days will be treated as provided in RCW 63.32 as UNCLAIMED PROPERTY IN HANDS OF CITY POLICE.

11.06.050 Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this ordinance should be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality thereof shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of any other section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this ordinance. (Ord. 2059, 2004)

Chapter 11.08 PARKING

Sections:
11.08.010    Purpose
11.08.020    Definitions
11.08.030    Stopping, Standing, or Parking Prohibited in Specified Places
11.08.040    Chain Parking Prohibited
11.08.050    Seventy-Two Hour Parking Limit
11.08.060    Time-Limited Parking
11.08.070    No-Parking Areas – Identification
11.08.080    Method of Parking
11.08.090    Parallel or Angle Parking – Method
11.08.100    Back-In Parking
11.08.110    Parking for Disabled Persons
11.08.120    Improper Stopping, Standing, or Parking
11.08.130    Parking for Certain Purposes Prohibited
11.08.140    Standing in Passenger Loading Zone
11.08.150    Standing in Loading Zone
11.08.160    Alley Parking – Service Parking
11.08.170    Parking Trailers, Campers, Motor Homes, and Trucks
11.08.180    Regulations not Exclusive
11.08.190    Enforcement of Parking Regulations
11.08.200    Registered Owner Responsible – Lien
11.08.210    Penalties
11.08.220    Failure to Comply with Notice of Parking Violation
11.08.230    Hearing to Contest Validity of Notices
11.08.240    Notice to the State of Washington Department of Licensing
11.08.250    Declaration of a Nuisance – Cost in Addition to Penalties
11.08.260    Notification of Hearing for Declaration of Vehicle as a Nuisance
11.08.270    Hearing on Declaration of Vehicles as Nuisance
11.08.280    Order of Immobilization of Vehicle
11.08.290    Immobilization of Vehicle
11.08.300    Immobilization Fee
11.08.310    Release from Immobilization
11.08.320    Unlawful to Remove or Attempt to Remove an Immobilization Device
11.08.330    Towing of Immobilized Vehicle
11.08.340    Emergency Impounding Procedures
11.08.350    Sale of Abandoned Vehicles
11.08.360    Parking Administrative Hearing Examiner
11.08.370    Parking Regulations
11.08.380    Rules and Regulations

11.08.010 Purpose.
A. Pursuant to Article II, Section II of the Constitution of the state of Washington, and RCW 35.22.280(7) and (30), the City enacts the ordinance codified in this chapter, in the exercise of the police power, to protect the public health and safety and promote the general welfare of the community by:
    1. Making possible the use of on-street parking spaces by the maximum number of vehicles consistent with the demands of commerce;
    2. Minimizing the congesting and serious air pollution caused by slow-moving and re-circulating motor vehicles;
    3. Accommodating the maintenance of public streets in a condition reasonably safe for public travel;
    4. Fostering the conduct of private and public commerce;
    5. Providing means of public revenues necessary to enforce traffic control;
    6. Encouraging respect and general public obedience of the laws of the City and deterring repeated violations.
B. This chapter does not create nor otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited by the terms of these regulations. It is the specific intent of the regulations set forth in this chapter to place the obligation of compliance upon the registered owner, legal owner and driver of the vehicle and no provision or term used in these regulations is intended to impose any duty whatsoever upon the City or any of its officers, employees, or agents for whom the implementation or enforcement of these regulations shall be discretionary and not mandatory.
C. Nothing contained in these regulations is intended to be nor shall be construed to create or form the basis for any liability on the part of the City, its officers, employees, or agents, for any injury or damage resulting from the failure to comply with these regulations, or in consequence or in connection with the implementation or enforcement of these regulations, or by reason of any action or inaction on the part of the City related in any manner to the enforcement of these regulations by its officers, employees or agents.
D. Notwithstanding any language used in this chapter, it is not the intent of this chapter to create a duty and/or cause of action running to any individual or identifiable person, but rather any duty is intended to run only to the general public. (Ord. 1865, 1998)

11.08.020 Definitions.
A. The definition of words and phrases contained in RCW 46.04.010 through 46.04.700 are adopted by reference and shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the same meanings ascribed to words and phrases herein.
B. The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meanings:
    1. “Alley” means a public highway not designed for general travel and used primarily as a means of access to the rear of residences and business establishments.
    2. “Bus stop” means a fixed portion of the highway parallel and adjacent to the curb and designated by a sign to be reserved exclusively for buses for layover in operating schedules or while waiting for, loading, or unloading passengers; provided, that such bus provides regularly scheduled service within the City.
    3. “Camper” means a structure designed to be mounted upon a motor vehicle and which provides facilities for human habitation or for temporary outdoor or recreational lodging.
    4. “City” means the City of Snohomish.
    5. “City street” means every public highway, or part thereof located within the limits of the City, except alleys.
    6. “Crosswalk” means that portion of the roadway between the intersection area and a prolongation or connection of the farthest sidewalk line or in the event there are no improved sidewalks, then between the intersection area and a line ten feet therefrom, except as modified by a marked crosswalk.
    7. “Curb” or “curb line” means the edge of a roadway, whether marked by curbing construction or not.
    8. “Intersection” means the area embraced within the prolongation of the lateral curb lines, or, if there be no curbs, then the lateral roadway boundary lines of two or more streets which join one another at an angle, whether or not such streets cross one another. The junction of an alley with a street or highway shall not constitute an intersection.
    9. “Legal owner” means a person having a security interest in a vehicle perfected in accordance with RCW Chapter 46.12 or the registered owner of a vehicle unencumbered by a security interest.
    10. “Loading zone” means a space reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of property or passengers.
    11. “Motor home” means motor vehicles originally designed, reconstructed, or permanently altered to provide human habitation.
    12. “Motor vehicle” means every vehicle which is self-propelled.
    13. “Park” or “parking” means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading of property or passengers.
    14. “Parking enforcement person” means an employee of the City under the direction of the City Treasurer who is responsible, along with the City’s police officers, to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
    15. “Parking space” means any space which is duly designated for the parking of a single vehicle by appropriate markings on the pavement and/or the curb.
    16. “Passenger loading zone” means a place reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles while receiving or discharging passengers.
    17. “Planting strip” means that portion of a highway laying between the constructed curb or the edge of the roadway and the property line exclusive of the sidewalk area.
    18. “Police officer” means a law enforcement officer of the City.
    19. “Registered owner” means the person whose lawful right of possession of a vehicle has most recently been recorded with the Washington State Department of Licensing.
    20. “Safety zone” means the area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is marked or indicated by painted marks, signs, buttons, or otherwise, so as to be plainly discernible.
    21. “Sidewalk” means that property between the curb lines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property, set aside and intended for the use of pedestrians or such portion of private property parallel and in proximity to a public highway and dedicated to use by pedestrians.
    22. “Stand” or “standing” means the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers.
    23. “Parking violation” means the infringement of any parking regulation set forth in this chapter.
    24. “Time-limited parking area” means a designated area that has restrictions on the time, days, and hours for parking. (Ord. 1865, 1998; Ord. 2225, 2011)

11.08.030 Stopping, Standing, or Parking Prohibited in Specified Places.
A. Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with the law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device, no person shall:
    1. Stop, stand or park a vehicle:
        a. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street;
        b. On a sidewalk or street planting strip;
        c. Within an intersection;
        d. On a crosswalk;
        e. Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless official signs or markings indicate a different no-parking area opposite the ends of a safety zone;
        f. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
        g. On any railroad tracks;
        h. In the area between roadways of a divided highway including crossovers;
        i. At any place where official signs prohibit stopping; or
        j. Within any fire zone or fire exits.
    2. Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger or passengers:
        a. In front of an alley or private driveway or within five feet of the end of the curb radius leading thereto;
        b. Within fifteen feet of a fire hydrant;
        c. Within twenty feet of a crosswalk;
        d. Within thirty feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign, yield sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway;
        e. Within twenty feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station when properly signed;
        f. In front of or behind a yellow painted curb;
        g. At any place where City barricades are placed;
        h. Within fifty feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
        i. At any place where official signs prohibit parking; or
        j. In a bus stop. (Ord. 1865, 1998)

11.08.040 Chain Parking Prohibited.
No vehicle shall be parked in the time-limited parking areas of the City for a consecutive period of more than the posted hours and restricted hours and days. It shall be no defense that the vehicle has been moved from one parking space to another within the time-limited parking zone or that the vehicle traversed streets not within said zone in so being moved. (Ord. 1865, 1998; Ord. 2225, 2011)

11.08.050 Seventy-Two Hour Parking Limit.
In street or alley locations not specifically regulated by time limits for parking no vehicle shall be parked for more than seventy-two hours consecutively. Each additional twenty-four hours of consecutive parking after the first notice of violation is placed upon the vehicle shall constitute additional and separate violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1865, 1998)

11.08.060 Time-Limited Parking.
It is unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to stop, stand, or park such vehicle for a period longer than the posted time limit and restricted hours and days on the streets or portions of streets designated as follows: Thirty-minute parking areas, two hour parking areas, and three hour areas, which will be indicated by signage at or near the parking areas. (Ord. 1865, 1998; Ord. 2225, 2011)

11.08.070 No-Parking Areas – Identification.
The City Department of Public Works shall paint the curb adjoining all no-parking and prohibited parking areas yellow or shall post signs prohibiting parking on the curb adjoining no-parking zones. It is unlawful for any other person to paint the curbs or post no-parking signs in such restricted zones. (Ord. 1865, 1998)

11.08.080 Method of Parking.
The City Engineer shall determine the location of parking spaces and the method of parking upon public streets and shall designate the location and method of parking by street marking and/or by signs. (Ord. 1865, 1998)

11.08.090 Parallel or Angle Parking – Method.
Every vehicle parallel parked shall be so stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels parallel to and within twelve inches of the right-hand curb or as close as practicable to the right edge of the right-hand shoulder. In any place where angle parking is permitted or required, it is unlawful to angle park a vehicle otherwise than with the right front wheel abutting against or touching the curb immediately in front of such vehicle where there is such a curb. On all streets and highways where angle parking is designated by lines drawn on the pavement or curbs, all vehicles shall be angle parked in such a manner that the entire portion of said vehicle is located within the stall or parking space designated by such lines. (Ord. 1865, 1998)

11.08.100 Back-In Parking.
Back-in parking shall be allowed on First Street while loading and unloading from vehicles that load and unload from the rear, providing proper traffic control of traffic is provided while moving in and out from the curb and while any traffic lane is wholly or partially obstructed. (Ord. 1865, 1998)

11.08.110 Parking for Disabled Persons.
A person who has received a current and valid special disabled person’s card, decal or license plate from the Washington State Department of Licensing under RCW 46.16.381 shall be allowed to park a vehicle being used to transport such person for unlimited periods of time in parking zones or areas which are otherwise restricted as to the length of time parking is permitted. This section shall have no application to those zones or areas in which the stopping, parking or standing of all vehicles is prohibited or which are reserved for special types of vehicles. Such person shall not be permitted the foregoing privilege unless the person obtains and displays a distinguishing card, decal, or license plate issued pursuant to RCW 46.16. (Ord. 1865, 1998)

11.08.120 Improper Stopping, Standing, or Parking.
A. No vehicle shall stop, stand or park in any designated parking space so that any part of such vehicle occupies more than one such space, protrudes beyond the markings designating such space or protrudes into the maneuvering lines, except that a vehicle which is of a size too large to be parked within a single designated parking space shall be permitted to occupy two or more adjoining spaces which are not otherwise restricted.
B. No vehicle shall stop, stand or park in any parking space for a period of time longer than the period allowed in that time zone. Once a vehicle remains in a parking space beyond the time which the time zone permits, each subsequent period of time for which the vehicle remains beyond the period of time allowed in that time zone shall constitute a separate violation.
C. No vehicle shall stop, stand or park in any location in which parking is prohibited by street marking, sign or City ordinance. (Ord. 1865, 1998)

11.08.130 Parking for Certain Purposes Prohibited.
A. No person shall park any vehicle upon any street or alley for the principal purpose of:
    1. Displaying of commercial or noncommercial signs;
    2. Displaying such vehicle for sale;
    3. Selling merchandise from such vehicle, except for licensed mobile food vendors meeting the requirements of SMC 5.30.
B. No person shall park any vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency. (Ord. 1865, 1998; Ord. 2310, 2016)

11.08.140 Standing in Passenger Loading Zone.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger loading zone during hours when the regulations applicable to the loading zone are effective, and then only for a period not to exceed three minutes. (Ord. 1865, 1998)

11.08.150 Standing in Loading Zone.
A. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of property in any place marked as a loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zone are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading of property exceed thirty minutes.
B. The driver of a vehicle may stop temporarily at a loading zone for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any vehicle which is waiting to enter or about to enter such zone to load or unload property. (Ord. 1865, 1998)

11.08.160 Alley Parking – Service Parking.
A. Except in the case of an emergency, no person shall park or stand a vehicle in an alley within the city for purposes other than actively loading or unloading, or for the rendering of service to adjacent property. In the case of rendering service to adjacent property, no vehicle shall remain parked or standing beyond thirty minutes.
B. In no event shall vehicles parked in alleys or on streets obstruct or hinder vehicular or pedestrian travel. (Ord. 1865, 1998)

11.08.170 Parking Trailers, Campers, Motor Homes, and Trucks.
A. No person shall detach and park any trailer or camper upon any street or alley.
B. Persons stopping, standing or parking trailers which are attached to towing vehicles shall abide by all parking regulations as set forth in this chapter.
C. No person shall stand or park a truck, motor home or truck tractor-trailer combination which as a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight in excess of sixteen thousand pounds, a length in excess of twenty feet or a width in excess of eight feet upon any portion of a street or alley within any residential zone as defined in the city’s zoning code and zoning map except when:
    1. Property is actively loaded or unloaded from such vehicle; or
    2. The vehicle is a City vehicle or public utility vehicle providing a service for the public; or
    3. The vehicle is an emergency vehicle; or
    4. Such vehicle is currently used at and is located at a specific location within a residential zone for the purpose of assisting in the providing of services such as construction, carpentry, plumbing or landscaping to such residence or location.
    Provided, however, motor homes can stand or park on a city street in a residential zone for a maximum period of twenty-four hours provided said vehicles do not violate any parking restrictions (such as posted time zones) and meet all other parking regulations. (Ord. 1865, 1998)

11.08.180 Regulations not Exclusive.
The provisions of this chapter imposing time limits on parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. The City police shall have the right to control stopping, standing or parking of vehicles on a temporary basis as may be required in case of emergencies or other events of a temporary nature. (Ord. 1865, 1998)

11.08.190 Enforcement of Parking Regulations.
A. The parking regulations set forth in this chapter shall be enforced by the City’s police officers and the City’s parking enforcement person. However, it shall be the primary responsibility of the parking enforcement person to enforce this chapter, as well as any other parking regulations adopted by the city. Parking enforcement person shall be employed by the City under the direction of the Chief of Police.
B. Failure to perform any act required or the performance of any act prohibited by this chapter is designated as a parking violation and shall not constitute an infraction or a criminal offense, unless otherwise indicated in this chapter.
C. City police officers and the City parking enforcement person have the authority to issue a notice of parking violation when the parking violation is committed in the person’s presence.
D. If any vehicle is found parked, standing or stopped in violation of this chapter or otherwise violates the provisions of this chapter, the officer finding the vehicle shall take its license number and may take any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user, and shall conspicuously affix to the vehicle a notice of parking violation. A notice of parking violation represents a determination that a parking violation has been committed. The determination will be final unless contested as provided in this chapter.
E. The police officers and parking enforcement person in charge of the enforcement of the parking regulations of the City shall, and are authorized to, mark such vehicles parked, standing or stopped from time to time to aid in the enforcement of this chapter. Such mark shall be by chalk upon the tires of said vehicles or by some other convenient method but will not be injurious to or damage such vehicle. The marks so placed shall not be interfered with, concealed, obliterated or erased by any person other than a police officer or parking enforcement person, while the same shall remain parked or standing at the place where so marked. It shall constitute a parking violation to interfere with, conceal, obliterate or erase any mark in violation of this section.

11.08.200 Registered Owner Responsible – Lien.
A. Every person in whose name a vehicle is registered shall be responsible for any violation of this chapter caused by the parking, standing or stopping of said vehicle in violation hereof. It shall be no defense that the vehicle was parked illegally by another, unless proof is presented that said vehicle had been stolen and had not been returned to the registered owner by the date of the violation. This section shall not apply to registered owners transferring vehicle ownership prior to the date of the violation.
B. Every vehicle against which penalties and costs are assessed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a lien for the penalties and costs thus assessed. Said lien shall be reduced to a possessory lien by the procedures mobilization and impound set forth herein and shall not be released from immobilization or impound until said penalties and costs are paid or provided for. (Ord. 1865, 1998)

11.08.210 Penalties.
A. Unless specifically set forth elsewhere in this chapter, the penalties for each parking violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be:
    1. Overtime parking: Thirty dollars;
    2. Unauthorized parking in alley: Twenty dollars;
    3. Parking in disabled space without requisite permit, decal or license: Two Hundred Fifty dollars;
    4. Parking, stopping or standing in fire lane: One Hundred Seventy Five dollars;
    5. Interfering with, concealing, obliterating or erasing marks established by the City Department of Public Works under 11.08.070 or by the City’s parking enforcement person under 11.08.190(E): One Hundred Seventy Five dollars;
    6. All other violations: Thirty dollars.
B. If no response or payment is made within ten calendar days of the date of issuance of the notice of parking violation, the penalty for each violation shall be:
    1. Overtime parking: Sixty dollars;
    2. Unauthorized parking in alley: Forty dollars;
    3. Parking in disabled space without requisite permit, decal or license: Five Hundred dollars;
    4. Parking, stopping or standing in fire lane: Three Hundred Fifty dollars;
    5. Interfering with, concealing, obliterating or erasing marks established by the City Department of Public Works under 11.08.070 or by the City’s parking enforcement person under 11.08.190(E): Three Hundred Fifty dollars;
    6. All other violations: Sixty dollars.
C. Payment of all parking violations shall be made to the City Treasurer’s office. All proceeds derived from individuals charged with a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be paid into the general fund of the City. (Ord. 1865, 1998; Ord. 2225, 2011)

11.08.220 Failure to Comply with Notice of Parking Violation.
A. A request for a hearing or, in the alternative, payment shall be made within ten calendar days of the date of issuance of the notice of parking violation. If no request for a hearing or payment be made within ten calendar days of the date of issuance of the notice of parking violation, the City shall mail by first class mail a delinquency notice to the registered owner of the vehicle to which the notice was affixed, informing him/her of the violation and of a right to request a hearing.
B. If no request for a hearing or payment be made within ten calendar days of the date of mailing the delinquency notice, the registered owner of the vehicle is declared delinquent. In addition to or in lieu of the possessory lien procedure for collecting delinquent parking violation penalties the City may bring suit for judgment on the penalties plus costs of suit including reasonable attorney’s fees. The City may also turn this matter over to a collection agency. (Ord. 1865, 1998)

11.08.230 Hearing to Contest Validity of Notices.
A. Any individual receiving a notice of parking violation or a delinquency notice may contest the notices issued by requesting a hearing through the City Treasurer’s office.
B. Upon receipt of a timely request for a hearing, the City Treasurer shall set the matter for hearing on the parking hearing examiner’s calendar.
C. The Hearing Examiner may, in its discretion, affirm, nullify or modify the notice of parking violation. In addition, the Hearing Examiner may, in its discretion, modify, waive, reduce or suspend the monetary penalty prescribed for the violation. (Ord. 1865, 1998)

11.08.240 Notice to the State of Washington Department of Licensing.
Any vehicle as to which it is found that in any calendar year:
A. Three or more notices of violation of this chapter have been issued re: the illegal parking of the vehicle;
B. The penalties assessed pursuant to three or more of said notices have not been paid, shall be subject to the City Treasurer giving notice of said parking violations to the Washington State Department of Licensing as provided by RCW 46.01.110 and WAC 308-96A-345 to 308-96A-380. This enforcement procedure shall be in addition to and not in lieu of the public nuisance procedure for enforcing this chapter. (Ord. 1865, 1998)

11.08.250 Declaration of a Nuisance – Cost in Addition to Penalties.
A. Any vehicle as to which it is found that in any calendar year:
    1. Three or more notices of violations of this chapter have been issued re: the illegal parking of the vehicle;
    2. The penalties assessed pursuant to three or more of said notices have not been paid, shall be deemed to constitute a public nuisance in that said vehicle has repeatedly inhibited the orderly movement of vehicles into parking spaces or the streets of the City, created an obstruction to traffic, inhibited the free flow of commerce and encouraged others to violate the City’s parking ordinance.
B. Upon being found to constitute a public nuisance there shall attach to said vehicle as a lien all parking penalties, immobilization fee, towing fee, storage fee and the reasonable attorney’s fees incurred by the City in enforcing the provisions of this chapter to obtain the payment of the penalties and costs and/or the impound and sale of the vehicle to pay the penalties and costs. (Ord. 1865, 1998)

11.08.260 Notification of Hearing for Declaration of Vehicle as a Nuisance.
Whenever any vehicle shall have been cited for three violations of this chapter and/or any other parking ordinance of the City within a calendar year, each of which remains unpaid ten days after the issuance of the notice of parking violation, the City shall send to the registered and legal owners of said vehicle as shown by the records of the Washington State Department of Licensing a notification of the right to a hearing on the issue of whether said vehicle constitutes a public nuisance as defined in Section 11.08.260. Such notice shall be sent by registered mail or by certified mail with return receipt requested. Said notice shall include the following information:
A. The license number of the vehicle;
B. The name of the registered owner of the vehicle as shown by the records of the Washington State Department of Licensing;
C. The date and nature of each violation which will form the basis of the declaration of the vehicle as a nuisance;
D. A statement that the vehicle will be declared a nuisance unless:
    1. All outstanding, unpaid penalties for violation of the parking ordinance of the City are paid within ten calendar days of the date of mailing of the notification, or
    2. A request for hearing is filed within ten calendar days of the date of mailing with the City Treasurer or his designee.
E. A statement that if the vehicle is declared a nuisance it will be subject to immobilization pursuant to this chapter;
F. The address and telephone number where additional information may be obtained. (Ord. 1865, 1998)

11.08.270 Hearing on Declaration of Vehicles as Nuisance.
A. Upon receipt of a timely request for hearing, the City Treasurer or his designee shall promptly set a hearing. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with such procedures as the parking Hearing Examiner shall establish. The parties shall be notified promptly of the result.
B. The Hearing Examiner shall enter a finding of nuisance only upon making the following determinations:
    1. The identity of the registered owner of the vehicle as shown by the records of the Washington State Department of Licensing;
    2. The identity of the cited vehicle including the license number of said vehicle;
    3. That the vehicle was or was not parked in violation of the parking ordinance on three separate occasions within a calendar year;
    4. That one or more of the penalties assessed for the parking violations remains unpaid;
    5. That there are no defenses nor extenuating and mitigating factors justifying a finding that the vehicle is not a public nuisance. (Ord. 1865, 1998)

11.08.280 Order of Immobilization of Vehicle.
If the registered owner or legal owner shall fail to request a hearing within ten calendar days of the date of mailing of the notice of hearing for declaration of vehicle as nuisance, or if the Hearing Examiner shall make a finding that the vehicle is a nuisance as defined in Section 11.08.260, the City Treasurer shall thereupon issue a written order declaring the vehicle a nuisance and directing the City’s police department and parking enforcement person to immobilize said vehicle. (Ord. 1865, 1998)

11.08.290 Immobilization of Vehicle.
A. Upon the order of the City Treasurer directing immobilization of a vehicle, an officer or employee of the City may temporarily immobilize such vehicle by installing on, or attaching to, such vehicle a device designed to restrict the normal movement of such vehicle. At the time the vehicle is immobilized, the City shall cause to be affixed to said vehicle a readily visible notice. Said notice shall include the following information:
    1. The date and the time the notice was affixed;
    2. The identity of the agent or employee of the City who immobilized the vehicle;
    3. A statement that the vehicle has been immobilized by the City for three or more violations of the City’s parking ordinance;
    4. A statement that the vehicle may be released from such immobilization at a designated place, by payment of the designated total of unpaid parking violation penalties, fifty dollars immobilization fee, and reasonable attorney’s fees incurred by the City in any hearing procedure utilized in obtaining a finding that the vehicle is a nuisance;
    5. A statement that unless arrangements are made for the release of said vehicle within twenty-four hours the vehicle will be towed;
    6. A warning that removing or attempting to remove the device before a release is obtained is unlawful; and
    7. The address and telephone number and office hours where additional information may be obtained.
B. Copies of this notification shall be mailed to the registered owner and legal owner of the vehicle at the address shown on the records of the Department of Licensing.
C. The parking restrictions otherwise applicable shall not apply to any vehicle immobilized pursuant to this section.

11.08.300 Immobilization Fee.
Any vehicle immobilized shall be assessed an immobilization fee as set by resolution of the City Council, said fee to be in addition to any other penalty assessed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1865, 1998; Ord. 2299, 2016)

11.08.310 Release from Immobilization.
No vehicle immobilized pursuant to the order of the City Treasurer because the vehicle has been found to be a nuisance shall be released from the device until payment of the total of unpaid parking violation penalties, the immobilization fee and the reasonable attorney’s fees incurred by the City in any hearing procedure utilized in obtaining the finding that the vehicle is a nuisance. (Ord. 1865, 1998)

11.08.320 Unlawful to Remove or Attempt to Remove an Immobilization Device.
It is unlawful for any person to remove, attempt to remove or to tamper with an immobilization device without arranging with the City for said release. Any tampering, removal or attempted removal of an immobilization device shall be a misdemeanor. Any person convicted thereof shall be subject to a fine of up to five hundred dollars and/or six months in jail. (Ord. 1865, 1998)

11.08.330 Towing of Immobilized Vehicle.
If no one shall respond to the immobilization of a vehicle within twenty-four hours of the affixing of the immobilization device, said vehicle shall be towed at the expense of the registered owner. Said vehicle shall not be released until full payment of all parking penalties, the immobilization fee, the towing fee, the storage fee and the reasonable attorney’s fees incurred by the City in any hearing procedure utilized in obtaining the finding that the vehicle is a nuisance. (Ord. 1865, 1998)

11.08.340 Emergency Impounding Procedures.
A vehicle may be impounded immediately without prior notice to the owner or operator thereof in the following cases which are found to constitute an emergency making prior notice to the owner or operator of the vehicle unreasonable and impracticable:
A. When any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge, or upon any street or alley in such a way that it is obstructing traffic and the owner or person in charge of the vehicle is unable or refuses to remove it or provide for its removal.
B. Any vehicle that is left unattended upon any street or alley and is so parked illegally as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic or emergency vehicles or which blocks or obstructs ingress or egress to a private driveway. (Ord. 1865, 1998)

11.08.350 Sale of Abandoned Vehicles.
Any vehicle which is towed to a City or private storage yard after immobilization or after emergency impound and which is not recovered by its owner within forty-eight hours of being towed shall be considered abandoned as defined by State law and shall be disposed of by a person or entity authorized by State law to dispose of such vehicles. (Ord. 1865, 1998)

11.08.360 Parking Administrative Hearing Examiner.
A. Office – Created. There is created the Office of the Parking Administrative Hearing Examiner of the City.
B. Office – Part-Time – Remuneration. The Office of the Hearing Examiner shall be part-time and remunerated by personal service contract.
C. Appointment. The Hearing Examiner shall be appointed by the Mayor.
D. Jurisdiction. The Hearing Examiner will be responsible for presiding over all hearings required by this chapter as well as other additional administrative matters over which he/she may be requested to preside.
E. Powers. The Hearing Examiner shall have the power to:
    1. Administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and receive evidence;
    2. Issue subpoenas upon the request of any party. The City Treasurer, his/her designated agent, the City Attorney and the attorney of record are also authorized to issue subpoenas. When so required, the applicant for the subpoena shall show to the satisfaction of said individual the general relevance and reasonable scope of the evidence sought;
    3. Rule on offers of proof and receive relevant evidence;
    4. Regulate the course of the hearing, including imposition of penalties for disruption of the orderly process or refusal to comply with lawful orders of the Hearing Examiner;
    5. Hold conferences for the settlement or simplification of the issues by consent of the parties;
    6. Make decisions which can be incorporated into findings of fact, conclusions of law and order of the Hearing Examiner and enter orders of default and consent orders;
    7. Appoint a pro-tem to act in the Hearing Examiner’s absence; and
    8. Establish rules and procedures to conduct hearings consistent herewith.
F. Contested Cases. In contested cases:
    1. The Hearing Examiner may admit and give probative effect to evidence which possesses probative value commonly accepted by reasonably prudent men in the conduct of their affairs. The Hearing Examiner shall give effect to the rules of privilege recognized by law. The Hearing Examiner may exclude incompetent, irrelevant, immaterial and unduly repetitious evidence.
    2. All evidence including, but not limited to, records and documents in the possession of the Hearing Examiner of which he/she desires to avail himself/herself shall be offered and no other factual information or evidence shall be considered in the determination of the case. Documentary evidence may be received in the form of copies or excerpts or by incorporation by reference.
    3. Every party shall have the right of cross examination of witnesses who testify and shall have the right to submit rebuttal evidence.
    4. The Hearing Examiner may take notice of judicially cognizable facts.
G. Notice to be Given. The Hearing Examiner shall see that interested parties are given proper notice of hearings.
H. Judicial Review. 
    1. Any person, including the City, aggrieved by a final decision in a contested case, whether such decision is affirmative or negative in form, is entitled to review thereof in the Snohomish County superior court.
    2. Proceedings for review under this chapter shall be instituted by filing a petition in superior court. All petitions shall be filed within thirty (30) days after the final decision of the Hearing Examiner. Copies of the petition shall be served on the Mayor as in civil actions.
    3. The filing of the petition shall not stay enforcement of the Hearing Examiner’s decision except by order of the court and on posting of a bond to be determined by the court naming the City as beneficiary.
    4. The review shall be conducted by the court without a jury. The review shall be de novo unless provided otherwise by ordinance.
    5. The court may affirm the decision of the Hearing Examiner or remand the case for further proceedings; or it may reverse the decision if the substantial rights of the petitioners may have been prejudiced because the administrative findings, interferences, conclusions or decisions are:
        a. In violation of constitutional provisions; or
        b. In excess of the statutory authority or jurisdiction of the Hearing Examiner. (Ord. 1865, 1998; Ord. 2340, 2018)

11.08.370 Parking Regulations.
The City Council shall, from time to time, adopt, by resolution, specific regulations regarding “no parking,” “parking for limited times,” and similar provisions relating to parking at particular locations upon particular streets. The City Engineer shall determine engineering standards for parking methods and signage. (Ord. 1865, 1998)

11.08.380 Rules and Regulations.
The City Treasurer’s office and the City’s Police Department are authorized to jointly promulgate rules and regulations necessary to administer this chapter and to receive and account for all sums paid under this chapter. (Ord. 1865, 1998)

Chapter 11.10 PERMIT PARKING

Sections:
11.10.010    Establishment of Zones
11.10.020    Mayor – Authority to Establish Time Limit Regulations for Tow-Away Zones
11.10.030    Permit Issuance Authority
11.10.040    Permit – Use
11.10.050    Permit – Unlawful Use
11.10.060    Visitor’s Passes
11.10.070    Permit – Eligibility
11.10.080    Permit – Exemption
11.10.090    Permit – Revocation – Conditions
11.10.100    Enforcement – Impound of Vehicles Without Prior Notice
11.10.110    How Impoundment Is To Be Effected
11.10.120    Owner of Impounded Vehicle To Be Notified
11.10.130    Redemption of Impounded Vehicles
11.10.140    Post-Impoundment Hearing Procedure
11.10.150    Violation – Penalty
11.10.160    No Special Duty Created
11.10.170    Priority of Chapter Over Conflicting Provisions
11.10.180    Severability

11.10.010 Establishment of Zones.
There are hereby established tow-away zones in which residents only shall be allowed by permit to park on-street during certain hours, on designated days, or at all times. The location of such tow-away zones shall be designated by resolution of the City Council.
The City Council may also designate by resolution tow-away zones for the purpose of ensuring that adequate parking space is available for patrons of businesses in residential neighborhoods, and for ensuring that adequate parking space is available for visitors at Snohomish High School and Snohomish High School staff.
The term “tow-away zone” as used in this ordinance shall mean an area designated by resolution of the City Council where vehicles may be impounded upon violation of this ordinance. The term “impoundment” as used in this ordinance shall mean the removal of a vehicle to a storage facility either by an officer or authorized agent of the Snohomish Police Department or by a contractor for towing and storage in response to a request from an officer or authorized agent of the Snohomish Police Department.

11.10.020 Mayor – Authority to Establish Time Limit Regulations for Tow-Away Zones.
The Mayor is empowered, in addition to those powers granted by other local or state law, to designate and establish the time periods applicable to said tow-away zone.
All areas established as tow-away zones and zones restricted to permit parking only shall be signed, posted or marked to clearly indicate that such area is a tow-away zone and shall clearly indicate the time periods applicable to such zones. (Ord. 2340, 2018)

11.10.030 Permit Issuance Authority.
The Snohomish Chief of Police shall be authorized to issue permits for residential on-street parking and visitor passes, and to administer the application for and use of said permits and passes. No fee shall be required for a residential on-street parking permit or pass. The Chief of Police shall issue to each person applying for a permit an information sheet containing the terms, conditions, and rules under which the permit shall be issued. Permits for up to two vehicles per address or one permit for each licensed driver residing at the address may be issued, subject to the provisions of SMC 11.10.070. In addition, permit parking fees paid and received by the City during calendar year 2013 shall be refunded by the City to the permittee within thirty (30) days of the effective date of this ordinance. (Ord. 2226, 2011; Ord. 2257, 2013; Ord. 2262, 2013)

11.10.040 Permit – Use.
A valid residential parking zone permit when properly displayed on the vehicle for which it was issued shall exempt that vehicle, while within the zone for which the permit was issued from citation and/or impoundment as authorized by this ordinance. The permit shall be valid only in the zone designated on its face.

11.10.050 Permit – Unlawful Use.
It is unlawful to falsify information in application for a residential parking zone permit, to fail to report a change of residence or vehicle ownership, to transfer the permit to another person or vehicle, to alter the permit, to improperly display the permit, or to violate any other terms or conditions under which the permit was issued. Any such unlawful use shall subject the permit holder to revocation of this permit, denial of eligibility for reapplication for one year, and to other penalties as described in this chapter.

11.10.060 Visitor’s Passes.
Each holder of a residential parking zone permit may be issued, at the discretion of the Chief of Police, a sufficient number of visitor passes upon a showing of need and taking into consideration available space. Such visitor passes shall exempt those vehicles displaying such passes from the restrictions imposed by the tow-away zone. Visitor passes shall be issued pursuant to policies and guidelines established by the Director of Public Safety.

11.10.070 Permit – Eligibility.
Eligibility for residential parking zone permits shall be established upon proof of residence within the zone for which the permit is sought and proof of ownership and/or control of a motor vehicle. The Chief of Police shall be responsible for establishing policies for verification of proof of residency and ownership of vehicles.

11.10.080 Permit – Exemption.
Disabled persons displaying a valid “Disabled Persons-Distinguishing Decal,” in accord with RCW 46.16.381 shall be allowed the same privileges within residential parking zones as permit holders, but shall not be required to hold a residential parking zone permit. Service vehicles parked in residential parking zones while making service calls to residential dwellings within the zone shall also be exempt from this ordinance.

11.10.090 Permit – Revocation – Conditions.
Residential parking zone permits may be revoked and shall be surrendered for the following reasons:
A. Unlawful use of the permit under SMC 11.10.050;
B. Use of visitor permits contrary to policies and guidelines as established by the Chief of Police under SMC 11.10.060;
C. In event of expiration or termination of the residential parking permit zone.

11.10.100 Enforcement – Impound of Vehicles Without Prior Notice.
It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter to park a vehicle in a tow-away zone without having applied for and/or received a permit or pass as set forth herein. A vehicle may be impounded with or without citation and without giving prior notice to its owner when the vehicle is illegally parked in a tow-away zone as established by this chapter.

11.10.110 How Impoundment Is To Be Effected.
When impoundment is authorized by this chapter, a vehicle may be impounded either by an officer or authorized agent of the Chief of Police or by a contractor for towing and storage acting at the request of an officer or authorized agent of the Chief of Police and in accordance with a contract authorized by the City Council.

11.10.120 Owner of Impounded Vehicle To Be Notified.
A. Not more than forty-eight (48) hours after impoundment of any vehicle, the Chief of Police shall cause a notice to be mailed to the registered owner of the vehicle, as may be disclosed by the vehicle license number, if such be obtainable, and to any other person who claims the right to possession of the vehicle, if such a claim is known to an officer, agent or employee of the Police Department who has knowledge of the impoundment. The notice shall be mailed to the registered owner at the address provided by the Washington State Department of Motor Vehicles or the corresponding agency of any other state or province. If a police officer who has knowledge of the impoundment has reason to believe that an owner, or one who claims to be an owner, is residing or in custody at some different address which is known to the officer, a copy of the notice shall also be mailed or personally delivered to such owner or claimant in a manner designed, as nearly as may be practicable, to give actual notice to him or her. The notice shall contain the full particulars of the impoundment, redemption, and opportunity for hearing to contest the propriety of the impoundment as hereinafter provided.
B. Similar notice shall be given to each person who seeks to redeem an impounded vehicle, except that if a vehicle is redeemed prior to the mailing of notice, then notice need not be mailed.

11.10.130 Redemption of Impounded Vehicles.
Vehicles impounded by the City shall be redeemed only under the following circumstances:
A. Only the registered owner, a person authorized by the registered owner, or one who has purchased a vehicle from the registered owner, may redeem a vehicle which has been impounded by the City under this chapter.
B. All parking citations issued pursuant to City ordinance, towing charges, impound fees and storage fees shall be paid prior to release of the vehicle by the City or towing contractor.
C. In addition, the Chief of Police shall cause the towing contractor to be notified, by telephone or in writing, of the authorization to release such vehicle.

11.10.140 Post-Impoundment Hearing Procedure.
A. Whenever any vehicle shall have been impounded for violation of this chapter, the registered owner, person authorized by the registered owner, or one who has purchased the vehicle from the registered owner may request in writing a hearing to determine whether a violation of the provisions of this ordinance which authorizes the impoundment of the vehicle has occurred. The written request for a hearing shall be submitted to the City Clerk within ten (10) working days of the date the vehicle was impounded or the right to a hearing shall be deemed to have been waived.
B. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of a request for a hearing, the hearing as provided by this chapter shall be conducted by the City Parking Administrative Hearing Examiner as established SMC 11.08.360 as it now reads or is hereinafter amended. The sole issue to be determined by the Hearing Examiner shall be whether a violation of the provisions of this ordinance which authorize impoundment has occurred. If the Hearing Examiner finds that a violation of this ordinance has not occurred, he may, in his discretion, order that the City reimburse the owner of the vehicle or such other authorized person for all impound, storage, and citation fees paid by such person.
C. All provisions of SMC 11.08.360, as they now read or are hereinafter amended, as they pertain to the hearing procedure established by SMC 11.08.360, are hereby adopted by this reference.

11.10.150 Violation – Penalty.
A. It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter for a person holding a valid parking permit or pass issued pursuant hereto to permit the use or display of such permit or pass on a motor vehicle other than that for which the permit or pass is issued. Such conduct constitutes an unlawful act and violation of this chapter both by the person holding the valid parking permit or pass and the person who so uses or displays the permit for a reason other than that for which it was issued.
B. It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter for a person to copy, produce, or otherwise bring into existence a facsimile or counterfeit parking permit or pass. It is further unlawful and a violation of this chapter for a person to knowingly use or display a facsimile or counterfeit parking permit or pass in order to evade time limitations on parking applicable in a residential permit parking area.
C. The offenses defined in this section shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000 and/or imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days.

11.10.160 No Special Duty Created.
Nothing in this chapter is intended to create a special relationship, duty, or course of action in favor of specific individuals or classes of persons. Any duty created herein is intended to be a general duty running in favor of the public citizenry as a whole.

11.10.170 Priority of Chapter Over Conflicting Provisions.
This chapter shall be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes as set forth herein. It is not the intention of this chapter to repeal any other existing City ordinance pertaining to parking or permits but to supplement the provisions of existing ordinances. However, in the case where any conflict or inconsistency between this chapter and any other existing ordinance or other laws becomes apparent, the provisions of this chapter shall be controlling.

11.10.180 Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance. (Ord. 1869, 1998)

Chapter 11.12 TRUCK ROUTES

Sections:
11.12.010    Truck Routes
11.12.020    Truck Defined – Exceptions
11.12.030    Truck Travel off of Truck Routes
11.12.040    Special Permits
11.12.050    Permit Fee
11.12.060    Revocation of Permits
11.12.070    Appeal from Administrative Determination
11.12.080    Penalties for Violations

11.12.010 Truck Routes.
Trucks are, subject to the exceptions set forth in Section 11.12.030, prohibited from traveling upon any of the streets, avenues, and alleys in the City of Snohomish, except: All of Second Street; First Street from Avenue D to Second Street; All of Avenue D; All of Bickford Avenue within the City limits; 30th Street from Bickford Avenue to Lake Avenue; 16th Street from Bonneville Avenue to the west City limits; Pine Avenue between Second Street and Maple Avenue; Maple Avenue from Pine Avenue to the north City limits; Bonneville Avenue within the City limits; and Lincoln Avenue from Second Street to the south City limits. (Ord. 1391, 1978; Ord. 2145, 2008)

11.12.020 Truck Defined – Exceptions.
“Truck,” for the purpose of this chapter, is defined as any motor vehicle designated or used for the transportation of commodities, merchandise, produce, freight or animals; except pickup trucks, campers, motor homes, recreational vehicles and vehicles licensed for twelve thousand pounds gross, or less, shall not be considered trucks for the purpose of this chapter. (Ord. 1391, 1978)

11.12.030 Truck Travel off of Truck Routes.
Truck travel off of designated truck routes shall be limited to:
A. Travel via the most direct route possible from a truck route to another location for the purpose of pickup, delivery, repair, or other necessary business;
B. Travel via the most direct route possible from a truck route to a place of business by vehicles operated by that business, this exception shall not apply in cases where a residence is also a place of business;
C. Travel allowed by a permit issued by the Mayor or his/her designee, pursuant to SMC 11.12.040. (Ord. 1391, 1978; Ord. 2340, 2018)

11.12.040 Special Permits.
Pursuant to the City right-of-way ordinance as codified in SMC Chapter 12.12, the City Engineer, or his designee, may, upon application in writing and for good cause being shown therefor, issue a special permit in writing authorizing the applicant to operate or move a truck upon any public street, avenue or alley under the jurisdiction of the City; provided further, that the City may attach such conditions to the permit as are necessary to reasonably protect the public safety and property. (Ord. 1721, 1992)

11.12.050 Permit Fee.
The fee for special permits shall be set by resolution of the City Council. Permits may be issued for any reasonable period of time not exceeding one year. The fee shall be collected by the City Treasurer as a condition of the issuance of any permit. (Ord. 1391, 1978; Ord. 2143, 2008; Ord. 2299, 2016)

11.12.060 Revocation of Permits.
A. The Mayor, or his/her designee, may revoke any special permit granted pursuant to this chapter upon reasonable cause being shown that:
    1. The permittee has violated the permit provisions; or
    2. Public safety and/or property are endangered by the continuation of the permit.
B. The permittee shall be given notice of revocation in writing by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested. (Ord. 1391, 1978; Ord. 2340, 2018)

11.12.070 Appeal from Administrative Determination.
Any applicant for a permit, or any resident of the City who is personally affected by the granting, denial or revocation of a special permit pursuant to this chapter, may appeal the administrative decision to the City Council. Such appeal must be made within ten days of the action appealed from, or within ten days of the date the appealing party learns of the action. The affected parties will be given not less than ten days’ advance written notice of the date, time and place at which the City Council will hear such appeal. (Ord. 1391, 1978)

11.12.080 Penalties for Violations.
A. Any person driving a truck in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or the terms or conditions of a special permit issued pursuant to this chapter, shall be liable for a traffic infraction, and upon first conviction thereof shall be fined not less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200), upon a second conviction thereof be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200) nor more than three hundred dollars ($300), and upon a third or subsequent conviction shall be fined not less than three hundred dollars ($300).
B. Any person, partnership, or corporation owning a truck that is driven in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or the terms or conditions of a special permit issued pursuant to this chapter, shall be liable for a civil infraction, and upon first conviction thereof shall be fined not less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200), upon a second conviction thereof be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200) nor more than three hundred dollars ($300), and upon a third or subsequent conviction shall be fined not less than three hundred dollars ($300). For purposes of determining the number of convictions, the court may include as prior convictions violations of this chapter by any and all operators of trucks owned by the same person, partnership, or corporation, regardless of the identity of the drivers or trucks involved in the violations of this chapter. (Ord. 1391, 1978; Ord. 1498, 1982; Ord. 2150, 2008)

Chapter 11.36 ABANDONED, UNAUTHORIZED AND JUNK VEHICLES

Sections:
11.36.010    Abandoned, Unauthorized and Junk Vehicles Regulated by MTO
11.36.020    Abandonment and Removal of Junk or Unauthorized Motor Vehicles or Parts Thereof From Private Property
11.36.030    Penalties

11.36.010 Abandoned, Unauthorized and Junk Vehicles Regulated by MTO.
All abandoned, unauthorized and junk vehicles shall be controlled by the applicable provisions of the MTO as adopted by Section 11.04.015 of the Snohomish Municipal Code, with the exception of those vehicles on private property which constitute a public nuisance.

11.36.020 Abandonment and Removal of Junk or Unauthorized Motor Vehicles or Parts Thereof From Private Property.
A. The storage or retention of an unauthorized vehicle, as defined in RCW 46.55.010(12), or a junk vehicle as defined in RCW 46.55.010(4), or parts of a junk vehicle, on private property is a public nuisance subject to removal and impoundment by the City. The police shall inspect and investigate complaints relative to unauthorized or junk vehicles, or parts thereof, on private property. Upon discovery of such nuisances, the Police Department shall give notice in writing to the last registered owner of the vehicle, and to the property owner of record, that within ten days of such notice either the nuisance must be abated or a written request for a hearing before the Evergreen District Court must be filed with the Police Chief. In the event such notice is not complied with, the vehicle will be removed by the City as provided below.
B. If a request for a hearing is received, a notice giving the time, location and date of the hearing on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle or part thereof as a public nuisance shall be mailed, by certified mail, with a five-day return receipt requested, to the owner of the land as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the last registered and legal owner of record of the vehicle unless the vehicle is in such condition that the identification numbers are not available to determine ownership.
C. The owner of the land on which the vehicle is located may appear in person at the hearing or present a written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with reasons for the denial. If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the landowner and that he has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, then the court shall not assess costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect the cost from the owner of the land.
D. Cost of removal of vehicles or parts thereof under this section shall be assessed against the last registered owner of the vehicle or automobile hulk if the identity of the owner can be determined, unless the automobile hulk has complied with RCW 46.12.101, or the costs may be assess against the owner of the property on which the vehicle is stored, unless the property owner establishes the facts set forth in subsection (b) of this section.
E. This section shall not apply to:
    1. A vehicle or part thereof that is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or
    2. A vehicle or part thereof that is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler or licensed vehicle dealer and is fenced according to RCW 46.80.130.
F. After notice has been given of the City’s intent to dispose of the vehicle and after a hearing, if requested, has been held, the vehicle or parts thereof shall be removed at the request of a police officer and disposed of to a licensed motor vehicle wrecker or hulk hauler with notice to the Washington State Patrol and the Department of Licensing that the vehicle has been wrecked.

11.36.030 Penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punished by a penalty of up to $250 for each day that the violation continues.

Title 12 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Chapter 12.12 Right-of-Way Use Permit
    12.12.010    Purpose
    12.12.020    Activities Regulated
    12.12.030    Definitions
    12.12.040    Permit Required
    12.12.050    Permit Exceptions
    12.12.060    Other Permits
    12.12.070    Permit Application
    12.12.080    Conditions – General Conditions (required of all applicants)
    12.12.090    Permit Pre-Inspection
    12.12.100    Refusal of Application
    12.12.110    Permit Limitation
    12.12.120    Permit Expiration
    12.12.130    Permit Fees
    12.12.140    Performance Deposits and Warranty Guarantee
    12.12.150    Insurance Required
    12.12.160    Debris and Spilled Loads in the Rights-of-Way
    12.12.170    Truck/Haul Routes
    12.12.180    Variances
    12.12.190    Permit Suspension or Revocation
    12.12.200    Methods of Enforcement
    12.12.210    Civil Infraction – Penalties
    12.12.220    Adoption of Standards and Procedures
    12.12.230    Liability
    12.12.240    Severability
Chapter 12.14 Sidewalk Use Permit
    12.14.010    Purpose
    12.14.020    Activities Regulated
    12.14.030    Definitions
    12.14.040    Permit Required
    12.14.050    Fees
    12.14.060    Application Materials
    12.14.070    Regulations, Limitations, and Conditions
    12.14.080    Permit Review Process, Term, Revocation, and Appeal
    12.14.090    Indemnity and Insurance
Chapter 12.16 Local Improvement Guaranty Fund
    12.16.010    Provision of moneys for fund
    12.16.020    Foreclosure – Council’s order, authority
    12.16.030    Foreclosure – County taxes – Notification
    12.16.040    City’s right to lease, sell purchased property
    12.16.050    Moneys to be deposited in fund
    12.16.060    Use of funds – City’s obligation to pay
    12.16.070    Investment of proceeds
Chapter 12.20 Sidewalk Maintenance and Repair
    12.20.010    Abutting Premises Owner’s Duty to Maintain
    12.20.020    Notice to Repair – Authorized
    12.20.030    Notice to Repair – Service
    12.20.050    Failure to Improve – City Action – Cost
    12.20.060    Definitions
    12.20.080    Construction Procedure
    12.20.090    Abutting Premises Owners’ Liability to Injured Party and City for Failure to Maintain
    12.20.100    City’s Action for Failure to Improve – Fine
    12.20.110    Abutting Premises Owners’ Duty to Keep Sidewalks Clear of Ice and Snow – Liability to Injured Parties and City
    12.20.120    City’s Action for Abutting Property Owners’ Failure to Remove Snow and Ice – Cost
    12.20.130    Permit – Required
    12.20.140    Permit – Issuance Restrictions
    12.20.150    Permit – Application – Contents Required – Issuance Authority
    12.20.160    Permit Fee Schedule
    12.20.170    Permit – Expiration
    12.20.180    Inspection – Required
    12.20.190    Inspection – Notification of Readiness Required
    12.20.200    Director of Public Works to be Administrative Authority – Powers and Duties
Chapter 12.24 Width of Sidewalks
    12.24.010    Distance from property line
Chapter 12.28 Letting Contracts
    12.28.010    When contracts required
    12.28.020    Bids from City residents
    12.28.030    Publication of notice for bidders
    12.28.040    Submitting bids – Opening bids – Letting contract
Chapter 12.40 Moving Buildings
    12.40.010    Building Materials on Street – Moving Buildings – Bond
    12.40.020    Building Moving – License Fee
    12.40.030    Authority of Street Superintendent in Emergency
    12.40.040    Penalty for Violations
Chapter 12.44 Address and House Numbers
    12.44.010    City Engineer to fix numbers
Chapter 12.48 Street Vacation
    12.48.010    Petition – Fee – Subdivision Vacation
    12.48.015    Preapplication Procedure
    12.48.020    Petition – Procedure – Investigation – Survey
    12.48.030    Resolution Setting Public Hearing
    12.48.040    Compensation
    12.48.050    Nonuser Statute
    12.48.060    Public Hearing Notice – Fifty Percent Objection
    12.48.070    Appraisal – Fees
    12.48.080    Granting Criteria
    12.48.090    Vacation Ordinance
    12.48.100    Notice of Action to Auditor and Appraiser
    12.48.110    Use of Proceeds of Vacation
    12.48.120    Title to Vacated Street or Alley
Chapter 12.52 Snohomish Transportation Benefit District
    12.52.010    Establishing Transportation Benefit District
    12.52.015    Assumption of Transportation Benefit District
    12.52.020    Governing Board
    12.52.030    Authority of the City
    12.52.031    No Existing Right Impaired
    12.52.032    Rules, Regulations, Pending Business, and Contracts
    12.52.033    Records of the Snohomish Transportation Benefit District
    12.52.034    Funds, Credits, Appropriations, Federal Grants, or Other Assets
    12.52.035    Assumption of Indebtedness
    12.52.040    Transportation Improvements Funded
    12.52.050    Dissolution of District

Chapter 12.12 RIGHT-OF-WAY USE PERMIT

Sections:
12.12.010    Purpose
12.12.020    Activities Regulated
12.12.030    Definitions
12.12.040    Permit Required
12.12.050    Permit Exceptions
12.12.060    Other Permits
12.12.070    Permit Application
12.12.080    Conditions – General Conditions (required of all applicants)
12.12.090    Permit Pre-Inspection
12.12.100    Refusal of Application
12.12.110    Permit Limitation
12.12.120    Permit Expiration
12.12.130    Permit Fees
12.12.140    Performance Deposits and Warranty Guarantee
12.12.150    Insurance Required
12.12.160    Debris and Spilled Loads in the Rights-of-Way
12.12.170    Truck/Haul Routes
12.12.180    Variances
12.12.190    Permit Suspension or Revocation
12.12.200    Methods of Enforcement
12.12.210    Civil Infraction – Penalties
12.12.220    Adoption of Standards and Procedures
12.12.230    Liability
12.12.240    Severability

12.12.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this ordinance to establish a method to regulate, by permit, activities that involve construction, disturbance, modification, permanent and temporary uses, and maintenance within the rights-of-way in the City of Snohomish in the interest of public health, safety, and welfare. (Ord. 2186, 2010)

12.12.020 Activities Regulated.
This ordinance shall regulate the following activities and uses:
Street Alteration or Disturbance. Any activity which digs up, breaks, excavates, tunnels, undermines, or in any manner disturbs any street or makes or causes to be made any excavation in or under the surface of any street for any purpose. This includes the placement of earth or other excavated material obstructing or tending to interfere with the free use of the street.
Sidewalk, Curb, and Gutter Disturbance. Activities which disturb curbs, gutters, and sidewalks where such curbs, gutters, and sidewalks are located within City rights-of-way: Chapter 12.20 of the Snohomish Municipal Code contains additional provisions concerning sidewalk regulations.
Utility Connections. Activities involving the installation or repair of utilities (such as side sewers, natural gas, power, and water services) not installed by the City, whether or not City rights-of-way are disturbed. Title 15 of the Snohomish Municipal Code outlines specific requirements for filing applications for water and sewer service and shall be read as supplemented by this ordinance.
Miscellaneous Permanent Uses and Alterations. Activities, uses, and alterations that involve disturbance to, occupation of, or installation or construction within the rights-of-way of a long-term permanent nature, such as installation of street trees, landscaping, planters, bus shelters, fountains, clocks, flag poles, fences, awnings, marquees, benches, permanent structures, permanent signs, fixed street furniture, or similar fixtures.
Temporary Uses and Alterations. Activities, uses, and alterations that involve disturbance to, or occupation of, or installation or construction within the rights-of-way of a temporary nature, such as temporary street or sidewalk closures, haul routes of limited duration, placement of materials, fencing, overhead protection, etc. during development or construction upon private property, storage containers, special events, and community or neighborhood celebrations. (Ord. 2186, 2010)

12.12.030 Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this ordinance shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
City Utility Easements. All private areas specified on appropriate documents, whether of record or not, as being reserved for installation of City utilities, including sewer, storm, and water facilities.
Minor Repair or Construction. Any activity which, in the discretion of the City Engineer, includes a short-term temporary use of the right-of-way and where pavement or sidewalk is not to be disturbed or broken and mechanical equipment other than ordinary domestic tools are not required. Examples of such activities include, but are not limited to, the sweeping and/or cleaning of debris from the right-of-way, and trimming, cutting, or pruning vegetation within the right-of-way.
Multiple Use Permit. A permit issued to a public utility or other entity by the City authorizing repetitive activities within City rights-of-way. Such permit will be issued in lieu of separate permits for each activity, where in the City Engineer's discretion a separate permit for each activity would be unduly burdensome.
Rights-of-Way. All public streets and property granted or reserved for, or dedicated to, public use for streets and all public utilities therein, including easements in favor of the City, together with public property granted or reserved for, or dedicated to, public use for curbs, gutters, and walkways or sidewalks, whether improved or unimproved, including the air rights, subsurface rights, and all easements in favor of the City related thereto.
Unsafe Condition. Any condition which the City Engineer determines poses a hazard to the health, safety, or welfare of the public or endangers the safe use of the rights-of-way by the public, or does or may impair or impede the operation or functioning of any portion of the rights-of-way, or which may cause damage to the right-of-way. (Ord. 2186, 2010)

12.12.040 Permit Required.
No person, partnership, corporation, or other entity shall use or alter the City rights-of-way or easements with activities described in Section 2 above, without first obtaining from the City a separate right-of-way permit for each disturbance. Multiple use permits may be issued by the City Engineer for public utility companies or other entities who, as their principal business, regularly conduct activities in the rights-of-way at various locations in the City. Such permits shall not eliminate the responsibility of an owner of a multiple use permit from notifying the City prior to use or alteration of any City right-of-way, or from obtaining any franchise easement or license authorized by law and required by the City. (Ord. 2186, 2010)

12.12.050 Permit Exceptions.
A right-of-way use permit shall not be required in advance of work performed in the rights-of-way in responses to emergencies such as gas leaks, down lines, or similar emergencies, provided that the City shall be notified by the responding utility or contractor by telephone as soon as practicable following onset of an emergency. Nothing herein shall relieve a responding utility or contractor from the requirement to obtain a right-of-way use permit and to comply with all standards and procedures after beginning emergency work in the right-of-way.
Permits shall not be required for work performed by City maintenance crews, or contractors working for the City.
The City Engineer shall have authority to reduce or waive permit requirements when it is determined that the work being done is “minor repair or construction” as defined herein.

12.12.060 Other Permits.
Additional permits for activities in the City rights-of-way for any use may be required by other City ordinances. If the permitting requirements of this ordinance conflict with the provisions of other City ordinances, this ordinance shall control.

12.12.070 Permit Application.
To obtain a permit, the applicant shall file a complete application in writing on a form provided by the City for that purpose, including any attachments as may be required by the City, and in accordance with instructions provided in the application form. (Ord. 2186, 2010)

12.12.080 Conditions – General Conditions (required of all applicants).
1. Comply with all applicable City ordinances, City design and construction standards, specifications, policies, and administrative procedures.
2. Agree to defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the City of Snohomish, its officers, employees, and agents, for any and all suits, claims, causes of action, or liabilities caused by or arising out of any activities conducted by the permittee resulting from issuance of the permit.
3. Agree to maintain ingress and egress for vehicles and persons to abutting property at all times, unless written consent for an alternative plan is obtained from the City and impacted business or property owner.
4. Agree to provide all safety equipment such as barricades, caution lighting, and personnel for traffic control.
5. Agree to be responsible for restoration and clean-up of the street, sidewalk, or curb and gutter to original or better condition immediately upon completion of the project.
6. Agree to special notification of the City, affected property owners and tenants, or other agencies as specified by the City Engineer.
7. The City Engineer may specify time limits on temporary uses, structures, and activities. If applicable, the permit shall identify the start and end dates, times, and scope of use, occupancy, or disturbance of a public right-of-way. Activities that affect pedestrian and vehicular passage may be limited to the time of day and dates of disturbance identified on the permit.
8. Special Conditions. The City Engineer may, at his/her discretion, attach other special conditions to any permit. Such condition(s) shall be necessary to satisfy the purpose of this Chapter and to protect the public’s health, safety, and welfare. (Ord. 2186, 2010)

12.12.090 Permit Pre-Inspection.
Prior to the issuance of any right-of-way permit, the location may be inspected by a City official for the purpose of determining the most satisfactory location for the installation, or for other conditions that may be placed on the permit.

12.12.100 Refusal of Application.
Wherever a proposed use or alteration in the public streets or rights-of-way within the City will create an exceptional traffic hazard or will unreasonably restrict the use of City streets, or create an unreasonable hazard to the travel or safety of pedestrians thereon; or where reasonable alternatives are available which will meet the applicant's needs with lesser impact to public rights-of-way, or where adequate provisions have not been made for the complete restoration and repair of the right-of-way after its use, the City Engineer, at his/her discretion, may refuse or require modification of any application made under the terms of this ordinance. (Ord. 2186, 2010)

12.12.110 Permit Limitation.
The issuance or granting of a right-of-way permit or approval of plans and specifications shall not be construed to be a permit for, or approval of, any violation of the provisions of this ordinance, or any other ordinance or rule or regulation of the City.

12.12.120 Permit Expiration.
Unless provided otherwise on the face of the permit, every permit issued by the City under the provisions of this ordinance shall expire ninety (90) days after issuance of the permit. At the discretion of the City Engineer, the City may extend the expiration date of a valid permit for up to an additional ninety (90) days. Any additional extensions of time may be granted by the City Engineer and shall require payment of an additional fee equal to the original permit application fee, provided a written request for extension is submitted to the City prior to the expiration of the permit as extended. (Ord. 2186, 2010)

12.12.130 Permit Fees.
Permits required under this ordinance shall be issued by the City Engineer upon proper application therefor and upon payment of fees to be set by separate Council resolution.

12.12.140 Performance Deposits and Warranty Guarantee.
Before a permit may be issued under the provisions of this ordinance, the applicant shall satisfy the conditions established in the City Design and Construction Standards and Specifications for guarantee of performance and warranty which are adopted by this reference. Deposit of funds or instruments for satisfying these conditions shall be made with the City Treasurer. Said cash deposit or bond shall further guarantee that all excavation and street restoration work shall be free from settling and defects in workmanship or materials for a period of up to two (2) years after the date said work is completed and accepted by the City.

12.12.150 Insurance Required.
No permit shall be issued until the permittee has filed with the City a certificate of commercial general liability insurance as required by the City of Snohomish Engineering Design and Construction Standards Section 1-0 and WSDOT Standard Specifications for Road, Bridge and Municipal Construction Section 1-07.18, as such provisions now read, or are hereafter amended, including the City as a named insured, and stating that the City will receive a minimum of a forty-five (45) days’ notice prior to any insurance policy changes or cancellation. (Ord. 2371, 2019)

12.12.160 Debris and Spilled Loads in the Rights-of-Way.
Whenever it is necessary for the safety of the public, the City may remove any obstructions, hazards, or nuisances from the rights-of-way; and anyone causing the obstructions, hazards, or nuisances shall be responsible for reimbursing the City for the expense of such removal. The owner or operator of any vehicle which has spilled, dropped, dumped, or in any manner deposited any matter upon the right-of-way shall cause the right-of-way to be cleaned to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. Upon failure to do so, the City may cause to have cleaned the rights-of-way, and the costs thereof shall be charged to the person or persons so responsible.

12.12.170 Truck/Haul Routes.
Consistent with state or federal requirements and SMC Chapter 11.12, the City Engineer shall have the authority to designate haul routes and time of day for operations involving public rights-of-way and may issue special permits as provided in SMC 11.12.040.

12.12.180 Variances.
The land use hearing examiner shall have authority to grant variances from any and all provisions of this ordinance and any standards adopted hereunder. All applications for a variance shall be in writing to the City Clerk and shall be accompanied by a fee set by resolution of the City Council. The applicant shall be given ten (10) days’ notice of the date on which the land use hearing examiner shall consider the variance. The land use hearing examiner may grant a variance only upon a finding that all of the following facts and conditions exist:
A literal enforcement of this ordinance would cause practical difficulties or a unique hardship which was not self-generated; and
No material detriment will result to public health, safety or welfare; and
No material increase in the likelihood of exposure of the City to liability for claims or damages; and
No violation of any other laws, rules, regulations, or policies applicable to the applicant's intended use.
In approving a variance request, the land use hearing examiner may impose such conditions as it deems necessary and appropriate to carry out the spirit and purposes of this ordinance and to protect the long-range plans of the City right-of-way system and the public interest. Each variance shall be considered on a case-by-case basis and shall not be construed as setting precedent for any subsequent application. The decision of the land use hearing examiner shall be final. Any party aggrieved by the decision of the land use hearing examiner shall have a right to file an application for Writ of Certiorari in the Snohomish County Superior Court; PROVIDED, that the application must be filed and served within a twenty (20) day period after the effective date of the decision. (Ord. 2186, 2010; Ord. 2299, 2016)

12.12.190 Permit Suspension or Revocation.
The City Engineer may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this ordinance for any of the following reasons:
Whenever the permit was issued in error or on the basis of incorrect information supplied.
Whenever the work does not proceed in accordance with the plans as approved, or conditions of approval.
Whenever, in the judgment of the City Engineer, the work is not being performed in compliance with the requirements of this ordinance, or other City ordinances or state or federal law.
Whenever the City has been denied reasonable access to investigate and permitted work is proceeding.
Whenever any excavation or fill endangers or may reasonably be expected to endanger the public, the adjoining property or street, or utilities in street.
Upon suspension or revocation of a permit, all work in the right-of-way shall cease, except as authorized or directed by the City Engineer.

12.12.200 Methods of Enforcement.
The City is authorized to use any or all of the following methods in ordering correction or discontinuance of any such conditions:
Serving of oral and written directives to the permittee or other responsible person requesting immediate correction or discontinuance of the specified condition.
Service of a written notice of violation, ordering corrections or discontinuance of a specific condition or activity within a reasonable period of time.
Issuance of an order to immediately stop work until authorization is received from the City to proceed with such work.
Suspension or revocation of a permit as provided above.
Commencement of a civil action by the City Attorney or issuance of a civil violation or other legal process pursuant to SMC 1.01.080 and Chapter 1.14 SMC. (Ord. 2155, 2008)

12.12.210 Civil Infraction – Penalties.
It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to disrupt a street or cause the same to be done in violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance. Both the contractor and owner and/or permittee and/or any agents of the owner will be held jointly and severally responsible and liable under this ordinance. Additionally, the City shall have the right to require full restoration of the street to original or better condition immediately upon completion of the project, or to require that the applicant reimburse the City for all costs of street restoration. Violation of this Chapter shall be considered a civil violation pursuant to SMC 1.01.080 and Chapter 1.14 SMC, except as otherwise provided therein. (Ord. 1927, 1999; Ord. 2155, 2008)

12.12.220 Adoption of Standards and Procedures.
The City Engineer shall prepare and the City Council shall adopt by resolution standards and procedures for the purpose of implementing this ordinance. Policies for implementing procedures may be developed by the City Engineer as needed.

12.12.230 Liability.
The obligation of complying with the requirements of this ordinance rests upon the permittee, and no provision is intended to impose any special duty upon the City, or any of its officers, employees, or agents. Nothing contained in this ordinance or any procedures adopted hereunder is intended to be or shall be construed to create a special relationship with any contractor, owner, permittee, or member of the public, or form the basis for liability on the part of the City, or its officers, employees, or agents, for any injury or damage resulting from the failure of the permittee to comply with the provisions hereof, or by reason or in consequence of any act or omission in connection with the implementation of enforcement of this ordinance or any procedures adopted hereunder by the City, its officers, employees, or agents.
The City Engineer and other employees charged with the enforcement and administration of this ordinance or agents of the City, acting for the City in good faith and without malice in the discharge of their duties, shall not thereby render themselves liable personally for any damages which may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or by reason of any act or omission in the discharge of such duties.

12.12.240 Severability.
If any one or more sections, subsections, or sentences of this ordinance are held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decisions shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code, and the same shall remain in full force and effect.

Chapter 12.14 SIDEWALK USE PERMIT

Sections:
12.14.010    Purpose
12.14.020    Activities Regulated
12.14.030    Definitions
12.14.040    Permit Required
12.14.050    Fees
12.14.060    Application Materials
12.14.070    Regulations, Limitations, and Conditions
12.14.080    Permit Review Process, Term, Revocation, and Appeal
12.14.090    Indemnity and Insurance

12.14.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to establish provisions by which the City can evaluate and authorize private use of public streets and sidewalks while preserving the public’s health, safety, and welfare.

12.14.020 Activities Regulated.
A. This chapter pertains to the temporary use of public sidewalks and similar areas of public rights-of-way by persons or entities other than public agencies. Regulated uses include temporary and permanent fixtures and furnishings non-commercial in nature; activities, fixtures, and furnishings of a commercial nature; outdoor dining areas; display of merchandise; mobile vendors; public performances and exhibitions conducted with an expectation of financial compensation; and similar uses within public streets and sidewalks within the Historic Business District.
B. This chapter is not intended to regulate, abridge, or curtail the following:
    1. Uses, improvements, or activities of the City of Snohomish, or
    2. Rights and privileges guaranteed by state or federal law. (Ord. 2198, 2011)

12.14.030 Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this ordinance shall have the following meanings:
A. Non-commercial fixture or furnishing means a temporary feature, amenity, or improvement not owned or provided by the City of Snohomish that is provided for the general public’s use and enjoyment while not identifying, advertising, or promoting a particular business. Examples include flower baskets, flower pots, seating available to the general public, civic announcements, public art, street clocks, etc.
B. Permit means a sidewalk use permit issued by the City Planner.
C. Sidewalk means that portion of the right-of-way adjacent and parallel to the street, designated for pedestrian use. For the purposes of this chapter, “sidewalk” may include the area between a street curb and the outer extent of the right-of-way.
D. Sidewalk cafe means a portion of a public sidewalk on which tables and chairs are placed for the use of patrons while consuming food and/or beverages served by a cafe, restaurant, or tavern located on the abutting property. (Ord. 2198, 2011)

12.14.040 Permit Required.
It shall be unlawful to occupy or engage in a regulated activity within the sidewalk or right-of-way without a valid sidewalk use permit issued by the City Planner. Violation of this section shall be considered a civil violation pursuant to SMC 1.01.080 and Chapter 1.14 SMC, except as otherwise provided therein.

12.14.050 Fees.
A. Application review fee. At the time of filing the application for a sidewalk use permit, the applicant shall pay to the City an application review fee as established by resolution.
B. Sidewalk use fee. Prior to the issuance of a sidewalk use permit for a commercial (for-profit) use or activity, the applicant shall pay to the City a sidewalk use fee as established by resolution. No sidewalk use fee shall be required for non-commercial fixtures or furnishings as defined by this chapter. (Ord. 2198, 2011)

12.14.060 Application Materials.
Applications for sidewalk use permit shall include the following information and documents:
A. Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant.
B. Written authorization provided by the property owner and occupant/tenant of the adjacent private property.
C. Drawing to scale depicting the following:
    1. The specific location and dimensions of the proposed sidewalk use.
    2. Location(s) of ingress/egress to the sidewalk use and to the adjacent properties.
    3. Proposed location of fixtures, furniture, and other obstructions.
    4. Nearby on-street parking areas and crosswalks.
    5. Existing objects/obstructions such as street lights, traffic signs and signals, fire hydrants, solid waste receptacles, postal boxes, etc.
    6. Sidewalk area proposed for unobstructed use by the general public.
D. Hours of operation.
E. Written description of the proposed sidewalk use, including alcohol service, amplified music, lighting, signs, security, etc.
F. Written description of whether the proposed sidewalk use is provided for the use and enjoyment of the general public or whether use and enjoyment of the proposed sidewalk use will be available only to business patrons.
G. Written description of the means of securing/anchoring fixtures, furniture, and other obstructions.
H. Written description of fixtures, furniture, and other obstructions to remain in the sidewalk during non-business hours.
I. Written description of the proposed sidewalk use during special community events.
J. Written description of how the sidewalk area will be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition during and following the sidewalk use, and how the sidewalk area will be restored to its original condition.
K. During review of a sidewalk permit application, the City Planner may require additional information as needed to evaluate the application. (Ord. 2198, 2011)

12.14.070 Regulations, Limitations, and Conditions.
Sidewalk use permits shall be subject to the following provisions:
A. All sidewalk uses. 
    1. An unobstructed sidewalk area not less than six feet in width shall be maintained for public use. The sidewalk area reserved for the public’s use shall be free of obstructions, except for those fixtures required for public safety, such as traffic signal standards, fire hydrants, street light standards, etc. In instances where such obstructions exist, the minimum width of unobstructed public sidewalk shall be 4.5 feet.
    2. Use of the public sidewalk shall not obstruct required sight distances for motorists and pedestrians.
    3. Use of the public sidewalk shall not obstruct required ingress-egress to nearby properties.
    4. Use of the public sidewalk shall not obstruct access to public facilities such as traffic signals, fire hydrants, etc.
    5. When the City determines that access to the public sidewalk is required for work relating to infrastructure or utilities, the permittee shall suspend use of the public sidewalk and vacate the area as directed by the City Planner or City Engineer. In the event of an emergency, the City may remove or move fixtures and furniture authorized by a sidewalk use permit. The City shall not be liable for any damage to any fixtures or furniture located upon a public sidewalk.
    6. Unless specifically authorized by the City, fixtures, furniture, enclosures, etc. may not be hung from or fastened to City or utility improvements (sign posts, street light standards, etc.).
    7. Use of the public sidewalk shall comply with all applicable local, state, and/or federal laws and regulations.
    8. The permit applicant shall agree to defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the City of Snohomish as provided by SMC 12.14.090.
    9. The permittee shall maintain insurance coverage required by this chapter for the duration of the use of the public sidewalk.
    10. The City Planner may approve sidewalk use permits for signs for civic and community events authorized by special event permit. No other signs or advertising shall be permitted under this chapter.
    11. The City Planner may, at his/her discretion, require a bond or other surety to ensure the provisions of this chapter are satisfied.
    12. The City Planner may, at his/her discretion, attach other special conditions to a sidewalk use permit. Such conditions shall be necessary to satisfy the purpose of this chapter and to protect the public’s health, safety, and welfare.
B. Sidewalk cafes. 
    1. The sale, service, and consumption of alcoholic beverages at sidewalk cafes is prohibited unless permitted by the Washington State Liquor Control Board and done in compliance with all applicable local, state, and federal regulations and laws.
    2. Additionally, alcohol service may be provided only by establishments offering food prepared onsite for onsite consumption.
    3. The hours of operation for sidewalk cafes shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
    4. Commercial signs, banners, pennants, etc. for sidewalk cafes are prohibited unless otherwise authorized under Chapter 14.245 SMC. (Ord. 2198, 2011)

12.14.080 Permit Review Process, Term, Revocation, and Appeal.
A. Permit review process. Sidewalk use permits shall be processed as a Type I Land Use Permit as provided by Title 14 SMC.
B. Term of permit. Unless specifically authorized by the City Planner, sidewalk use permits shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of permit issuance.
C. Revocation. 
    1. All permits approved under this chapter shall be temporary, shall vest no permanent right, and may be revoked at the sole discretion of the City upon the 30 days’ written notice from the City Planner to the permit holder, or without notice in the event that after consultation with the City Engineer and the Chief of Police, the City Planner determines that a sidewalk use or activity has posed, or is likely to pose, a threat to the public’s health, safety, or welfare.
    2. Permits shall also be revoked by the City Planner if:
        a. The permittee fails to maintain insurance in accordance with SMC 12.14.090; or
        b. After written notice from the City, the permittee fails to pay any required use or other applicable fees; or
        c. The permittee fails to comply with the terms and/or conditions of the permit, and/or fails to comply with any provision of this chapter.
    3. The decision to revoke a sidewalk use permit is conclusive.
D. Appeals. An appeal of the City Planner’s determination regarding whether to issue a sidewalk use permit shall be made and processed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 14.20 SMC.

12.14.090 Indemnity and Insurance.
A. Indemnity. Prior to issuance of a sidewalk use permit, the applicant shall execute and deliver to the City, upon a form supplied by the City Planner, a written agreement to defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the City and its officers, elected officials, employees, and agents from any and all claims, actions, or damages of every kind and description which may accrue to, or be suffered by, any persons and/or entities by reason of or related to the sidewalk use for which the permit is sought.
B. Insurance. 
    1. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the applicant shall provide the City Planner with a certificate of public liability insurance, and where liquor is authorized to be served, liquor liability insurance. The permittee shall maintain said insurance coverage during the entire term of the sidewalk use permit, any extensions or renewals thereof, and during any period of holdover where the permittee is using a public sidewalk but does not have a valid permit.
    2. The public liability insurance shall be written on an occurrence basis, shall name the City as an additional insured, and shall contain a provision prohibiting cancellation of the policy except upon not less than 30 days’ prior written notice to the City.
    3. The public liability insurance shall have the following minimum insurance limits coverage: $1,000,000 commercial general liability insurance per occurrence combined with single limits, and $2,000,000 aggregate.

Chapter 12.16 LOCAL IMPROVEMENT GUARANTY FUND

Sections:
12.16.010    Provision of moneys for fund
12.16.020    Foreclosure – Council’s order, authority
12.16.030    Foreclosure – County taxes – Notification
12.16.040    City’s right to lease, sell purchased property
12.16.050    Moneys to be deposited in fund
12.16.060    Use of funds – City’s obligation to pay
12.16.070    Investment of proceeds

12.16.010 Provision of moneys for fund.
Each year the City Council shall, as part of the biennial budget and/or budget amendment process and its review of the annual levy needed to meet the financial requirements of the City, include a levy in any amount not to exceed five (5) percent of the amount of bonds or warrants issued during the preceding fiscal year to meet the cost of local improvements in districts established and constructed during said fiscal year, as the Council may from time to time determine, unless the amount then in the “local improvement guarantee fund” shall equal said five (5) percent. (Ord. 568, 1927; Ord. 2354, 2018)

12.16.020 Foreclosure – Council’s order, authority.
When any assessment levied against any lot, parcel or tract of land, in any local improvement district established in said City shall be delinquent for a sufficient length of time to subject said lots, tract or parcel of land to foreclosure for the collection of said delinquent assessment, the City Treasurer shall notify the City Council in writing, giving the description of such lot, tract or parcel of land so subject to foreclosure and the amount of assessment, penalties and interest against the same. The City Council shall then consider said report, and, within one year from January first, of each year, direct the City Attorney to bring foreclosure proceedings against such lot, tract or parcel of land for such delinquent assessment. (Ord. 568, 1927)

12.16.030 Foreclosure – County taxes – Notification.
It shall also be the duty of the City Treasurer to notify the City Council, in writing, and transmit any notice which may be served upon him by the county treasurer of Snohomish County, Washington, relating to the foreclosure or sale by the county of delinquent general taxes against any lot, tract or parcel of land included in any such local improvement district where the local improvement assessments have not bean paid in full, and the Council shall consider such report and may direct the proper officer of said City to pay said general taxes against such lot, tract or parcel of land out of said “local improvement guarantee fund” or to bid in such lot, tract or parcel of land at the sale thereof by the county. (Ord. 568, 1927)

12.16.040 City’s right to lease, sell purchased property.
The City Council, after the purchase by the City of any such lot, tract or parcel of land, shall have the right to lease or sell such lot, tract or parcel of land on such terms, in such manner and at such price as it bay determine to be for the best interest of the City. (Ord. 568, 1927)

12.16.050 Moneys to be deposited in fund.
All moneys realized for the sale of any such lot, tract or parcel of land by the City, (after the payment of the amount of general taxes against the same, and the delinquent local improvement assessments against such lot, and cost of foreclosure) all taxes specially levied and collected for said fund, and all interest received by the City Treasurer from moneys invested from said fund, and all surplus remaining in any local improvement district fund after the payment of warrants and bonds issued in said local improvement district in full, shall be placed in said local improvement guarantee fund. (Ord. 568, 1927)

12.16.060 Use of funds – City’s obligation to pay.
Except as herein provided, the moneys in said local improvement guarantee fund shall be used only for the purpose of paying up delinquent bonds, interest coupons and warrants issued by said city for the payment of expenses of local improvement districts; and the City of Snohomish does not obligate itself or guaranty the payment of said local improvement bonds, or warrants, except there be a sufficient amount levied for or in said fund sufficient to pay such delinquent local improvement bonds, interest coupons or warrants, as provided for in this chapter, and in RCW Chapter 35.54. (Ord. 568, 1927)

12.16.070 Investment of proceeds.
The City Treasurer is directed to invest the proceeds of said local improvement guaranty fund from time to time in accordance with the prevailing legal requirements, with the earning of all investments paid into said guaranty fund. (Ord. 568, 1927; Ord. 1363, 1977)

Chapter 12.20 SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR

Sections:
12.20.010    Abutting Premises Owner’s Duty to Maintain
12.20.020    Notice to Repair – Authorized
12.20.030    Notice to Repair – Service
12.20.050    Failure to Improve – City Action – Cost
12.20.060    Definitions
12.20.080    Construction Procedure
12.20.090    Abutting Premises Owners’ Liability to Injured Party and City for Failure to Maintain
12.20.100    City’s Action for Failure to Improve – Fine
12.20.110    Abutting Premises Owners’ Duty to Keep Sidewalks Clear of Ice and Snow – Liability to Injured Parties and City
12.20.120    City’s Action for Abutting Property Owners’ Failure to Remove Snow and Ice – Cost
12.20.130    Permit – Required
12.20.140    Permit – Issuance Restrictions
12.20.150    Permit – Application – Contents Required – Issuance Authority
12.20.160    Permit Fee Schedule
12.20.170    Permit – Expiration
12.20.180    Inspection – Required
12.20.190    Inspection – Notification of Readiness Required
12.20.200    Director of Public Works to be Administrative Authority – Powers and Duties

12.20.010 Abutting Premises Owner’s Duty to Maintain.
Whenever any street, lane, square, place, or alley in the City of Snohomish has been or shall have been improved by the construction of a sidewalk or sidewalks along either or both sides thereof, the duty, burden, and expense of the maintenance, repair, and renewal of such sidewalk, or sidewalks shall devolve upon the property directly abutting on that side of such street along which such sidewalk has been constructed as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 388, 1912)

12.20.020 Notice to Repair – Authorized.
Whenever in the judgment of the Public Works Director, or such person as shall be designated by the Public Works Director, the construction of any sidewalk in the City is such as to render the same unfit or unsafe for the purpose of public travel, the said officer shall thereupon serve, or cause to be served, a written notice on the property owner of the property immediately abutting upon said portion of the sidewalk, of the condition thereof, instructions said owner to clean, clear, repair, or replace said portion of the sidewalk in such manner as officials shall designate. (Ord. 388, 1912; Ord. 1312, 1976)

12.20.030 Notice to Repair – Service.
The notice provided for herein shall be deemed sufficiently served if delivered in person to the owner of said property or his authorized agent, or by leaving a copy of such notice at the home of the owner or authorized agent with some person of suitable age and discretion, or by mailing said notice to the owner or authorized agent by certified mail, return receipt requested; or if the owner is a nonresident, by mailing by certified mail, return receipt requested, a copy of said notice to his last known addresses, or if the owner of the property be unknown or if his address be unknown, then such notice shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, and addressed to the general delivery office of the City of Snohomish. (Ord. 388, 1912; Ord. 1312, 1976)

12.20.050 Failure to Improve – City Action – Cost.
If any such property owner, who has been notified, fails to make the improvements so ordered within the time specified in such notice, then the public works director shall proceed to make the improvement so ordered and shall report to the City Council the cost of such improvement. The City Council at its regular meeting shall assess the cost of such work against the property owner and the parcel of land immediately abutting on that portion of the sidewalk so improved, which charge or assessment shall be a lien upon said property and shall be collected by due process of law in the same manner as are other local improvement assessments by the City Clerk causing said costs to be recorded on the assessment roll, and said assessment shall constitute a special assessment against and a lien upon the property. (Ord. 388, 1912; Ord. 1312, 1976)

12.20.060 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, all property having a frontage upon the sides or margin of any street shall be deemed “abutting property,” and such property shall be chargeable as provided in this chapter for all costs of cleaning, clearing, and repairing or replacing any form of sidewalk, such payments to be in accordance with Resolution No. 389A, of the City of Snohomish. Between said street margin and the roadway on and in front of and adjacent to it, the term “sidewalk,” for the purpose of this chapter, shall be taken to include any and all constructions or forms of street improvements included in the streets spaced between the margin and the roadway, excluding the curb and gutter, which shall be constructed by the City of Snohomish in accordance with Resolution No. 389. (Ord. 388, 1912; Ord. 1312, 1976)

12.20.080 Construction Procedure.
All cleaning, clearing, repairs, and replacement or construction of new sidewalks, curbs or gutters, or combined curbs or gutters, shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications as provided by the Public Works Director of the City of Snohomish. (Ord. 388, 1912; Ord. 554, 1926; Ord. 1312, 1976)

12.20.090 Abutting Premises Owners’ Liability to Injured Party and City for Failure to Maintain.
Every abutting property owner, who has been notified as provided in Sections 12.20.020 and 12.20.030, who shall fail to make improvements to the abutting sidewalk as ordered, shall be liable for injury or damage to any person caused by the defective condition of the sidewalk. Such owner shall be liable to the City for all damages, injuries, costs, and disbursements which it may be required to pay the person injured. (Ord. 1261, 1975)

12.20.100 City’s Action for Failure to Improve – Fine.
Every abutting property owner, who, after having received notice from the Public Works Director of the City of Snohomish as provided in Sections 12.20.020 and 12.20.030, that the sidewalk in front of the property owned or controlled by such person is out of condition or repair, shall neglect or refuse to put such sidewalk in condition or repair within the time and in the manner provided by such notice, shall be in violation of this Chapter of the Snohomish Municipal Code, and such violation shall be considered a civil violation pursuant to SMC 1.01.080 and Chapter 1.14 SMC, except as otherwise provided therein. (Ord. 1261, 1975; Ord. 1927, 1999; Ord. 2155, 2008)

12.20.110 Abutting Premises Owners’ Duty to Keep Sidewalks Clear of Ice and Snow – Liability to Injured Parties and City.
Every owner of property within the City limits of Snohomish, shall, during the time snow shall continue on the ground, by nine a.m. upon every day after the snowfall, and when necessary, clear the sidewalk in front of such property of snow and ice and shall keep it conveniently free therefrom during the day; or shall, in case the ice and snow are so congealed that they cannot be removed without injury to such sidewalks, cause the snow and ice to be strewn with ashes, sand, or other suitable material. Any abutting property owner neglecting or refusing to comply with the provisions of Sections 12.20.090 through 12.20.120 shall be liable to any person for injuries or damages caused by such failure and such owner shall be liable to the City for all damages, injuries, costs, and disbursements which it may be required to pay the person injured. (Ord. 1261, 1975)

12.20.120 City’s Action for Abutting Property Owners’ Failure to Remove Snow and Ice – Cost.
Whenever any person shall neglect or refuse to remove snow or ice as compelled by this chapter, the Public Works Director shall cause all such snow and ice to be removed and shall report the same, together with verified vouchers of the costs of the removal, to the City Council, and the costs shall be assessed upon the lot, block, or property abutting upon the sidewalk from which the said snow and ice are removed, and the City Council shall make a special assessment for the same and said assessment shall be a lien upon said lot, block, or other property, collected by due process of law as other local improvement assessments. (Ord. 1261, 1975)

12.20.130 Permit – Required.
It is unlawful for any person to install, remove, alter, repair, replace, or construct any sidewalk, curb, gutter, or driveway, or combination of the same, or cause the same to be done in the City, without first obtaining a permit to do such work from the Director of Public Works.
A separate permit shall be obtained for proposed improvements abutting each separate lot or parcel of property under common ownership.
No person shall allow any other person to do or cause to be done any work under a permit secured by a permittee except persons in his employ.
The permit required pursuant to this section shall also be subject to all requirements of Ordinance 1708, as codified in SMC Chapter 12.12 as it now reads or is hereafter amended. Any permitting requirements set forth in this chapter that are inconsistent with SMC Chapter 12.12 shall be superseded and controlled by the provisions of SMC Chapter 12.12. (Ord. 1721, 1992)

12.20.140 Permit – Issuance Restrictions.
Any permit required by this chapter may be issued to any properly licensed person not acting in violation of any current contractor licensing law, or to the owner of any single-family dwelling located on the premises abutting the proposed work. (Ord. 1322, 1976)

12.20.150 Permit – Application – Contents Required – Issuance Authority.
A. Any person legally entitled to apply for and receive a permit shall make such application on forms provided for that purpose. He shall give a description of the character of the work proposed to be done, and the location and ownership of the premises in connection therewith. The Director of Public Works may require plans, specifications, or drawings and such other information as he may deem necessary.
B. If the Director of Public Works determines that the plans, specifications, drawings, descriptions, or information furnished by the applicant are in compliance with this code, he shall issue the permit applied for upon payment of the required fee as hereinafter fixed. (Ord. 1322, 1976)

12.20.160 Permit Fee Schedule.
Every applicant for a permit to do work regulated by this code shall, at the time of making such application, pay a permit fee set by resolution of the City Council (Ord. 2299, 2016)

12.20.170 Permit – Expiration.
Every permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit is not completed within sixty days of the date of issuance. Before such work can be recommenced, a new permit shall be first obtained to do so and a new fee paid therefor. (Ord. 1322, 1976)

12.20.180 Inspection – Required.
All work done pursuant to this chapter shall be inspected by the Director of Public Works or his designee, to assure compliance with all requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1322, 1976)

12.20.190 Inspection – Notification of Readiness Required.
It shall be the duty of the person doing the work authorized by the permit to notify the Director of Public Works, orally or in writing, that the work is ready for inspection. Such notification shall be given not less than twenty-four hours before the work is to be inspected. (Ord. 1322, 1976)

12.20.200 Director of Public Works to be Administrative Authority – Powers and Duties.
The Director of Public Works of the City of Snohomish, or his designee, shall be the authority empowered and responsible for the administration of this chapter; he shall perform the following duties:
A. Require submission of, examine, and check plans and specifications, drawings, descriptions, and/or diagrams necessary to show clearly the character and kind and extent of work covered by applications for a permit, and upon approval thereof, shall issue the permit applied for;
B. Keep a permanent accurate account of all fees for permits issued and other moneys collected and received as provided by this code, the names of the persons upon whose account the same were paid, the date and amount thereof, together with the location or premises to which they relate;
C. Administer and enforce the provisions of this code in a manner consistent with the intent thereof; for such purposes he shall have the powers of a police officer. He shall inspect or cause to be inspected all sidewalk construction, improvement, and repair work authorized by any permit to assure compliance with provisions of this code and amendments thereto, approving or condemning said work in whole or in part as conditions require;
D. Issue upon request a certificate of approval for any work approved by him;
E. Condemn and reject all work done or being done or materials used or being used which do not, in all respects, comply with the provisions of this code and amendments thereto;
F. Order changes in workmanship and/or materials essential to obtain compliance with all provisions of this code;
G. Investigate any construction or work regulated by this code and issue such notices and orders as provided in this code;
H. Keep a completed record of all essential transactions of his office;
I. Transfer all fees collected by him to the proper authority provided by law to receive such funds. (Ord. 1322, 1976)

Chapter 12.24 WIDTH OF SIDEWALKS

Sections:
12.24.010    Distance from property line

12.24.010 Distance from property line.
The outside line of all sidewalks constructed in the City shall be such distance from the property line of the abutting property as shall be fixed by the City Engineer and approved by the City Council. (Ord. 238, 1907; Ord. 420, 1913)

Chapter 12.28 LETTING CONTRACTS

Sections:
12.28.010    When contracts required
12.28.020    Bids from City residents
12.28.030    Publication of notice for bidders
12.28.040    Submitting bids – Opening bids – Letting contract

12.28.010 When contracts required.
All work for the erection, improvement and repair of all public buildings and works in the City of Snohomish, and all street and sewer work, and all work in or about streams, bay or waterfronts, or in or about embankments, or other works for protection against overflow, or additions or repairs to the waterworks system of said City and all supplies and materials furnished for the same, when the expenditure required for the same exceeds the sum of five hundred dollars, shall be done and furnished upon contract and shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 345, 1911)

12.28.020 Bids from City residents.
The City Council shall as far as practicable, receive bids from residents of this City only. (Ord. 345, 1911)

12.28.030 Publication of notice for bidders.
The City Clerk shall give notice of the time and place of letting of contracts referred to in Section 12.28.010 by publication in the newspaper published in the City, which shall at the time be under contract to do the advertising for the City, which notice shall be first published at least ten days before the date fixed for letting such contracts, and shall be inserted in each issue of such newspaper thereafter until the day fixed for letting such contract; and such notice shall state clearly the character of the work to be done, or amount of supplies to be furnished, and shall state where those desiring to bid may find the specifications for such work or supplies for the purpose of examination with a view to submitting bids. Such notice shall also state that such bids will be received and such contract let at the Council Chamber in the City where the City Council may be holding its regular meetings at the time such notice may be given. (Ord. 345, 1911)

12.28.040 Submitting bids – Opening bids – Letting contract.
At the time and place mentioned in the notice referred to in Section 12.28.010 all persons desiring to bid shall submit sealed bids in writing, clearly and succinctly stating the amount thereof, and referring to the plans and specifications for such work then on file; and such bids shall be opened in the presence of the City Council, and such contracts shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder.
All bids shall be accompanied with a certified check equal in amount to five per cent of the estimated cost of the proposed work, which amount shall be forfeited to the city should such contract be awarded to such party and he should fail or refuse to enter into contract as required by this chapter and by the City Council.
The person or persons to whom such contract may be awarded shall furnish such bond to the City as the City Council may require.
The City Council may reject all bids presented and readvertise in their discretion. (Ord. 345, 1911)

Chapter 12.40 MOVING BUILDINGS

Sections:
12.40.010    Building Materials on Street – Moving Buildings – Bond
12.40.020    Building Moving – License Fee
12.40.030    Authority of Street Superintendent in Emergency
12.40.040    Penalty for Violations

12.40.010 Building Materials on Street – Moving Buildings – Bond.
No person, corporation, firm, or association of persons shall place or cause to be placed, any stone, brick, timber, lumber, planks, boards, cement, lime, sand, gravel, or other material for building purposes of any kind or nature whatsoever, in or upon any street, avenue, alley, or other public ground in the City. No person, corporation, firm, or association of persons shall use any street, alley, avenue, or other public ground, including sidewalks, within the City, for the removal of any building, without first having obtained a written permit and license therefor pursuant to the requirements of SMC Chapter 12.12 as it now reads or is hereafter amended, from the City Council, and without executing a good and sufficient bond to be furnished by any surety company authorized to transact the business of a surety within the State of Washington, which shall be approved by the City Council. In the case of placing or causing to be placed the above enumerated building materials in any street, avenue, alley, or other public ground in the City, said bond shall be in the penal sum of one thousand dollars and in case the applicant desires to use any street, avenue, alley, or other public ground in the City for the removal of any building, such bond shall be in the penal sum of ten thousand dollars. In either event said bond shall be conditioned that said applicant for said permit and license will well and truly comply with all terms of said permit and license, all ordinances of the City of Snohomish then in force relating to such operations, and further conditioned to save said City harmless from all claims, actions, demands, and/or damages of every kind and description which may accrue to or be suffered by any person or persons by reason of the granting of said permit and license or by reason of negligent operations thereunder, and further conditioned that all sidewalks, street crossings, street pavement, or other street improvements of any description shall be restored to as good condition as same were in immediately prior to the granting of such permit and license, and to the satisfaction of the City Council. (Ord. 1721, 1992)

12.40.020 Building Moving – License Fee.
The license fee for the removal of buildings in, upon, or along any of the places mentioned in Section 12.40.010 hereof, shall be set by resolution of the City Council (Ord. 699, 1941; Ord. 2299, 2016)

12.40.030 Authority of Street Superintendent in Emergency.
Authority is hereby given the Street Superintendent of the City to issue the permits hereinabove required upon compliance with the provisions of Sections 12.40.010 and 12.40.020 hereof, in cases deemed by him an emergency, without reference of same to the City Council; and authority is further given the Street Superintendent to waive the requirements hereinabove provided in Sections 12.40.010 and 12.40.020 hereof, in all cases deemed by him not applicable to this chapter. (Ord. 699, 1941; Ord. 702, 1941)

12.40.040 Penalty for Violations.
Violation of this Chapter of the Snohomish Municipal Code shall be considered a civil violation pursuant to SMC 1.01.080 and Chapter 1.14 SMC, except as otherwise provided therein. (Ord. 699, 1941; Ord. 1927, 1999; Ord. 2155, 2008)

Chapter 12.44 ADDRESS AND HOUSE NUMBERS

Sections:
12.44.010    City Engineer to fix numbers

12.44.010 City Engineer to fix numbers.
It shall be the duty of the City Engineer to establish and designate all address and house numbers within the city limits of the City of Snohomish and to give any owner of the frontage concerning such address or street number, and such other persons as may be appropriate, proper notice of the number allocated. (Ord. 352, 1911; Ord. 970, 1965; Ord. 1198, 1973)

Chapter 12.48 STREET VACATION

Sections:
12.48.010    Petition – Fee – Subdivision Vacation
12.48.015    Preapplication Procedure
12.48.020    Petition – Procedure – Investigation – Survey
12.48.030    Resolution Setting Public Hearing
12.48.040    Compensation
12.48.050    Nonuser Statute
12.48.060    Public Hearing Notice – Fifty Percent Objection
12.48.070    Appraisal – Fees
12.48.080    Granting Criteria
12.48.090    Vacation Ordinance
12.48.100    Notice of Action to Auditor and Appraiser
12.48.110    Use of Proceeds of Vacation
12.48.120    Title to Vacated Street or Alley

12.48.010 Petition – Fee – Subdivision Vacation.
A. The owner of an interest in any real estate abutting on any street or alley who may desire to vacate any street or alley, or any part thereof, shall petition the City Council for the vacation of such street or alley or any part thereof in the manner hereinafter provided in this chapter and pursuant to Chapter 35.79 RCW. Such petition shall be on such form as may be prescribed by the City, shall contain a full and correct legal description and map of the property sought to be vacated, and shall be signed by the owners of more than two-thirds of the property abutting upon the part of such street or alley sought to be vacated.
B. Fees to be paid on the filing of a petition shall be established by resolution of the City Council. Until all fees have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on the petition.
C. If a proposed street vacation is part of a proposed vacation of a subdivision or short subdivision, then the procedure for vacation of subdivisions under RCW 58.17.212 shall be used and complied with, and the street vacation procedure under this chapter shall not be used. (Ord. 2123, 2007; Ord. 2305, 2016)

12.48.015 Preapplication Procedure.
A. Prior to submitting a petition for the vacation of any street or alley, any abutting property owner may submit a written request to the City Clerk for a preapplication meeting with the City Council to discuss the proposal. The request shall include a description of the right-of-way for which vacation is intended to be sought, a statement of the applicant’s reasons for requesting vacation, and a statement as to how the requested vacation meets the criteria for granting a vacation as set forth in SMC 12.48.080. No fee shall be required in connection with the preapplication meeting request.
B. Upon receipt of a request for a preapplication meeting, the City Clerk shall schedule the meeting. At the meeting, the City Council may hear from the applicant, other interested parties, and City staff concerning the proposal. The Council may preliminarily determine if there are any of the granting criteria that the proposal appears incapable of complying with. This preliminary determination shall not be final or binding in any respect. If the applicant thereafter decides to proceed with a street vacation petition, all provisions of this chapter shall apply. (Ord. 2123, 2007)

12.48.020 Petition – Procedure – Investigation – Survey.
A. Upon receiving a petition, and payment of fees for the vacation of a City street or alley, and upon completion of the report referenced in Subsection C below, from the Public Works Director or designee (hereafter “Public Works Director”), the City Clerk will place the matter upon the agenda of a meeting of the City Council. The City Clerk shall notify the petitioners in writing of the date the matter shall come before the City Council.
B. The City Clerk shall notify the Public Works Director of all proposed vacations. It shall be the duty of the Public Works Director to investigate and report on the matters set forth in SMC 12.48.020(C).
C. Prior to the presentation of the petition to the City Council, the Public Works Director shall investigate and report on the following:
    1. Ownership of the property abutting on the street or portion sought to be vacated. Proof of ownership of abutting property by the title insurance or certificates may be required, such proof to be furnished by, and at the expense of, the petitioners;
    2. Whether and in what respect the public may be benefited or harmed by the vacation;
    3. Whether the public benefit of the area’s use is insufficient to justify the cost of maintenance;
    4. Which property or properties will be directly benefited or adversely affected by the vacation, and in what way;
    5. What effect the vacation will or may have upon property served or which might be served by said vacated street, and whether said street has been opened or constructed, and if so, to what standard;
    6. How said street relates to other streets and highways, and whether other portions of the subject street or alley have already been vacated;
    7. Whether the substitution of an alternate way would be more useful to the public;
    8. Whether future changes in conditions may increase public use or need;
    9. How and when the street or alley sought to be vacated became a public right-of-way;
    10. Whether any utilities now exist in said street, or whether such street may be reasonably necessary for future utility uses;
    11. The necessity or desirability of the City retaining an easement or the right to exercise and grant easements for emergency vehicle access and construction, repair, and maintenance of public utilities and services over the land sought to be vacated;
    12. Whether any abutting owner would become landlocked or its access substantially impaired; i.e., whether there is an alternative motive ingress and egress, even if less convenient;
    13. If the right-of-way abuts a body of water, how the proposed vacation would or would not comply with the requirements set forth in RCW 35.79.035; and
    14. Any other matters relevant to the vacation of the street or alley.
D. The Public Works Director shall determine whether or not the location and legal description of the street or alley proposed for vacation are sufficiently known to the City so that an accurate legal description of the proposed vacation may be made and so that the location of the property proposed for vacation can be known with certainty. If the Public Works Director determines that these matters are not known or are not accurately known, then the City shall notify the petitioners of the necessity of having an accurate professional survey of the property proposed for vacation with the boundaries of the proposed vacation marked upon the ground and an accurate legal description by a licensed surveyor of the proposed vacation to be furnished to the City at the applicants’ expense. The City shall not proceed further upon the vacation petition and a public hearing shall not be set until such a survey has been done and legal description received. (Ord. 1364, 1977; Ord. 2123, 2007; Ord. 2305, 2016)

12.48.030 Resolution Setting Public Hearing.
A. The City Council shall consider the report of the Public Works Director, shall consider whether the Council will require that the City be compensated as a condition of the vacation, and shall determine whether to adopt a resolution setting a public hearing on the proposed vacation. The Council will generally make its determination regarding compensation before it adopts the resolution, but the Council shall retain the discretion to review its determination following the public hearing.
B. For both petition and Council-initiated vacations proposed for public hearing, the City Council shall adopt a resolution setting a time for the hearing, which is not less than 20 nor more than 60 days from the date of passage of the resolution. (Ord. 2123, 2007)

12.48.040 Compensation.
The City Council may require the petitioners to compensate the City of Snohomish, prior to the vacation becoming effective, in accordance with the following criteria:
A. If the City Council determines in its discretion to grant the petition for vacation or any part thereof, the Council may by ordinance vacate such street or alley. Except as otherwise provided herein, such ordinance shall not become effective until the City is compensated in an amount which does not exceed one-half the appraised value of the area to be vacated;
B. Notwithstanding (A) above, when the street or alley has been part of a dedicated public right-of-way for twenty-five years or more, or when the street or alley or portions thereof were acquired at public expense, an amount that does not exceed the full appraised value of the area vacated;
C. Compensation may be waived or reduced either when the vacation is initiated by the City of Snohomish or when the City Council deems it to be in the best interest of the City in accordance with the following criteria:
    1. When the abutting property is owned by a governmental entity or by a non-profit corporation whose purpose is for the necessary support of the poor or infirm; or
    2. When the street or alley was vacated by the provisions of Section 32, Chapter 19, Laws of 1889-90 (as described in SMC 12.48.050).
    3. When the street or alley (right-of-way) vacated is traded for property of greater or approximately equal value;
    4. When the street or alley (right-of-way) vacated is abutting residential properties and is 1500 square feet or less, the appraisal required under SMC section 12.48.070 may be waived and the value calculated as a percentage of the average Snohomish County Assessor assessed value of the abutting properties.
    5. When the street or alley (right-of-way) vacated is de minimis, under 500 square feet, or otherwise has little to no assessed value. (Ord. 1364, 1977; Ord. 1996, 2001; Ord. 2123, 2007; Ord. 2305, 2016)

12.48.050 Nonuser Statute.
A. Section 32, Chapter 19, Laws 1889-90, is known as the “nonuser” statute and reads as follows: “Any county road, or part thereof, which remains unopen for public use for a period of five years after the order is made or authority granted for opening it, shall be thereby vacated, and the authority for building it barred by lapse of time.”
B. The nonuser statute was amended in 1909 by adding a significant proviso, which is set forth in the current, codified version of the statute, which reads as follows:
RCW 36.87.090
Vacation of road unopened for five years -- Exceptions.
Any county road, or part thereof, which remains unopen for public use for a period of five years after the order is made or authority granted for opening it, shall be thereby vacated, and the authority for building it barred by lapse of time: PROVIDED, That this section shall not apply to any highway, road, street, alley, or other public place dedicated as such in any plat, whether the land included in such plat is within or without the limits of an incorporated city or town, or to any land conveyed by deed to the state or to any county, city or town for highways, roads, streets, alleys, or other public places.
C. The proviso in RCW 36.87.090 exempts streets dedicated in a plat from the nonuser statute. In applying this proviso, the statute cannot have a retroactive effect, if it would interfere with vested rights. Thus, where a county road was dedicated and unopened for five years prior to the 1909 proviso and was not annexed into a city during said five year period, the right of abutting property owners to the vacated road vested and is unaffected by the proviso. On the other hand, where the five-year period had not run by the time of the 1909 proviso, the abutting property owner did not have a vested right and the proviso “saved” the unopened road from automatic vacation.
D. Although the nonuser statute applies without regard to the City’s street vacation process under Ch. 35.79 RCW, property owners who abut a street vacated under the nonuser statute may nonetheless apply to the City to “formally” vacate the street by ordinance. Abutting property owners may use this method to clear title to right-of-way vacated under the nonuser statute rather than filing a quiet title action in Superior Court, which can be more costly and cumbersome than the street vacation ordinance process. Accordingly, the City will consider petitions to formally vacate streets or alleys that have been vacated by operation of the nonuser statute, if said streets or alleys were dedicated and unopened as county roads for five years prior to the 1909 proviso and if the City has not acquired said streets or alleys by prescription /adverse possession, purchase, eminent domain, or other means. The burden shall be on the property owner requesting vacation to provide all necessary title and historical information to the City to demonstrate that the nonuser statute operates to vacate the subject property. (Ord. 2123, 2007)

12.48.060 Public Hearing Notice – Fifty Percent Objection.
A. Upon the passage of the resolution referenced in SMC 12.48.030, the City Clerk shall give twenty days notice of the pendency of the petition by a written notice posted in three of the most public places in the City and a like notice in a conspicuous place on the street or alley sought to be vacated. The said notice shall contain a statement that a petition has been filed to vacate the street or alley described in the notice, together with a statement of the time and place fixed for the hearing of the petition. In all cases where the proceeding is initiated by resolution of the City without a petition having been signed by the owners of more than two-thirds of the property abutting upon the part of the street or alley sought to be vacated, in addition to notice hereinabove required, there shall be given by mail at least fifteen days before the date fixed for the hearing, a similar notice to the owners or reputed owners of all lots, tracts, or parcels of land or other property abutting upon any street or alley or any part thereof sought to be vacated, or within 300 feet thereof, as shown on the rolls of the County Treasurer, directed to the addresses thereon shown. Failure to send notice by mail to any such property owner where the current address of such property owner is not a matter of public record shall not invalidate any proceedings in connection with the proposed street vacation. The costs of the notice shall be borne by the applicant.
B. In all cases, the City shall be prohibited from proceeding further with the street vacation process, if fifty percent or more of the abutting property owners file written objection to the proposed vacation with the City Clerk prior to the time of hearing. (Ord. 1364, 1977; Ord. 2123, 2007)

12.48.070 Appraisal – Fees.
A. In all cases where the City Council requires compensation for the vacated right-of-way, except for those cases where compensation is waived pursuant to SMC 12.48.040 C, an appraisal of the right-of-way proposed for vacation shall be made. Said appraisal shall be by a professional appraiser selected by the City unless otherwise determined by the Public Works Director. The cost of the appraisal shall be borne by the applicant.
The petitioner may select the appraiser of their choice as follows:
    1. either from a list of appraisers approved by the City, or
    2. by selecting a Washington State Certified and licensed Real Estate Appraiser who is familiar with the local market conditions and with a reputation for respecting the rules and regulations applicable to appraisers. The petitioner must submit the Appraisers name and credentials to the City and receive prior written approval by the Public Works Director.
B. Petition Denial for nonpayment of fee or Failure to submit appraisal.
Pursuant to SMC 12.48.010 B, no action shall take place on the Petition until fees have been paid in full. Therefore, if the application fee is not paid by the petitioner or the appraisal is not received by the City within twelve (12) months of the petition filing date, the petition will be denied and the petitioner/applicant/ owner will be required to re-apply and pay a new filing fee. (Ord. 2123, 2007; Ord. 2305, 2016)

12.48.080 Granting Criteria.
A. The City Council shall not vacate any street, alley, or any parts thereof, if any portion thereof abuts any body of saltwater or freshwater, unless such vacation is sought to enable the City or State to acquire the property for port purposes, boat moorage or launching sites, park, viewpoint, recreational, or educational purposes, or other public uses and unless the requirements of RCW 35.79.030 and this chapter are complied with.
B. The City Council shall use the following criteria for deciding upon all street vacation petitions:
    1. That the vacation will provide a public benefit, and/or will be for a public purpose, which public benefit may consist of economic and business support derived by the community from the petitioners;
    2. That the right-of-way vacation shall not adversely affect the street pattern or circulation of the immediate area or the community as a whole;
    3. That the public need shall not be adversely affected;
    4. That the right-of-way is not contemplated or needed for future public use;
    5. That no abutting owner becomes landlocked or its access will not be substantially impaired; i.e., there must be an alternative motive ingress and egress, even if less convenient; and
    6. That provision has been made for utility easements, when needed for the right to construct, repair, and maintain public utility facilities.
C. The City Council may, at the time of its public hearing, determine that the City may retain an easement or right to exercise and grant easements in respect to the vacated land for the construction, repair, and maintenance of public utilities and services. (Ord. 1364, 1977; Ord. 1996, 2001; Ord. 2123, 2007)

12.48.090 Vacation Ordinance.
If the City Council determines to grant such petition, or any part thereof, the Council shall authorize by ordinance the vacation of such street or alley, or any part thereof. Such ordinance may provide for the retention by the City of all easements or rights in respect to the vacated land for the construction or repair and maintenance of public utilities and services. If the City Council determines that compensation shall be paid as a condition of the vacation, then the ordinance shall not be published or become effective until all compensation and fees and costs have been paid in full by the petitioners and all conditions imposed by the City Council have been complied with. When there are multiple properties which are adjacent to right-of-way which is petitioned for vacation, any one or more of the applicants may pay the total compensation, fees and costs in order to complete the vacation and to cause the ordinance to be published and become effective. Such payment shall not affect the vacated right-of-way vesting to the adjacent property owner. If the compensation is not paid and the conditions are not complied with within one year from adoption of the ordinance, then the ordinance shall be void unless the one year period is extended by ordinance of the City Council. (Ord. 1364, 1977; Ord. 2123, 2007)

12.48.100 Notice of Action to Auditor and Appraiser.
A certified copy of the ordinance vacating any such street or alley, or part thereof, shall be filed by the City Clerk with the Snohomish County Auditor's Office. Following the recording of the ordinance, a certified copy shall be sent to the Snohomish County Treasurer’s Office. (Ord. 1364, 1977; Ord. 2123, 2007)

12.48.110 Use of Proceeds of Vacation.
One-half of the revenue received by the City as compensation for area vacated under this chapter shall be dedicated to the acquisition, improvement, development, and related maintenance of public open space or transportation capital projects within the City. (Ord. 1996, 2001; Ord. 2123, 2007)

12.48.120 Title to Vacated Street or Alley.
A. Pursuant to RCW 35.79.040, and regardless of who pays the compensation, fees and expenses of vacation, vacated streets, or alleys shall belong to the abutting property owners, one-half to each, provided that:
    1. When only part of the street or alley is requested to be vacated, only that portion of the adjacent right-of-way up to the center line shall belong to the abutting owner; or
    2. When the street or alley requested to be vacated is wholly contained within a subdivision and is part of the boundary of the subdivision, the entire street shall belong to the owner or owners of the property within the vacated subdivision, in compliance with RCW 58.17.212; or
    3. When dictated by the particular circumstances of the situation, ownership of the underlying fee of a street or alley may be allocated by the City as equally and fairly as possible.
B. The ownership of the vacated street or alley shall be set forth in the street vacation ordinance in accordance with SMC 12.48.120(A). (Ord. 2123, 2007)

Chapter 12.52 SNOHOMISH TRANSPORTATION BENEFIT DISTRICT

Sections:
12.52.010    Establishing Transportation Benefit District
12.52.015    Assumption of Transportation Benefit District
12.52.020    Governing Board
12.52.030    Authority of the City
12.52.031    No Existing Right Impaired
12.52.032    Rules, Regulations, Pending Business, and Contracts
12.52.033    Records of the Snohomish Transportation Benefit District
12.52.034    Funds, Credits, Appropriations, Federal Grants, or Other Assets
12.52.035    Assumption of Indebtedness
12.52.040    Transportation Improvements Funded
12.52.050    Dissolution of District

12.52.010 Establishing Transportation Benefit District.
There is created a transportation benefit district to be known as the Snohomish Transportation Benefit District or “District” with geographical boundaries comprised of the corporate limits of the city as they currently exist or as they may exist following future annexations.

12.52.015 Assumption of Transportation Benefit District.
Pursuant to Section 303, subsection (1) of 2 ESSB 5987, from and after the effective date of this Ordinance, the City of Snohomish assumes all of the rights, powers, immunities, functions, and obligations of the Snohomish Transportation Benefit District previously established in this chapter, and the City of Snohomish is hereby vested with each and every right, power, immunity, function, and obligation granted to or possessed by the Snohomish Transportation Benefit District under Chapter 36.73 RCW, this chapter, and/or any other applicable law as of the effective date of this Ordinance. References to the District, the rights, powers, functions and obligations previously exercised and/or performed by the governing body of the Transportation Benefit District pursuant to Section 3.40.020 of this Chapter are hereby assumed by and transferred to the City of Snohomish City Council.

12.52.020 Governing Board.
A. Pursuant to Section 303, subsection (2) of 2ESSB 5987, the governing body of the Snohomish Transportation Benefit District established in Section 12.52.020 of the Snohomish Municipal Code is hereby abolished. The Snohomish City Council shall have the authority to exercise the statutory powers set forth in Chapter 36.73 RCW and this chapter.
B. The treasurer of the transportation benefit district shall be the City Finance Director.
C. The City shall implement the material change policy previously adopted by the Snohomish Transportation Benefit District to address major plan changes that affect project delivery of the ability to finance the plan, pursuant to the requirements set forth in RCW 36.73.160(1).
D. The City Council shall issue an annual report pursuant to the requirements of RCW 36.73.160(2).

12.52.030 Authority of the City.
A. The City, acting by and through its City Council may authorize a vehicle fee of up to $20.00 per vehicle as provided for by RCW 82.80.140. Any expansion of the authorized purposes of the District shall be undertaken only after notice, hearing, and adoption of an ordinance in accordance with RCW 36.73.050(2)(b) or a vote of the people pursuant to RCW 36.73.065(3).
B. When authorized by the voters pursuant to the requirements of RCW Chapter 36.73, other taxes, fees, charges and tolls, or increases in these revenue services may be assessed for the preservation, maintenance, and operations of City streets. Additional transportation improvements may be added to the functions of the District upon compliance with the requirements of said chapter.
C. The City Council shall have and exercise all powers and functions provided by Chapter 36.73 RCW to fulfill the functions of the District.

12.52.031 No Existing Right Impaired.
Pursuant to Section 304 of 2ESSB 5987, nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed as impairing or altering any existing rights acquired by the Snohomish TBD under chapter 36.73 RCW, this chapter or any other provision of law applicable to transportation benefit districts. Nor does this assumption impair or alter any actions, activities, or proceedings validated thereunder; any civil or criminal proceedings instituted thereunder; any rule, regulation, or order promulgated thereunder; any administrative action taken thereunder; nor the validity of any act performed by the Snohomish TBD or division thereof or any officer thereof prior to the assumption of such rights, powers, functions, and obligations by the City hereunder.

12.52.032 Rules, Regulations, Pending Business, and Contracts.
Pursuant to Section 305, subsection (1) of 2ESSB 5987, all rules and regulations and all pending business before the board of the Snohomish Transportation Benefit District shall be continued and acted upon by the Snohomish City Council. In addition, pursuant to subsection (2) of Section 305, all existing contracts and obligations of the Snohomish Transportation Benefit District remain in full force and effect, and will be performed by the City. The assumption does not affect the validity of any official act performed by any official or employee prior to the assumption authorized in Sections 1 and 2 of this Ordinance.

12.52.033 Records of the Snohomish Transportation Benefit District.
Pursuant to Section 306, subsection (1) of 2ESSB 5987, all reports, documents, surveys, books, records, files, papers, or other writings relating to the administration of the powers, duties, and functions available to the Snohomish Transportation Benefit District shall be made available to the City.

12.52.034 Funds, Credits, Appropriations, Federal Grants, or Other Assets.
Pursuant to Section 306, subsection (2) of 2ESSB 5987, all funds, credits, or other assets held in connection with rights, powers, duties, and functions of the Snohomish Transportation Benefit District assumed hereunder shall be assigned to the City. Further, pursuant to Section 306, subsection (3) of 2ESSB 5987, any appropriations or federal grant made to the Snohomish Transportation Benefit District for the purpose of carrying out the rights, powers, functions, and obligations authorized to be assumed by the City must, on the effective date of the assumption, be credited to the City for the purpose of carrying out such assumed rights, powers, functions, and obligations.

12.52.035 Assumption of Indebtedness.
Pursuant to Section 307 of 2ESSB 5987, the City assumes and agrees to provide for the payment of all of the indebtedness of the Snohomish Transportation Benefit District, including the payment and retirement of outstanding general obligation and revenue bonds (if any) issued by the Snohomish Transportation Benefit District.

12.52.040 Transportation Improvements Funded.
The funds generated by the transportation benefit district shall be used for transportation improvements that preserve, maintain, and operate the existing transportation infrastructure of the City, consistent with the requirements of Chapter 36.73 RCW. The funds may be utilized for any lawful purpose under the Chapter; but all funds raised through the TBD shall be expended only for such preservation, maintenance, and operation in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 36.73 RCW as the same exists or is hereafter amended. The funds expended by the District shall preserve, maintain, and operate the City's previous investments in the transportation infrastructure, reduce the risk of transportation facility failure, improve safety, continue the cost-effectiveness of the City’s infrastructure investments, and continue the optimal performance of the transportation system. Additional transportation improvement projects may be funded only after compliance with the provisions of RCW 36.73.050(b) following notice, public hearing, and enactment of an authorizing ordinance.

12.52.050 Dissolution of District.
The transportation benefit district shall be automatically dissolved when all indebtedness of the District has been retired and when all of the District's anticipated responsibilities have been satisfied. Street preservation, maintenance, and operation are ongoing, long-term obligations of the City. In order to comply with the dissolution requirement of RCW 36.73.050, the Washington State Transportation Plan 2007- 2026 timeframe is hereby adopted and the District shall automatically be dissolved 16 years from the effective date of this ordinance.

Title 13 PARKS
Chapter 13.04 Park Code
    13.04.010    Short Title
    13.04.020    Exercise of Police Power
    13.04.030    Definitions
    13.04.040    Erection of Signs or Structures
    13.04.050    Defacing Park Property
    13.04.060    Animals in City Parks
    13.04.065    Off-Leash Area for Dogs
    13.04.070    Firearms – Fireworks – Weapons
    13.04.075    Radio/Remote Controlled, Self-Propelled Devices – Operation
    13.04.080    Annoying or Feeding Animals
    13.04.090    Solicitors – Loudspeakers
    13.04.100    Sale of Refreshments or Merchandise – Distribution of Literature
    13.04.110    Use of Watercraft
    13.04.120    Vehicle, Bike, Horse, and Trail Use
    13.04.130    Public Assembly
    13.04.140    Camping
    13.04.150    Sports – Location Restrictions
    13.04.155    Scheduling Park Spaces and Facilities
    13.04.160    Litter, Illegal Dumping, Abandonment of Animals
    13.04.170    Testing of Motor Vehicles
    13.04.175    Parking
    13.04.180    Speed or Endurance Competitions Prohibited
    13.04.190    Fires
    13.04.200    Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited
    13.04.205    Park Hours
    13.04.210    Swimming and Diving Restrictions
    13.04.220    Compliance with Park Rules and Regulations
    13.04.222    Park Exclusion
    13.04.225    Trespass in Parks
    13.04.230    Violation – Reward for Information
    13.04.240    Violation – Principal Defined
    13.04.250    Violation – Penalty
    13.04.260    Severability

Chapter 13.04 PARK CODE

Sections:
13.04.010    Short Title
13.04.020    Exercise of Police Power
13.04.030    Definitions
13.04.040    Erection of Signs or Structures
13.04.050    Defacing Park Property
13.04.060    Animals in City Parks
13.04.065    Off-Leash Area for Dogs
13.04.070    Firearms – Fireworks – Weapons
13.04.075    Radio/Remote Controlled, Self-Propelled Devices – Operation
13.04.080    Annoying or Feeding Animals
13.04.090    Solicitors – Loudspeakers
13.04.100    Sale of Refreshments or Merchandise – Distribution of Literature
13.04.110    Use of Watercraft
13.04.120    Vehicle, Bike, Horse, and Trail Use
13.04.130    Public Assembly
13.04.140    Camping
13.04.150    Sports – Location Restrictions
13.04.155    Scheduling Park Spaces and Facilities
13.04.160    Litter, Illegal Dumping, Abandonment of Animals
13.04.170    Testing of Motor Vehicles
13.04.175    Parking
13.04.180    Speed or Endurance Competitions Prohibited
13.04.190    Fires
13.04.200    Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited
13.04.205    Park Hours
13.04.210    Swimming and Diving Restrictions
13.04.220    Compliance with Park Rules and Regulations
13.04.222    Park Exclusion
13.04.225    Trespass in Parks
13.04.230    Violation – Reward for Information
13.04.240    Violation – Principal Defined
13.04.250    Violation – Penalty
13.04.260    Severability

13.04.010 Short Title.
This chapter shall constitute the Park Code of the City of Snohomish and may be cited as such. (Ord. 1387, 1978)

13.04.020 Exercise of Police Power.
This chapter is an exercise of the police power of the state of Washington and the City of Snohomish for the public peace, health, safety, and welfare, and this provision shall be liberally construed.
A. A violation of a park regulation adopted pursuant to this section shall be deemed a civil infraction punishable as provided in this chapter.
B. All agreements between the City and private owners of open space and public access lands for the adoption of regulations shall authorize entry upon the land by police officers and other City employees to enforce such regulations. (Ord. 1387, 1978; Ord. 2132, 2007)

13.04.030 Definitions.
The terms used in this chapter, unless clearly contrary to or inconsistent with the context in which used, shall be considered to mean as follows:
“Boat” is any floating vessel whether propelled or not.
“Community event” means an event or activity which is open to all members of the public, regardless of race, religion, sex, or national origin.
“Community nonprofit” means any group with the Internal Revenue Service tax designation 501(c) that provides some measure of service to the community as a whole.
“Leashed” means a physical restraint of not more than fifteen (15) feet, firmly attached to the collar of an animal and held in hand by a human being.
“Held under control” means the ability of a human being, through either leashing or verbal commands, to control a dog’s behavior to ensure it does not bother, molest, or attack other park users.
“Manager” is the person immediately in charge of all park areas and their activities, and to whom all park attendants of any area are responsible.
“Park” means and includes all City parks, trails, public squares, public drives, parkways, public walkways, boulevards, museums, zoos, bathing beaches, public gazebos, public restrooms, and play and recreation grounds devoted to active or passive recreation under the jurisdictions of the City Council. A current map of said City parks shall be kept on file and available for public inspection in the office of the City Clerk.
“Person” is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind.
“Organized youth sports team” means any group that organizes youth teams and schedules competitive sports events between other organized teams, in which the majority of members are under the age of eighteen (18).
“Vehicle” is any wheeled conveyance, whether motor powered, animal-drawn, or self-propelled. The term includes any trailer in tow of any size, kind, or description. Exception is made for baby carriages and vehicles in the service of City parks. (Ord. 1166, 1972; Ord. 1387, 1978; Ord. 2132, 2007; Ord. 2168, 2009; Ord. 2191, 2010)

13.04.040 Erection of Signs or Structures.
It is unlawful to use, place, or erect any sign board, sign, billboard, bulletin board, post, pole, or device of any kind for advertising in any park; or to attach any notice, bill, poster, sign, wire, rod, or card to any tree, shrub, railing, post, or structure within any park; or to place or erect in any park a structure of any kind. (Ord. 1387, 1978)

13.04.050 Defacing Park Property.
It is unlawful for any person, except an authorized employee or agent of the City or an authorized volunteer, to remove, destroy, mutilate, or deface any park property, structure, facility, or station. This prohibition applies to all aspects of the natural or landscaped environment and to any structure, object, equipment, improvement, or other park property. (Ord. 2132, 2007)

13.04.060 Animals in City Parks.
A. Leashed dogs or other pets are permitted in all parks with the exception of certain areas:
    1. Dogs or other pets are prohibited within the boundary of the Snohomish City Boat Launch and adjacent twenty (20) acre park area located at 20 Lincoln Avenue.
    2. Dogs are prohibited in play structure boundary areas, picnic areas, tennis/basketball courts, or playfields of any park.
    3. Dogs or other pets are prohibited from entering any lake, pond, fountain, or stream therein, regardless whether such animal is running at large or on a leash.
B. Dog/animal handlers and their dog/animals are required to comply with any posted park rules, including:
    1. Any person with an animal in his or her possession in any park shall be responsible for the conduct of the animal and shall not allow the animal to bite or otherwise molest or annoy other animals or park visitors.
    2. Any person with an animal in his or her possession in any park shall carry equipment for removing fecal matter, and shall collect and place fecal matter deposited by such animal in an appropriate receptacle. (Ord. 2132, 2007; Ord. 2191, 2010; Ord. 2335, 2018)

13.04.065 Off-Leash Area for Dogs.
A. The City Council, as it determines is in the best interest of the City, shall have the authority to designate areas at City parks as off-leash areas for dogs to run at large.
B. The Mayor, or his/her designee, shall have the authority to establish such rules and regulations as reasonably necessary for the operation of such designated off-leash areas. Rules and regulations shall be posted at the entrance to all designated off-leash dog areas.
C. Owners or persons having charge, care, custody or control of dogs in designated off-leash areas must be present at all times within vocal control distance of their dogs, and ensure that their dogs do not cause public nuisance, safety hazard or harass people, other dogs or wildlife.
D. Except as specifically provided in this section, all other applicable provisions of this chapter shall also apply in designated off-leash areas. (Ord. 2335, 2018)

13.04.070 Firearms – Fireworks – Weapons.
Except for law enforcement personnel, it is unlawful to shoot, fire, or explode any firearm, fireworks, firecracker, torpedo, or explosive of any kind or to shoot or fire any air gun, paint ball guns, bows and arrows, BB gun, or use any slingshot in any park. (Ord. 1387, 1978; Ord. 2132, 2007; Ord. 2221, 2011; Ord. 2335, 2018)

13.04.075 Radio/Remote Controlled, Self-Propelled Devices – Operation.
No person shall operate any radio/remote controlled unmanned aircraft, self-propelled model airplane, glider, car, boat or any model rocket within the boundaries of any park unless otherwise approved by Special Event Permit or in areas specifically designated by the Mayor or his/her designee and posted for such use. (Ord. 2335, 2018)

13.04.080 Annoying or Feeding Animals.
A. It is unlawful in any manner to tease, annoy, disturb, molest, catch, injure, or kill or to throw any stone or missile of any kind at or strike with any stick or weapon, any animal, bird, fowl, water fowl, fish, farm animal, or wildlife.
B. It is unlawful to feed any animal, bird, fowl, water fowl, fish, farm animal, or wildlife. (Ord. 1166, 1972; Ord. 1387, 1978; Ord. 2132, 2007)

13.04.090 Solicitors – Loudspeakers.
It is unlawful to take up collections for any purpose, to solicit for any services or products or to operate or use any loudspeaker without written permission from the Mayor or his/her designee. (Ord. 1166, 1972; Ord. 1387, 1978; Ord. 2132, 2007; Ord. 2335, 2018)

13.04.100 Sale of Refreshments or Merchandise – Distribution of Literature.
A. It is unlawful to sell refreshments or merchandise in any park except pursuant to a valid concession contract with the City or a Special Event Permit.
B. It is unlawful to distribute literature in any park except when authorized by a Special Event Permit.
C. It is unlawful to rent any merchandise, material, sporting equipment, or other items in any park except pursuant to a valid concession contract with the City or a Special Event Permit. (Ord. 2132, 2007)

13.04.110 Use of Watercraft.
A. It is unlawful to have, keep, or operate any boat, float, raft, or other watercraft in or upon any bay, lake, slough, river, or creek within the limits of any park, or to land or launch the same at any point upon the shores thereof bordering upon any park, except at places set apart for such purposes by the Mayor or his/her designee and so designated by signs posted at or near the entrance to such parks.
B. Blackmans Lake. 
    1. No gas-powered motors of any size and no electric motors in excess of one and three-quarters horsepower, including model boats, shall be allowed on Blackmans Lake unless otherwise approved by Special Event Permit.
    2. For Blackmans Lake, boats shall be launched within the designated boat launch area only. Vehicles shall not be left or parked in the boat launch area after launching; vehicles must be moved to a designated parking area. (Ord. 1166, 1972; Ord. 1387, 1978; Ord. 2132, 2007; Ord. 2335, 2018)

13.04.120 Vehicle, Bike, Horse, and Trail Use.
A. Motor/Motorized Vehicles. 
    1. It is unlawful to ride or drive any motorcycle or motor vehicle over or through any park except along and upon the park roadways, driveways, and parking lots.
    2. It is unlawful to park or stand any motorcycle or motor vehicle in any area except designated parking places.
    3. Exceptions. Law enforcement personnel or the Department of Parks and Recreation employees acting pursuant to or in accordance with the direction of the Mayor or his/her designee, or persons needing the use of a powered wheelchair or similar device as defined in the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
B. Bicycle, Tricycle, and Nonmotorized Vehicles. 
    1. It is unlawful to ride or drive any bicycle, tricycle, and nonmotorized vehicle over or through any park except along designated trails and bike paths, park roadways, driveways, and parking lots.
    2. Exceptions. Law enforcement personnel or the Department of Parks and Recreation employees acting pursuant to or in accordance with the direction of the Mayor or his/her designee, or persons needing the use of a nonmotorized wheelchair or similar device as defined in the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
C. Horses. Horses are prohibited from all parks with the exception of a Special Events Permit approved by the City of Snohomish.
D. Nonmotorized Travel Speeds. 
    1. Travel speeds shall be ten (10) miles per hour or less.
    2. Travel at speeds in excess of ten (10) miles per hour on a walking/nonmotorized trail, unless otherwise posted, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the person violated this section.
    3. Travel at speeds ten (10) miles per hour or less shall not relieve the rider from maintaining control of themselves and their equipment, and from the duty to ride with due regard for the safety of all persons. (Ord. 2132, 2007; Ord. 2335, 2018)

13.04.130 Public Assembly.
It is unlawful to hold or participate in any assembly of any nature of more than one hundred people in any park without the written permission of the Mayor or an approved Special Event Permit pursuant to Chapter 5.10 SMC to do so. (Ord. 1166, 1972; Ord. 1387, 1978; Ord. 2132, 2007; Ord. 2341, 2017)

13.04.140 Camping.
No person or group of persons shall be permitted to camp in a City park, except camping may be allowed in conjunction with a Special Event Permit approved by the City of Snohomish. (Ord. 2132, 2007)

13.04.150 Sports – Location Restrictions.
It is unlawful to practice or play golf, baseball, cricket, lacrosse, polo, archery, hockey, tennis, badminton, or other games of like character or to hurl or propel any airborne or other missile except at places designated for such purposes by the Mayor or his/her designee. (Ord. 1166, 1972; Ord. 1387, 1978; Ord. 2132, 2007; Ord. 2335, 2018)

13.04.155 Scheduling Park Spaces and Facilities.
The Mayor, or designee, shall be authorized to schedule the use of sports fields at City parks and the main structure at Hill Park. The following process shall be used:
A. Scheduling sports fields. By March 31st of each year, the Snohomish Parks and Recreation Board will review and approve a yearly field schedule for organized youth sports teams. The Parks and Recreation Board will adopt rules, forms, and deadlines for the determination of field scheduling. The Mayor, or designee, shall be responsible to ensure that sufficient time is available for general or non-scheduled public use of sports fields consistent with state and federal grants.
B. Scheduling the main Hill Park structure. Starting January 1st of each year, community nonprofit organizations, using the Special Event Permit process defined in Chapter 5.10 SMC, can schedule the use of the main Hill Park structure for community events open to the general public.
Starting February 1st of each year, private citizens, groups, or organizations can schedule the use of the main Hill Park structure for private functions. Groups, organizations, or private citizens, other than community nonprofit organizations who schedule use that is open to the general public, shall be limited to two reservations per year.
C. The Mayor, or designee, consulting with the Snohomish Parks and Recreation Board, shall have the authority to develop rules to administer scheduling or reserving City facilities.
D. All other park spaces and facilities shall be provided to the general public on a first-come, first-served basis under the provisions provided by the Snohomish Municipal Code.
E. Any fees associated with park or park shelter usage shall be set by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 1989, 2001; Ord. 2018, 2002; Ord. 2132, 2007; Ord. 2299, 2016; Ord. 2341, 2017)

13.04.160 Litter, Illegal Dumping, Abandonment of Animals.
A. It is unlawful to throw any refuse, litter, broken glass, crockery, nails, shrubbery, trimmings, junk, or advertising matter in any park or to deposit any such material therein, except in designated receptacles.
B. No person shall deposit household or commercial garbage, trash, refuse, waste, debris, rubbish, or organic matter which is brought as such from any private property, in any park garbage receptacle or upon any park property.
C. No person shall abandon an animal by intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal negligence leaving a domesticated animal in a park.
D. Violation of any of the provisions of this section constitutes a misdemeanor, and may be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or by imprisonment not to exceed ninety days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 1387, 1978; Ord. 2132, 2007)

13.04.170 Testing of Motor Vehicles.
It is unlawful to operate any motor vehicle or motorcycle for the purpose of testing it, or ascertaining its fitness for service, along or upon any park drive, parkway, boulevard, or other park property. (Ord. 1387, 1978)

13.04.175 Parking.
A. Parking shall be in designated parking places only.
B. No person shall park any vehicle in any park for the principal purpose of:
    1. Displaying of commercial or noncommercial signs;
    2. Displaying such vehicle for sale;
    3. Other events not held in the park; parking is for current park users only;
    4. Washing, greasing, or repairing such vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency. (Ord. 2132, 2007)

13.04.180 Speed or Endurance Competitions Prohibited.
It is unlawful to engage in, conduct, or hold any trials or competitions for speed, endurance, or hill climbing involving any vehicle, boat, aircraft, or animal in any park. (Ord. 1387, 1978)

13.04.190 Fires.
Except for permanently mounted City furnished barbeques in designated areas, it is unlawful to build any fires or use any type of barbeque in any park. (Ord. 2132, 2007; Ord. 2335, 2018)

13.04.200 Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to sell, possess, or consume alcoholic beverages of any kind in the City parks. Possession and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages shall be grounds for loss of the right to use the parks in addition to the penalties otherwise imposed. (Ord. 1387, 1978; Ord. 1479, 1981)

13.04.205 Park Hours.
City parks are open to the public year-round from 6:00 a.m. to dusk every day except for: any section or part of any park may be declared closed to the public under City of Snohomish authorization at any time and for any interval of time necessary to complete maintenance tasks, construction projects, storm cleanup, and any safety related issues that may arise. (Ord. 2132, 2007; Ord. 2335, 2018)

13.04.210 Swimming and Diving Restrictions.
It is unlawful to swim or dive within the limits of any park or at any point beyond the shores thereof, bordering upon any park, except at places designated for such purposes by the Mayor or his/her designee by posted signs. Any persons swimming or diving, whether in designated or nondesignated areas, do so at their own risk and with the knowledge that there is no lifeguard on duty and neither the Mayor nor his/her designee, nor the City of Snohomish, shall be responsible for any injury to any person. (Ord. 2132, 2007; Ord. 2335, 2018)

13.04.220 Compliance with Park Rules and Regulations.
It is unlawful to violate or fail to comply with any park rule or regulation duly adopted and posted by the City Council. (Ord. 1166, 1972; Ord. 1387, 1978)

13.04.222 Park Exclusion.
A. Any City Police Officer may, by delivering an exclusion notice in person to the offender, or by First Class Mail and Certified Mail to the offender at the offender’s last known address, exclude from a City park, anyone who within a City park:
    1. Violates any provision of this chapter; or
    2. Violates any park rule; or
    3. Violates any provision of the Snohomish Municipal Code or Revised Code of Washington.
    The offender need not be charged, tried, or convicted of any crime or infraction in order for an exclusion notice to be issued or be effective. The exclusion may be based upon observation by the Police Officer or upon civilian reports that would ordinarily be relied upon by police officers in the determination of probable cause. The exclusion shall not take effect until seven days after delivery of the exclusion notice to the offender; provided that, if the offender files a request for a hearing as provided in Subsection E, the exclusion shall not take effect until directed by the hearing examiner.
B. If the offender:
    1. Has not been excluded from any City park by an exclusion notice issued within one year prior to the violation and the current violation is not a weapon violation, then the exclusion notice may exclude the offender from the City park in which the current violation occurred for a period not exceeding seven days from the date of the exclusion notice.
    2. Has been the subject of only one prior exclusion notice issued within one year prior to the current violation and neither the current nor the past violation was a weapon violation, then the exclusion notice may exclude the offender from any or all City parks for a period of ninety days from the date of the exclusion notice.
    3. Has been the subject of two or more prior exclusion notices issued within one year prior to the current violation, or if the current violation is a weapon violation, then the exclusion notice may exclude the offender from any or all City parks for a period of one year from the date of the exclusion notice.
C. The exclusion notice shall be in writing and shall contain the date of issuance. The exclusion notice shall specify the length and places of exclusion. It shall be signed by the issuing Police Officer. Warning of the consequences for failure to comply shall be prominently displayed on the notice.
D. Only the hearing examiner after a hearing may rescind, shorten, or modify an exclusion notice.
E. An offender receiving an exclusion notice may seek a hearing to have the exclusion notice rescinded, the period of exclusion shortened, or the areas of exclusion reduced. The request for a hearing shall be delivered to the Police Department or postmarked no later than seven days after the issuance date of the exclusion notice. The request for hearing shall be in writing and shall be accompanied by a copy of the exclusion notice on which the hearing is sought. The Police Department shall take reasonable steps to notify the offender of the date, time, and place of the hearing.
F. At the hearing, the violation must be proved by a preponderance of the evidence in order to uphold the exclusion notice. If the exclusion notice was issued because of the alleged violation of any criminal law, the offender need not be charged, tried, or convicted for the exclusion notice to be upheld. The exclusion notice establishes a prima facie case that the offender committed the violation as described. The hearing examiner shall consider a sworn report or a declaration made under penalty of perjury, written by the individual who issued the exclusion notice, without further evidentiary foundation. The certifications authorized in Rule 6.13 of the Criminal Rules for Courts of Limited Jurisdiction shall be considered without further evidentiary foundation. The hearing examiner may consider information that would not be admissible under the evidence rules in a court of law but which the hearing examiner considers relevant and trustworthy.
G. If the violation is proved, the exclusion notice shall be upheld; but upon good cause shown, the hearing examiner may shorten the duration of the exclusion or reduce the areas covered by the exclusion. If the violation is not proved by a preponderance of the evidence, the hearing examiner shall rescind the exclusion. If the hearing examiner rescinds an exclusion, the exclusion shall not be considered a prior exclusion for the purposes of subsection B of this section.
H. The decision of the hearing examiner is final. An offender seeking judicial review of hearing examiner’s decision must file an application for a writ of review in the Snohomish County superior court within fifteen days of the date of that decision.
I. The exclusion shall remain in effect during the pendency of any administrative or judicial proceeding.
J. No determination of facts made by a person conducting a hearing under this section shall have any collateral estoppel effect on a subsequent criminal prosecution or civil proceeding and shall not preclude litigation of those same facts in a subsequent criminal prosecution or civil proceeding.
K. This section shall be enforced so as to emphasize voluntary compliance with laws and park rules, and so that inadvertent minor violations that would fall under subsection B.1 can be corrected without resort to an exclusion notice. (Ord. 2168, 2009)

13.04.225 Trespass in Parks.
A. Any person shall be guilty of trespass in parks who knowingly:
    1. Enters or remains in a park from which he or she has been excluded during the period covered by an exclusion notice pursuant to SMC 13.04.222;
    2. Enters, remains in, or is otherwise present within the premises of a park during hours which the park or portion of the park is not open to the public, unless the person is present within the park to participate in an activity either conducted by the City or conducted pursuant to the terms of an approved Special Event Permit issued by the City; or
    3. Enters or remains in any area of a park which has been designated and posted by the Mayor or his/her designee as a closed area, using such postings as “no admittance” or “closed to use” or “no trespassing.”
B. The provisions of this section do not apply to any duly authorized City employee in the performance of his or her duties, or other person authorized by law.
C. It is not a defense to the crime of trespass in parks:
    1. That the underlying exclusion issued pursuant to this chapter is on appeal when the excluded person is apprehended, charged, or tried under this section; nor
    2. That the excluded person entered or remained in the park pursuant to a permit that was issued in the name of another person either before or after the date of the exclusion notice. (Ord. 2168, 2009; Ord. 2335, 2018)

13.04.230 Violation – Reward for Information.
The City Council may offer, post, and pay a suitable reward for information leading to the arrest and conviction of anyone violating the rules and provisions of this chapter; this reward is not to exceed twenty-five dollars. (Ord. 1166, 1972; Ord. 1387, 1978)

13.04.240 Violation – Principal Defined.
Anyone concerned in the violation of this chapter whether directly committing the act or omitting to do the thing constituting the offense, or who aids or abets the same, and whether present or absent, and anyone who directly or indirectly counsels, encourages, hires, or commands, is and shall be a principal under the terms of this chapter shall be proceeded against and prosecuted as such. (Ord. 1387, 1978)

13.04.250 Violation – Penalty.
Violation of this chapter of the Snohomish Municipal Code shall be a civil infraction pursuant to SMC 1.01.080, and Chapter 1.14 SMC, except as otherwise provided therein, and except that violation of SMC 13.04.140 “Camping,” violation of SMC 13.04.200 and violation of SMC 13.04.225 shall be a misdemeanor and punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or by imprisonment not to exceed ninety days or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 1387, 1978; Ord. 1927, 1999; Ord. 2155, 2008; Ord. 2168, 2009; Ord. 2219, 2011)

13.04.260 Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are declared to be separate and severable. The invalidity of any clause, sentence, paragraph, subdivision, section, or portion of this chapter to any person or circumstance shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this chapter or the validity of its application to other persons or circumstances. (Ord. 1926, 1999)

Title 14 LAND USE DEVELOPMENT CODE
Chapter 14.05 General Provisions
    14.05.010    Authority
    14.05.020    Purpose
    14.05.030    Jurisdiction
    14.05.040    No Special Duty Created
    14.05.050    Administration and Interpretation
    14.05.055    Reasonable Accommodations for Persons with Disabilities
    14.05.060    Adoption of Supporting Administrative Guidelines
    14.05.070    Compliance
    14.05.080    Computation of Time
    14.05.090    Land Use Designation Map
Chapter 14.10 Land Use Development Code Fees
    14.10.010    Fees
    14.10.020    Hearing Examiner and Consultant Deposits
Chapter 14.15 Amendments to the Comprehensive Plan, Land Use Map, and Development Code
    14.15.010    Early and Continuous Public Participation
    14.15.020    Amendment Procedures
    14.15.040    Threshold Determination, Scheduling of Hearing, and Notice
    14.15.050    Reconsideration of DNS
    14.15.060    Forward to City Council and Planning Commission
    14.15.070    State Review
    14.15.080    Hearing
    14.15.090    Criteria – Findings and Recommendation
    14.15.100    Council Action
    14.15.105    Amendments to the Development Code’s Land Use Designation Map
    14.15.110    Appeals
Chapter 14.20 Permit Classifications and Development Review Process
    14.20.010    Purpose
    14.20.020    Permit Classifications
    14.20.030    Consolidation of Permits
    14.20.040    Pre-Application Process
    14.20.050    Design Review
    14.20.060    Application Information Requirements
    14.20.070    Acknowledgement of Owner
    14.20.080    Determination of Legal Status of Lot or Parcel
    14.20.090    Concurrency
    14.20.100    Land Use Permit Review Process
    14.20.110    Determination of Completeness and Review Timeframes
    14.20.120    Permit Approval Timeframes and Expiration
    14.20.130    Public Notice
    14.20.140    Permit Conditions
    14.20.150    Assignability of Permits
    14.20.160    Minor Changes
    14.20.170    Appeals
    14.20.180    Vesting of Applications
Chapter 14.55 Conditional Use Permits
    14.55.010    Applicability
    14.55.020    Approval Criteria
Chapter 14.60 Temporary Permits
    14.60.010    Purpose
    14.60.020    Procedure
Chapter 14.65 Site Development Plans
    14.65.010    Applicability
    14.65.020    Approval Criteria
Chapter 14.70 Variances
    14.70.010    Purpose
    14.70.020    Minor Variances
    14.70.030    Major Variances
    14.70.040    Criteria For Minor And Major Variances
Chapter 14.80 Nonconforming Uses and Structures
    14.80.010    Applicability
    14.80.020    Nonconforming Uses
    14.80.030    Nonconforming Structures
Chapter 14.85 Enforcement
    14.85.010    Purpose
    14.85.020    Violations
    14.85.030    Nature of Violation – Penalties
    14.85.040    Right of Inspection
    14.85.050    Stop Work Order
    14.85.060    Other Recourse
Chapter 14.90 State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA)
    14.90.010    Adoption by Reference of Chapter 197-11 WAC
    14.90.020    Designation of SEPA Responsible Official
    14.90.030    Initiation of Environmental Review
    14.90.040    Categorical Exemptions
    14.90.050    Environmental Checklist
    14.90.060    Mitigated Determination of Non-Significance (MDNS)
    14.90.070    Cost of Environmental Impact Statement (EIS)
    14.90.080    Substantive Authority
    14.90.090    Environmentally Sensitive Areas
Chapter 14.95 Hearing Examiner
    14.95.010    Authority And Duties
    14.95.020    Ex Parte Communication/ Appearance of Fairness/Conflict of Interest
    14.95.030    Rights And Responsibilities Of Applicants, Appellants, And Parties Of Record
    14.95.040    Rights And Responsibilities of the City Planner
    14.95.050    Elements Of Public Hearing
    14.95.060    Evidence
    14.95.070    Continuation Of Hearing
    14.95.080    Additional Evidence
    14.95.090    Record Of Hearing
    14.95.100    Decision
    14.95.110    Reconsideration
Chapter 14.100 Definitions
    14.100.010   General
    14.100.020   Definitions
Chapter 14.205 Permitted Land Uses
    14.205.005   Purpose
    14.205.010   Map of Land Use Designations
    14.205.020   Single-Family Residential Designation
    14.205.025   Low Density Multi-Family Residential Designation
    14.205.030   Medium Density Multi-Family Residential Designation
    14.205.035   High Density Multi-Family Residential Designation
    14.205.040   Commercial Designation
    14.205.045   Neighborhood Commercial Designation
    14.205.050   Historic Business Designation
    14.205.055   Business Park Designation
    14.205.060   Industry Designation
    14.205.065   Airport Industry Designation
    14.205.070   Mixed Use Designation
    14.205.075   Open Space Designations
    14.205.080   Urban Horticulture Designation
    14.205.090   Public Park Designation
    14.205.100   Historic District
Chapter 14.207 Land Use Tables
    14.207.010   Guide to Use of Land Use Tables
    14.207.020   Permitted Uses
    14.207.030   Conditional Use Permits
    14.207.040   Specific Regulations Pertaining to the Use in the Land Use Designation
    14.207.050   Uses Not Permitted in a Land Use Designation
    14.207.060   Interpretation of the Land Use Tables
    14.207.065   Prohibited Uses
    14.207.070   Residential Land Use Table
    14.207.075   Residential Land Use: Regulations
    14.207.080   General Services Land Use Table
    14.207.085   General Services Land Uses: Regulations
    14.207.090   Government/Business Services Land Use Table
    14.207.095   Government/Business Services Land Uses: Regulations
    14.207.100   Retail Land Use Table
    14.207.105   Retail Land Uses: Regulations
    14.207.110   Manufacturing Land Use Table
    14.207.115   Manufacturing Land Uses: Regulations
    14.207.120   Regional Land Use Table
    14.207.125   Regional Land Uses: Regulations
    14.207.130   Recreational/Cultural Land Use Table
    14.207.135   Recreational/Cultural Land Uses: Regulations
    14.207.140   Resource Land Use Table
    14.207.145   Resource Land Uses: Regulations
    14.207.150   Essential Public Facility Regulations
    14.207.155   Essential Public Facilities: Regulations
    14.207.160   Accessory Uses
Chapter 14.210 Dimensional and Other Requirements
    14.210.010   Purpose
    14.210.020   Interpretation of Tables
    14.210.030   Measurement Methods
    14.210.040   Lot Area – Prohibited Reduction
    14.210.050   Lot Divided By Land Use Designation Boundary
    14.210.060   Division of Lots in Multi-Family Residential Use
    14.210.070   Directional Sense of Lots
    14.210.080   Contiguous Lots
    14.210.090   Non-Contiguous Lots
    14.210.100   Setbacks for Single-Family Residential Structures in Other Land Use Designations
    14.210.110   Setbacks – Modifications
    14.210.120   Setbacks – Utilities
    14.210.130   Access Ways, Setbacks – Alleys, Easements, Private Roads
    14.210.140   Setbacks – Adjoining Half-Street or Designated Arterial
    14.210.150   Setbacks – Projections Allowed
    14.210.160   Sight Clearance
    14.210.170   Heights – How to Measure
    14.210.180   Heights – Exceptions to Limits
    14.210.190   Utility Distribution and Transmission Poles and Towers
    14.210.210   Special Considerations for Multi-Family Developments in Non-Multi-Family Land Use Designations
    14.210.215   Detached Condominiums and Cottage Housing
    14.210.220   Mobile Home Park Requirements
    14.210.230   Business Park and Airport Industry
    14.210.235   Public Park
    14.210.240   Design Requirements for Mixed Use and Planned Residential Developments (PRDs)
    14.210.250   Accessory Buildings and Miscellaneous Structures in All Land Use Designations
    14.210.260   Conversions
    14.210.270   Swimming Pools
    14.210.280   Street Frontage – Easements
    14.210.290   Screening of Exterior Mechanical Equipment for Commercial and Multi-Family Developments
    14.210.300   Infrastructure Improvements Required as a Condition of Building Permit
    14.210.310   Location of New Utilities
    14.210.320   Keeping of Animals
    14.210.330   Dimensional Requirements
    14.210.340   Severability
Chapter 14.212 Pilchuck District Development Regulations
    Article I.  DEVELOPMENT CODE APPLICABILITY
        14.212.110   Purpose and Intent of Pilchuck District Land Use Regulations
        14.212.120   Administration and Interpretation
        14.212.130   Applicability
        14.212.140   Development Review and Approval
        14.212.150   Pilchuck District SEPA Planned Action
        14.212.160   Transportation Impacts and Concurrency
        14.212.170   Deviation from Code Requirements and Determination of Equivalence
    Article II. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND ZONES
        14.212.200   General Requirements for Development
        14.212.210   Regulating Plan Adopted
        14.212.220   Zones
    Article III. STREETS AND SUBDIVISIONS
        14.212.300   Street Types and Design
        14.212.310   Subdivision, Lots, and Blocks
        14.212.320   Public Frontage Construction
    Article IV. BUILDING AND SITE USE
        14.212.400   Purpose
        14.212.410   Allowed Uses
    Article V.  SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
        14.212.500   Site Development
        14.212.510   Nonconforming Structures
        14.212.520   Structures with Potential Historic Value
        14.212.530   Building Height Provisions
        14.212.540   Residential Densities
        14.212.550   Building Disposition and Configuration
    Article VI. PARKING REGULATIONS
        14.212.600   Purpose
        14.212.610   Parking Access, Screening, Lighting, and Location
        14.212.620   Off-Street Parking Calculations
        14.212.630   Bicycle Parking Standards
    Article VII. LANDSCAPE REGULATIONS
        14.212.700   Landscape and Open Space Standards
    Article VIII. DESIGN STANDARDS
        14.212.800   Purpose
        14.212.810   Context
        14.212.820   Applicability
        14.212.830   Site Design – General
        14.212.840   Building Design – General
        14.212.850   Standards Specific to the Neighborhood Single Family Zone
        14.212.860   Standards Specific to the Neighborhood Townhouse Zone
        14.212.870   Standards Specific to the Neighborhood Center Zone
        14.212.880   Standards Specific to the Neighborhood Civic Zone
    Article IX. SIGN STANDARDS [Reserved]
    Article X.  DESCRIPTION OF TERMS
        14.212.1010  Private Frontage Types
        14.212.1020  Definitions.
Chapter 14.215 Subdivisions
    14.215.010   Purpose and Scope
    14.215.020   Preliminary Plat Approval Criteria
    14.215.025   Preliminary Plat Approval
    14.215.030   Revisions of Preliminary Plats
    14.215.035   Construction Drawings
    14.215.040   Preconstruction Meeting
    14.215.050   Construction Compliance
    14.215.060   Assurance That Any Remaining Improvements Will Be Installed
    14.215.070   As-Built Drawings
    14.215.080   Maintenance Bond
    14.215.085   Extension of Time for Preliminary Plats
    14.215.090   Final Plats
    14.215.100   Final Plat Criteria
    14.215.105   Phased Development
    14.215.110   Vacations and Alterations of Plats
    14.215.120   Short Plat
    14.215.125   Fee Simple Unit Lot Subdivisions
    14.215.130   Boundary Line Adjustments
Chapter 14.220 Planned Residential Developments
    14.220.010   Purpose
    14.220.020   Applicability
    14.220.030   Permitted Uses
    14.220.040   Application and Review Procedures
    14.220.050   Internal Streets and Sidewalks
    14.220.060   Parking and Driveways
    14.220.070   Public Utilities
    14.220.080   Buffering and Screening Between Housing Types
    14.220.090   Compatibility with Adjacent Land Uses
    14.220.100   Special Design and Bulk and Dimensional Requirements
    14.220.105   Open Space and Recreation Area Requirements
    14.220.110   Preservation of Existing Features
    14.220.120   Maintenance of Open Space and Common Facilities
Chapter 14.222 Transfer of Development Rights
    14.222.010   Purpose
    14.222.020   Definitions.
    14.222.030   Authorized and Priority Sending Areas
    14.222.040   Authorized Receiving Areas
    14.222.050   TDR Credit Use and Exchange Rates
    14.222.060   Program Evaluation
Chapter 14.225 Design Standards in Historic District
    14.225.010   Historic District Boundaries
    14.225.020   Purpose
    14.225.030   Design Standards
    14.225.040   References
    14.225.050   Implementation of Design Standards – Reviewing Entity
    14.225.060   Exemptions
    14.225.070   Submittal Requirements
    14.225.080   Building Demolitions
    14.225.090   Other Reviews
    14.225.100   Conduct of DRB Meetings
Chapter 14.230 Design Standards Outside Historic District
    14.230.010   Purpose
    14.230.020   Design Standards
    14.230.030   Implementation of Design Standards – Reviewing Entity
    14.230.040   Exemptions
    14.230.050   Submittal Requirements
Chapter 14.235 Off-Street Parking, Loading, and Access Requirements
    14.235.010   Required Off-Street Parking
    14.235.020   Interpretation of Tables
    14.235.030   Parking Requirements for Uses Not Specified
    14.235.040   Parking Requirements for Existing and New Structures in the Historic Business District Land Use Designation
    14.235.045   Parking Requirements for Existing and New Structures in the Pilchuck District Land Use Designation
    14.235.050   Parking Requirements for Senior Citizens’ Multi-Family Units
    14.235.055   Parking Requirements for Low-Income Multi-Family Units
    14.235.060   Mixed Occupancies
    14.235.070   Joint Uses of Parking Facilities
    14.235.080   Conditions Required for Joint Use
    14.235.090   Location of Parking Spaces
    14.235.100   Use of Parking Spaces Accessory to Residences
    14.235.110   Parking Plans Required Prior to the Issuance of a Building Permit
    14.235.120   Allowance for Compact Cars
    14.235.130   Minimum Requirements for Off-Street Parking
    14.235.140   Off-Street Loading Space Requirements
    14.235.150   Access to Parking from Alleys
    14.235.160   Vehicle Capacity for Drive-Through Service Access
    14.235.170   Parking Requirements for Residential Land Uses
    14.235.180   Parking Requirements for General Services Land Uses
    14.235.190   Parking Requirements for Government/Business Services Land Uses
    14.235.200   Parking for Retail Land Uses
    14.235.210   Parking for Manufacturing Land Uses
    14.235.220   Parking for Regional Land Uses
    14.235.230   Parking for Recreational/Cultural Land Uses
    14.235.240   Parking for Resource Land Uses
    14.235.250   Parking for Essential Public Facilities Land Uses
    14.235.260   Minimum Standards for Conventional Off-Street Parking
    14.235.270   Minimum Standards for Interlocking Off-Street Parking
    14.235.280   Acceptable Parking Designs
    14.235.290   Acceptable Parking Designs
Chapter 14.237 Clearing and Grading
    14.237.010   Purpose
    14.237.020   Permit Required
    14.237.030   Exempt Activities
    14.237.040   Permit Issuance
    14.237.050   General Conditions (Required of All Applicants)
    14.237.060   Minimum Standards
    14.237.070   Permit Restrictions
    14.237.080   Inspections
    14.237.090   Completion of Work
    14.237.100   Permit Suspension or Revocation
    14.237.110   Liability
    14.237.120   Severability
Chapter 14.240 Landscaping, Screening, Fencing, and Retaining Walls
    14.240.010   General Provisions
    14.240.020   Performance Assurance
    14.240.030   Existing Vegetation
    14.240.040   Landscape Requirements for Parking Lot and Site Development
    14.240.050   Maintenance of Landscaping
    14.240.060   Fence and Freestanding Wall Regulations
Chapter 14.242 Wireless Communications Facilities
    14.242.010   Purpose
    14.242.020   Definitions
    14.242.030   Applicability and Exemptions
    14.242.040   Prohibitions
    14.242.050   Siting Hierarchy
    14.242.060   Exception from the Standards
    14.242.070   City-Owned WCF Sites
    14.242.080   Types of WCF Permits Required
    14.242.090   WCF Application Requirements
    14.242.100   Permit Review (“Shot Clock”) Time Periods
    14.242.110   Category 1 WCF Permit Process and Findings
    14.242.120   Category 2 WCF Permit Process and Findings
    14.242.130   Category 3 WCF Permit Process and Findings
    14.242.140   Development Standards
    14.242.150   Conditions of Approval
    14.242.160   Third Party Technical Review
    14.242.170   Public Notice
    14.242.180   Removal of Abandoned Equipment
    14.242.190   Revocation
Chapter 14.245 Sign Regulations
    14.245.010    Intent and Purpose
    14.245.015   Applicability and Interpretations
    14.245.020   Definitions
    14.245.030   Sign Permit Required
    14.245.040   Sign Permit Fees
    14.245.050   Sign Permit – Historic District
    14.245.060   Signs Exempt from Permit Requirements
    14.245.065   Freestanding Signs
    14.245.070   Building Signs
    14.245.075   Temporary Signs
    14.245.080   Prohibited Signs
    14.245.082   Off-Site Highway Signs
    14.245.085   Electronic Changing Message Signs
    14.245.090   Illumination of Signs
    14.245.115   Signs in Residential Land Use Designations
    14.245.120   Maintenance of Signs
    14.245.130   Non-Conforming Signs
Chapter 14.250 Shoreline Management
    14.250.010   Purpose
    14.250.020   Shoreline Master Program Regulations and Relationship to Other Regulations
    14.250.030   Definitions.
    14.250.040   General Provisions
    14.250.050   Permits, Decisions, and Appeals – General
    14.250.060   Substantial Development Permit, Conditional Use Permit and Variance
    14.250.070   Non-Conforming Shoreline Uses and Structures
    14.250.080   Shoreline Environments
    14.250.090   Shoreline Environment – Designation Change
    14.250.100   Development Regulations – General
    14.250.110   Use Regulations – General
    14.250.120   Table 1: Shoreline Uses
    14.250.130   Regulations Specific to Agriculture Uses
    14.250.140   Regulations Specific to Aquaculture Uses
    14.250.150   Regulations Specific to Commercial Uses
    14.250.160   Regulations Specific to Industrial Uses
    14.250.170   Regulations Specific to Residential Uses
    14.250.180   Regulations Specific to Recreation and Cultural Uses 
    14.250.190   Regulations Specific to Boat Launches and Marinas
    14.250.200   Regulations Specific to Transportation and Parking
    14.250.210   Regulations Specific to Utilities
    14.250.220   Regulations Specific to In-Water Structural Uses
    14.250.230   Regulations Specific to Public Facilities
    14.250.240   Regulations Specific to Public Access
    14.250.250   Regulations Specific to Signs
    14.250.260   Shoreline Modifications – General
    14.250.270   Table 2: Shoreline Modifications 
    14.250.280   Regulations Specific to Shoreline Stabilization
    14.250.290   Regulations Specific to Flood Protection
    14.250.300   Regulations Specific to Grading, Filling, Dredging, and the Disposal of Dredge Material
    14.250.310   Regulations Specific to Breakwaters, Jetties, Groins and Weirs
    14.250.320   Regulations Specific to Docks and Piers
    14.250.330   Critical Areas in Shoreline Jurisdiction
Chapter 14.252 Archaeological Resources
    14.252.010   Purpose and applicability
    14.252.020   Applicability of zoning requirements
    14.252.030   Archaeology site report
    14.252.040   Project or permit approval for property on state register as an archaeological resource
    14.252.050   Inadvertent discovery of archaeological resources
    14.252.060   Inadvertent discovery of human remains
    14.252.070   Appeals
    14.252.080   Severability
Chapter 14.255 Critical Areas – General
    14.255.010   Findings
    14.255.020   Purpose
    14.255.030   Critical Areas Code
    14.255.035   Best Available Science (BAS)
    14.255.040   Fees
    14.255.050   Applicability
    14.255.060   Exemptions
    14.255.070   Review Process
    14.255.080   Critical Area Reports
    14.255.090   Previous Studies
    14.255.100   Mitigation Plan Requirements
    14.255.110   Independent Review of Critical Area Report
    14.255.120   Substantive Requirements
    14.255.130   Variances
    14.255.140   Enforcement and Inspections
Chapter 14.260 Wetlands
    14.260.010   Purpose and Intent
    14.260.020   Rating and Designation
    14.260.030   Critical Area Reports
    14.260.040   Substantive Requirements
    14.260.050   Mitigation
Chapter 14.265 Critical Aquifer Recharge Areas
    14.265.010   Designation
    14.265.020   Exemptions
    14.265.030   Critical Area Reports
    14.265.040   Substantive Requirements
    14.265.050   Prohibited Activities and Uses
Chapter 14.270 Flood Hazard Areas
    14.270.010   Authority
    14.270.020   Findings of Fact
    14.270.030   Purpose and Methods
    14.270.040   Definitions (44 CFR 59.1).
    14.270.050   General Provisions (44 CFR 59.22 (a))
    14.270.060   Administration
    14.270.070   General Standards for Flood Hazard Reduction
    14.270.080   Specific Standards for Flood Hazard Reduction (44 CFR 60.3(c)(1))
    14.270.090   Determination of Flood Insurance Risk
    14.270.100   Floodplains as Critical Areas
    14.270.110   Recordation
Chapter 14.275 Geologically Hazardous Areas
    14.275.010   Designation
    14.275.020   Mapping
    14.275.030   Exemptions
    14.275.040   Critical Area Reports
    14.275.050   Substantive Requirements
    14.275.060   Decisions
Chapter 14.280 Habitat Conservation Areas
    14.280.010   Designation of Habitat Conservation Areas
    14.280.020   Designation of Habitats and Species of Local Importance
    14.280.030   Mapping
    14.280.040   Critical Area Reports
    14.280.050   Substantive Requirements
    14.280.060   Habitat Conservation Area Buffers
Chapter 14.285 Low-Income Housing Incentives
    14.285.010   Purpose
    14.285.020   Eligibility
    14.285.040   Procedure for Review and Approval
    14.285.050   General Low-Income Density Incentive
    14.285.060   Low-Income Senior Housing Density Incentive
Chapter 14.290 School Impact Fees
    14.290.010   Purpose
    14.290.020   Applicability
    14.290.030   Incorporation of School District Capital Facilities Plan as a Sub-Element of the City Capital Facilities Plan
    14.290.040   Establishment of Impact Fees
    14.290.050   Exemptions from Impact Fees
    14.290.060   Procedure for Determining Mitigation Impacts
    14.290.070   Method for Calculating Impact Fees
    14.290.080   Administrative Adjustment of Fee Amount
    14.290.090   School District Impact Area
    14.290.100   Comparable In-Kind Mitigation Option
    14.290.110   Credit for Payment or Obligation Previously Incurred
    14.290.120   Time of Performance for Mitigation of Impact
    14.290.125   Single-Family Residential Deferral Program
    14.290.130   Use of Impact Mitigation Funds
    14.290.140   Unacceptable Impact Levels
    14.290.150   Impact Fee Schedule Exemptions
    14.290.160   Impact Fee Limitations
    14.290.170   Revision of School District CFP
    14.290.180   Annual Report
    14.290.190   Appeals
Chapter 14.295 Traffic Impact Fees and Mitigation
    14.295.010   Findings
    14.295.020   Declaration of Purpose
    14.295.030   Relationship to Environmental Impacts
    14.295.040   Definitions
    14.295.050   Street System Policy-General Provisions
    14.295.060   Traffic Study
    14.295.070   Determination of Street System Obligations
    14.295.080   Street System Capacity Requirements
    14.295.090   Traffic Impact Fee
    14.295.095   Traffic Impact Fee Exemption
    14.295.100   Level-of-Service Requirements and Concurrency Determinations
    14.295.110   Inadequate Street Condition Requirements
    14.295.120   Special Circumstances
    14.295.130   Administration of Traffic Impact Fee Payments
    14.295.135   Single-Family Residential Deferral Program
    14.295.140   Administrative Appeals
    14.295.150   Severability
    14.295.160   No Special Duty
Chapter 14.300 Park Impact Fees
    14.300.010   Purpose
    14.300.020   Establishment of Impact Fees and Fund
    14.300.030   Incorporation of Parks Capital Facilities Plan
    14.300.040   Applicability
    14.300.050   Impact Fee Schedule Exemptions
    14.300.060   Impact Fee Collection and Assessment
    14.300.065   Single-Family Residential Deferral Program
    14.300.070   Schedule of Park Impact Fees
    14.300.080   In-Kind Mitigation Option
    14.300.090   Credit for Payment or Obligation Previously Incurred
    14.300.100   Administrative Adjustment of Fee Amount – Payment under Protest
    14.300.110   Appeals
    14.300.120   Service Area Established
    14.300.130   Use of Funds
    14.300.140   Refunds
    14.300.150   Use and Disposition of Land
    14.300.160   Annual Report
    14.300.170   Definitions
    14.300.180   Severability
    14.300.190   No Special Duty

Chapter 14.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:
14.05.010    Authority
14.05.020    Purpose
14.05.030    Jurisdiction
14.05.040    No Special Duty Created
14.05.050    Administration and Interpretation
14.05.055    Reasonable Accommodations for Persons with Disabilities
14.05.060    Adoption of Supporting Administrative Guidelines
14.05.070    Compliance
14.05.080    Computation of Time
14.05.090    Land Use Designation Map

14.05.010 Authority.
A. Title 14 of the Snohomish Municipal Code is adopted as the City of Snohomish Land Use Development Code (Development Code) pursuant to Chapter 35A.63 RCW (Planning and Zoning in Code Cities), Chapter 35A.58 RCW (Boundaries and Plats), Chapter 36.70A RCW (Growth Management Act), Chapter 86.16 RCW (Flood Prevention), Title 58 RCW (Boundaries and Plats), the City’s general police powers, and any other applicable state statutes and regulations.
B. Whenever any provision of this title cites a section of the Revised Code of Washington (RCW) or Washington Administrative Code (WAC) and that section is later amended or superseded, this title shall be deemed amended to refer to the amended section or the section that most nearly corresponds to this superseded section.
C. All activities allowed under the provisions of this title shall comply with applicable federal, state, regional, county, or City performance standards related to the creation or existence of the following: noise, vibration, glare, heat, odorous material, smoke and dust emission, wind borne air pollution, toxic or noxious material, sealed radioactive material, and all forms of water pollution.

14.05.020 Purpose.
The general purposes of the City of Snohomish Land Use Development Code are to:
A. Implement the City of Snohomish Comprehensive Plan.
B. Implement Chapter 36.70A RCW, the Growth Management Act, and Chapter 36.70B RCW, Local Project Review.
C. Protect the general health, safety, and welfare.
D. Provide for the economic, social, and aesthetic advantages of orderly development.
E. Provide for adequate public facilities and services in conjunction with development.

14.05.030 Jurisdiction.
This title shall be effective throughout the City’s corporate boundaries. In addition, the City of Snohomish and Snohomish County may enter into an interlocal agreement causing this title to apply to any or all portions of the City of Snohomish Urban Growth Area (UGA).

14.05.040 No Special Duty Created.
It is expressly the purpose of this title to provide for and promote the health, safety and welfare of the general public and not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited by the terms of this title.
No provision or term used in this title is intended to impose any duty whatsoever upon the City or any of its officers, agents, or employees, for whom the implementation or enforcement of this title shall be discretionary and not mandatory.
Nothing contained in this title is intended nor shall be construed to create or form the basis of any liability on the part of the City, or its officers, employees, or agents, for any injury or damage resulting from any action or inaction on the part of the City, its officers, employees, or agents. (Ord. 2375, 2019)

14.05.050 Administration and Interpretation.
A. The City Planner shall interpret and apply this Development Code consistently. As may be necessary, the City Planner shall render new interpretations in writing, file said interpretations, and apply said interpretations in future like instances.
B. In the event of conflict: 1) specific provisions shall prevail over general provisions; 2) text shall prevail over headings, captions, illustrations, and citation references; and 3) Chapter 36.70B RCW shall prevail over this Development Code.
C. Regulations, conditions, or procedural requirements that are specific to an individual land use shall supersede regulations, conditions, or procedural requirements of general application.
D. A land use includes the necessary structures to support the use unless specifically prohibited or the context clearly indicates otherwise.
E. The word “shall” is mandatory and the word “may” is discretionary. The word “should” is mandatory unless the City Planner determines that application of the particular provision is not necessary to implement the purposes of the Development Code as set forth in SMC 14.05.020.

14.05.055 Reasonable Accommodations for Persons with Disabilities.
A. Purpose. The federal Fair Housing Act and Fair Housing Act Amendments require that reasonable accommodations be made in the rules, policies, practices, or services, when such accommodations may be necessary to afford disabled persons equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. The rights created by the statutes are requirements of federal law and shall be interpreted and applied in accordance with federal case law.
B. Scope. The City Planner or his or her designee is therefore authorized to make reasonable accommodations in the provisions of this title as such provisions apply to dwellings occupied or to be occupied by disabled persons as defined by the federal Fair Housing Act and Fair Housing Act Amendments. Accommodations may include:
    1. Reducing the setback requirements to retrofit a house with handicapped accessible facilities.
    2. Other modifications to this title necessary to afford a person with a disability an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling, provided such modification does not reduce public safety nor keep the intent of the code from being met.
C. Procedure. 
    1. Request. A request for a reasonable accommodation in the form of a modification of this title may be made to the City Planner and must include verifiable documentation of the disability and need for accommodation. Such accommodation shall be reasonable, personal to the applicant and granted pursuant to the definitions and requirements of the Fair Housing Act and Fair Housing Act Amendments as the same exists or is hereafter amended.
    2. Decision. The written decision of the City Planner or his or her designee shall be provided to the applicant and copies of the decision posted at City Hall, and on or near the subject site, and mailed to all property owners within 300 feet of the subject site.
    3. Recording of Decision. Notice of the decision of the Planning Director or his or her designee shall be recorded with the Snohomish County Auditor to apprise prospective purchasers of the reasonable accommodation granted hereunder. All such notices shall conspicuously state that all accommodations granted under this section are personal to the applicant and that they expire when the applicant terminates his or her occupancy at the subject site.
    4. Appeals. The decision of the City Planner or his or her designee shall be appealable to Hearing Examiner in accordance with the provisions of SMC 14.20.170. The appeal period for such appeals shall commence on the date the notice of decision is postmarked.
D. Criteria. The City Planner or his or her designee may determine that such reasonable accommodations may be necessary in order to comply with the federal Fair Housing Act and Fair Housing Act Amendments. All such accommodations shall be personal to the applicant and shall expire immediately if the disabled applicant terminates occupancy at the subject site. (Ord. 2268, 2014)

14.05.060 Adoption of Supporting Administrative Guidelines.
A. City departments, boards, and commissions may adopt guidelines, reference materials, forms, or other documents to aid in interpreting and administering this Development Code, provided that such adoption is ratified by resolution or ordinance of the City Council.
B. Previously adopted and ratified documents include the following:
    1. Approved Landscape Materials List.
    2. U.S. Department of Interior Rehabilitation Standards for Historic Properties.

14.05.070 Compliance.
Subject to Chapter 14.80 SMC (Non-conforming Uses and Buildings), no person may use, occupy, or sell any land or buildings, or authorize or permit the use, occupancy, or sale of land or buildings under his control except in compliance with all of the applicable provisions of this title.

14.05.080 Computation of Time.
A. Unless otherwise specifically provided, the time within which an act is to be done under the Development Code shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day. If the last day is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, that day shall be excluded. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays shall be excluded.
B. Unless otherwise specifically provided, whenever a person has the right, or is required, to do some act within a prescribed period after the service of a notice or other paper upon him and the notice or paper is served by mail, three days shall be added to the prescribed period.

14.05.090 Land Use Designation Map.
The Land Use Designation Map in the Comprehensive Plan shall also constitute the Land Use Designation Map for the Development Code. (Ord. 2082, 2005)

Chapter 14.10 LAND USE DEVELOPMENT CODE FEES

Sections:
14.10.010    Fees
14.10.020    Hearing Examiner and Consultant Deposits

14.10.010 Fees.
A. Fees sufficient to cover the costs of administration, inspection, publication of notice, and similar matters may be charged to applicants for permits, approvals, variances, and other administrative relief. Appeal filing fees are not intended to cover all City costs. The amount of the fees charged shall be as established by resolution of the City Council.
B. All permit applications shall be accompanied by an application fee as set by resolution of the City Council. Application fees are for City processing services, and are not refundable because an application is denied or modified. The City Council may adopt rules providing for the partial refund of application fees for withdrawn applications or appeals in relation to actual City costs expended to the time a written request is received to withdraw the application or appeal. (Ord. 2300, 2016)

14.10.020 Hearing Examiner and Consultant Deposits.
A. Costs for Hearing Examiner review, except appeals, and/or third-party technical review by consultants under contract with the City for review of critical areas, radio frequency engineering, or other disciplines shall be borne by the applicant in full at the actual cost invoiced by the Hearing Examiner and/or consultant.
B. When a Hearing Examiner review is required according to this title or when peer-review of a land use application is determined necessary by the City Planner or designee, the applicant shall provide a deposit or deposits and associated administrative fee(s) in the amounts established by resolution of the City Council.
C. In the event such costs do not exceed the initial deposit amount(s), the City shall refund any unused portion within thirty days of receipt of the Hearing Examiner’s or consultant’s final invoice.
D. If the application is withdrawn before billable time is expended by the Hearing Examiner and/or consultant(s), the deposit(s) shall be returned in full within sixty days of written request to withdraw the application.
E. If the invoiced costs exceed the cumulative amount for all deposits for an application, the applicant shall pay the difference before the final permit is released. In any event, the applicant shall be responsible for all project costs invoiced by the Hearing Examiner or consultant(s). The City shall endeavor to monitor the deposit amount(s) and may, but shall not be required to, notify the applicant before costs exceed the initial deposit. The City may halt processing of a development application until a supplemental deposit covering the reasonable additional costs of Hearing Examiner or Consultant services is received. The City shall not be liable for a failure to notify the applicant that costs have exceeded the deposit amount(s). (Ord. 2300, 2016)

Chapter 14.15 AMENDMENTS TO THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN, LAND USE MAP, AND DEVELOPMENT CODE

Sections:
14.15.010    Early and Continuous Public Participation
14.15.020    Amendment Procedures
14.15.040    Threshold Determination, Scheduling of Hearing, and Notice
14.15.050    Reconsideration of DNS
14.15.060    Forward to City Council and Planning Commission
14.15.070    State Review
14.15.080    Hearing
14.15.090    Criteria – Findings and Recommendation
14.15.100    Council Action
14.15.105    Amendments to the Development Code’s Land Use Designation Map
14.15.110    Appeals

14.15.010 Early and Continuous Public Participation.
The City encourages early and continuous public participation in the comprehensive planning and development regulation process and to that end has established notification procedures in SMC 14.20.130, which are consistent with the requirements of RCW 36.70A.130, 140, and 470. Procedures, timelines, and application forms are available from the Planning and Development Services Department. (Ord. 2338, 2017)

14.15.020 Amendment Procedures.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to:
    1. Create procedures, consistent with the requirements of RCW 36.70A.130, 36.70A.140, and 36.70A.470, for processing proposals to amend the City’s Comprehensive Plan, Land Use Designation Map, and Land Use Development Code;
    2. Provide a process for the public and interested parties to propose amendments to the Comprehensive Plan and to the Land Use Development Code; and
    3. Provide the public and interested parties with opportunities to participate in the amendment process.
B. Comprehensive Plan and Land Use Designation Map Amendments. The City, in carrying out its Comprehensive Plan review function, may find instances where it is necessary to amend all or part of the Plan’s text and/or maps. The following procedural steps shall govern all amendments to the Comprehensive Plan or Land Use Designation Map:
    1. The City’s Comprehensive Plan shall be subject to continuing evaluation and review by the City. Any amendment or revision to the Comprehensive Plan shall conform to Chapter 36.70A RCW.
    2. Initiation of Amendments. 
        a. Site-specific Land Use Designation Map amendment proposals shall only be initiated by a person with ownership interest in at least a portion of the affected site, the City Council, City of Snohomish Planning Commission, or City staff.
        b. Comprehensive Plan amendment and areawide Land Use Designation Map amendment proposals may be initiated by citizens, any interested person, the Planning Commission, City staff, City Council, the City’s designated Hearing Examiner and staff of other agencies.
        c. The proposed amendments or revisions to the Comprehensive Plan shall be docketed and considered by the City no more frequently than once every calendar year except that amendments may be considered more frequently under the circumstances provided for in RCW 36.70A.130(2)(a)(i) through (2)(a)(v).
    3. The Planning Director shall establish an annual docketing process whereby any interested person, the Planning Commission, City staff, City Council, City’s designated Hearing Examiner and staff of other agencies may submit applications to amend the City’s Comprehensive Plan. That process shall include, but not be limited to, an:
        a. Annual application period August 1st through September 30th;
        b. Application form and a checklist of required information to be submitted with the application; and
        c. Public outreach program during the annual application period to ensure public awareness of the docketing process and the ability for the public to submit applications proposing amendments to the Comprehensive Plan, Land Use Designation Map, and Land Use Development Code.
    4. After the application deadline, the Planning Director shall compile a preliminary docket consisting of a listing of all docket applications that were determined to include all of the required submittal items. The preliminary docket shall include a:
        a. Brief description of the proposed amendment;
        b. Preliminary staff analysis of the proposal as to whether it is in the interest of the public health, safety, and welfare of Snohomish residents; and
        c. Staff recommendation as to whether it should be placed on the final docket.
        If no applications are received, compiling a preliminary docket is not required.
    5. The City Council, at an annual docket public hearing held in October or November, shall consider all of the proposals on the preliminary docket and decide which, if any, shall be placed on the final docket. Criteria the City Council may use in considering the application may include, but are not limited to, whether the proposal is consistent with their vision for the City and whether there are adequate staff resources to properly evaluate and process the proposal. Decisions by the City Council on which items to place on the final docket are legislative and discretionary. If no applications are received the City Council shall not hold an annual docket public hearing and a final docket will not be approved for that year.
    6. The Planning Director shall research and analyze all items placed on the final docket by the City Council. The Planning Director shall process each item as a Comprehensive Plan or Land Use Designation Map amendment to be brought to the City Council, with a Planning Commission recommendation, for their consideration during an annual Comprehensive Plan amendment public hearing. All final docket items shall be processed or reported on within one (1) calendar year of when the item was placed on the final docket. This time limit may be extended with City Council approval.
    7. Only amendment proposals placed on the final docket may be forwarded to the Planning Commission for consideration. All amendment proposals to be considered in a calendar year shall be considered concurrently so the cumulative effect of the various proposals can be ascertained. However, pursuant to RCW 36.70A.130(2)(a)(i) through (2)(a)(v), certain amendments to the Comprehensive Plan that are not on the final docket may be forwarded to the Planning Commission – at any time during the year and independent of other amendments – even if it means amending the Comprehensive Plan more than once a year.
    8. It is the responsibility of the Planning Director to review and oversee the preparation of all materials to express, explain, or depict the various aspects or elements of the text or map amendments including the documentation required by the State Environmental Policy Act. The Planning Director may require applicants to provide materials and studies as deemed necessary to understand the proposal and its implications.
    9. The Planning Director may request other City boards or agencies or other governmental entities to provide comments and recommendations on Comprehensive Plan amendments. In proposing any changes to its Comprehensive Plan, the City shall notify the Department of Commerce of its intent to adopt such amendments at least sixty (60) days prior to final adoption. The City shall transmit a complete and accurate copy of approved amendments to the Department of Commerce in accordance with state law.
    10. Letters of support or objection to a proposed Comprehensive Plan amendment may be filed by any interested party. The letters must be filed by the date of the City Council public hearing unless an extension of time is granted.
    11. The City may use any or all of the following techniques to provide for early and continuous public participation in the development and/or amendments of the City’s Comprehensive Plan. Techniques not listed may also be used.
        a. Provide for an opportunity to submit written comments;
        b. Hold informational public meetings to explain the proposed amendment;
        c. Use the City’s website and social media to provide information, documents, and to announce all public meetings related to the proposed amendment.
    12. The Planning Commission shall consider proposed amendments placed on the final docket at a public hearing then make written findings of fact and conclusions and a recommendation to the City Council on each proposed amendment. The Commission shall make one (1) of four (4) decisions in considering amendments:
        a. Approval in the form submitted for public hearing;
        b. Approval with changes;
        c. Approval in part;
        d. Disapproval.
    13. City Council Action. 
        a. After receipt of the Planning Commission’s findings and recommendations on proposed Comprehensive Plan or Map amendments, the Council shall consider the proposed amendments at a public meeting. The Council shall make one (1) of the following decisions in considering amendments:
            i. Approval in accordance with the findings and recommendations submitted by the Planning Commission;
            ii. Approval with modifications; provided, that the Council shall hold its own public hearing before making any substantial modification to any Comprehensive Plan amendment recommended by the Planning Commission;
            iii. Refer all or part of the Plan text or map amendment proposal back to the Planning Commission for further consideration;
            iv. Disapprove.
        b. If the Council’s decision is the alternative in subsection (B)(13)(a)(iii) of this section, the Council must specify which matters it wishes reconsidered by the Planning Commission.
    14. Notice of Public Hearing. Notice of all public hearings shall be made in accordance with state and local laws.
    15. Appeals of Decisions. All requests for review by a Growth Management Hearings Board shall be initiated by filing a petition in accordance with Chapter 36.70A, 43.21C or 90.58 RCW. Only parties of record may initiate an appeal of the City Council’s final decision.
C. Development Regulation Code Amendments. From time to time, it may be necessary to amend development regulations within the code to allow for the implementation of the Comprehensive Plan. Petitions or applications for Development Regulation Code amendments shall be evaluated on their compatibility with the goals, objectives, policies and recommendations of the Comprehensive Plan.
    1. Development Regulation Code amendments may be initiated by the City at any time.
    2. Development Regulation Code amendments shall be initiated by citizens, the Planning Commission, or any interested party including applicants, hearing examiners, and staff of other agencies pursuant to the annual docketing procedure described in subsection (B)(2) of this section.
    3. Proposed Development Regulation Code amendments shall only be forwarded to the Planning Commission for consideration if:
        a. Initiated by the City; or
        b. Placed on a final docket by the City Council, pursuant to subsection (B)(2) of this section. Proposed Development Regulation Code amendments do not have to be considered concurrently with other proposed amendments and may be enacted at any time. Unlike Comprehensive Plan amendments, they are not subject to the requirement for concurrent review and cumulative effect analysis and once-a-year limitation.
    4. Processing of Development Regulation Amendments. 
        a. The City may use any or all of the following techniques to provide for early and continuous public participation in the development and/or amendments of the City’s Comprehensive Plan. Techniques not listed may also be used.
            i. Provide for an opportunity to submit written comments;
            ii. Hold informational public meetings to explain the proposed amendment;
            iii. Use the City’s website and social media to provide information, documents, and to announce all public meetings related to the proposed amendment.
        b. A public hearing shall be held by the Planning Commission on the proposed Development Regulation Code amendment after the proposed amendment has been reviewed for consistency with the Comprehensive Plan. Upon completion of the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall issue findings of fact and conclusions and make a recommendation to the City Council on the proposed Development Regulation Code amendment.
        c. Upon receipt of a Development Regulation Code amendment recommendation from the Planning Commission, the City Council shall consider the matter at a public meeting, and may take the following actions:
            i. Concur with the Planning Commission’s recommendation and adopt the code amendment substantially in the form as presented;
            ii. Remand the matter to the Planning Commission with instructions regarding the City Council’s concerns and direction; or
            iii. Conduct another public hearing prior to making any substantial change in the Development Regulation Code amendment recommended by the Planning Commission. (Ord. 2352, 2018)

14.15.040 Threshold Determination, Scheduling of Hearing, and Notice.
A. Amendments to the Comprehensive Plan or Development Code may be requested utilizing a form provided by the Planning and Development Services Department subject to payment of prescribed fees. The Planning Director shall verify completeness and shall docket complete requests.
B. Once a proposed amendment to the Comprehensive Plan or Development Code has been drafted, the Planning Director shall:
    1. Perform a threshold determination regarding the proposal in accordance with Chapter 197-11 WAC Part Three;
    2. If a determination of significance (DS) is issued, determine the scope of the environmental impact statement (EIS) and prepare the draft EIS;
    3. Schedule a public hearing before the Planning Commission for a date that conforms to the following notice requirement; and
    4. Publish between 15 and 30 days before the hearing a notice of hearing in the official newspaper (see Chapter 14.20 SMC); provided, that:
        a. If a determination of nonsignificance (DNS) has been issued, the notice shall state that if timely comments are received the Planning Director will reconsider the DNS.
        b. If WAC 197-11-340(2) applies (i.e., City cannot take final action until 14 days after issuing a DNS), the Planning Director shall also send the notice of hearing/DNS and environmental checklist to the agencies listed in WAC 197-11-340(2).
        c. If a DEIS has been prepared, the notice shall state that comments on the DEIS will be accepted until and at the hearing.
        d. If the proposal is a site-specific amendment to the Land Use Map, the publication requirement shall be that of a Type 5 permit.
        e. The Planning Director, at his or her discretion, may publicize a given legislative proposal more broadly than stated herein to gather more public input. Minor errors in amendment procedures, such as unintended inaccuracies in any public notice, shall not invalidate an amendment proceeding. (Ord. 2338, 2017)

14.15.050 Reconsideration of DNS.
If a DNS is issued and timely comments are received, the Planning Director shall reconsider the DNS in accordance with WAC 197-11-340(2)(f) and (3). (Ord. 2338, 2017)

14.15.060 Forward to City Council and Planning Commission.
The Planning Director or designee shall forward a staff report to the Planning Commission and City Council, which report shall include a summary of the environmental review for the proposal. If a determination of significance has been issued, the Planning Director shall distribute copies of the draft and final EIS to the Planning Commission, City Council, and other affected agencies. (Ord. 2338, 2017)

14.15.070 State Review.
The City shall comply with RCW 36.70A.106 regarding review by the Department of Community, Trade, and Economic Development of proposed amendments to the Comprehensive Plan or Development Code. (Ord. 2338, 2017)

14.15.080 Hearing.
A. One or more public hearings shall be conducted in accordance with this section.
B. If directed by the City Council, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing, which may be at a joint meeting of the Planning Commission and City Council at the discretion of the City Council.
C. The City Council may conduct its own public hearing, in addition to or in lieu of any public hearing conducted by the Planning Commission.
D. In the case of site-specific amendments to the Development Code’s Land Use Designation Map, the only public hearing shall be the one conducted by the Hearing Examiner pursuant to Chapter 14.20 SMC. (Ord. 2338, 2017)

14.15.090 Criteria – Findings and Recommendation.
A. The Planning Commission shall adopt written findings referencing the following criteria, and shall make a recommendation consistent with those findings to the City Council.
B. The approval criteria for amendments to the Comprehensive Plan and Development Code shall be that the amendment:
    1. Is internally consistent with the Comprehensive Plan (for Comprehensive Plan amendments) or is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan (for Development Code amendments);
    2. Is consistent with the Growth Management Act and the State Environmental Policy Act; and
    3. Is in the interest of the public health, safety, and welfare of Snohomish residents. (Ord. 2338, 2017)

14.15.100 Council Action.
The City Council, if it elects to amend the Comprehensive Plan or Development Code, shall revise the findings if necessary and adopt said amendment by ordinance. Any substantive changes to the amendment considered at the public hearing shall be processed in accordance with the public participation requirements of RCW 36.70A.035. (Ord. 2338, 2017)

14.15.105 Amendments to the Development Code’s Land Use Designation Map.
Amendments to the Development Code’s Land Use Designation Map shall be consistent with the Growth Management Act, and shall be in the public interest. (Ord. 2338, 2017)

14.15.110 Appeals.
Amendments of the Comprehensive Plan or Development Code may be appealed to the Growth Management Hearings Board in accordance with RCW 36.70A.290. (Ord. 2338, 2017)

Chapter 14.20 PERMIT CLASSIFICATIONS AND DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCESS

Sections:
14.20.010    Purpose
14.20.020    Permit Classifications
14.20.030    Consolidation of Permits
14.20.040    Pre-Application Process
14.20.050    Design Review
14.20.060    Application Information Requirements
14.20.070    Acknowledgement of Owner
14.20.080    Determination of Legal Status of Lot or Parcel
14.20.090    Concurrency
14.20.100    Land Use Permit Review Process
14.20.110    Determination of Completeness and Review Timeframes
14.20.120    Permit Approval Timeframes and Expiration
14.20.130    Public Notice
14.20.140    Permit Conditions
14.20.150    Assignability of Permits
14.20.160    Minor Changes
14.20.170    Appeals
14.20.180    Vesting of Applications

14.20.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a land use development permit review process, as established by state law, for considering consistency of a proposed project with the applicable development regulations. These regulations establish a mechanism for implementing the provisions of the Growth Management Act regarding compliance, conformity, and consistency of land use development permit review with the Snohomish Comprehensive Plan and existing development regulations.
These procedures provide for an integrated and consolidated land use permit process. The procedures integrate the environmental review process with the land use review process, decisions, and consolidated appeal processes. These procedures are intended to:
A. Promote timely and informed public participation;
B. Process permits equitably and expediently;
C. Balance the needs of permit applicants with those of neighboring properties;
D. Ensure that decisions are made consistently and predictably;
E. Eliminate redundancy and confusion in the application, permit review, and appeal processes; and
F. Result in development that furthers the City’s vision, goals, and policies as set forth in the Comprehensive Plan. (Ord. 2338, 2017)

14.20.020 Permit Classifications.
A. The Director shall determine the proper classification for all project permit applications. Any reference in the Land Use Development Code or other City ordinance to a review process that no longer exists shall be construed to refer to the comparable process in this title. If the Director determines that the choice among appropriate classifications cannot be ascertained from the code and its intent, the Director shall resolve it in favor of the higher classification number.
B. A project that involves two or more land use permits may be processed collectively under the highest numbered classification required for any part of the application or processed individually under each of the classifications identified by the specific City regulation. The applicant may determine whether the application is processed under the individual procedure option. If the application is processed under the individual procedure option, the highest numbered classification must be processed prior to the subsequent lower numbered procedure.
C. The land use development permit application review shall follow the underlying permit review process as described in the Snohomish Municipal Code. Depending on the application, land use development permit application review may be administrative or require a public hearing by a City designated Hearing Examiner, commission, board or the City Council.
D. Permits and approvals shall be classified according to the decision maker and applicable review procedures. In the following table, permit types are organized into five classifications based on the decision authority, the appeal authority, and the review process.
+----------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------+-------------------+
| Classification |                Permit Type                | Decision Authority | Appeal Authority* |
+----------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------+-------------------+
| Type 1         | Building Permit                           | Planning Director  | Hearing Examiner  |
|                | Code Interpretation                       |                    |                   |
|                | Design Review Determination               |                    |                   |
|                | Fence Permit                              |                    |                   |
|                | Retaining Wall Permit                     |                    |                   |
|                | Right-of-Way Permit                       |                    |                   |
|                | Sidewalk Use Permit                       |                    |                   |
|                | Sign Permit, Temporary Sign Permit        |                    |                   |
|                | Utility Connection Permit (Water, Sewer)  |                    |                   |
|                | Wireless Communications Facilities,       |                    |                   |
|                | Cat. 1                                    |                    |                   |
+----------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------+-------------------+
| Type 2         | Accessory Dwelling Unit                   | Planning Director  | Hearing Examiner  |
|                | Binding Site Plan                         |                    |                   |
|                | Boundary Line Adjustment                  |                    |                   |
|                | Final Plat                                |                    |                   |
|                | Final Short Plat                          |                    |                   |
|                | Flood Hazard Area Permit                  |                    |                   |
|                | Home Occupation Permit                    |                    |                   |
|                | Minor Variance                            |                    |                   |
|                | Site Civil Permit                         |                    |                   |
+----------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------+-------------------+
| Type 3         | Site Development Plan                     | Planning Director  | Hearing Examiner* |
|                | Preliminary Short Plat                    |                    |                   |
|                | Unit Lot Subdivision (4 or Fewer Lots)    |                    |                   |
|                | Wireless Communications Facilities,       |                    |                   |
|                | Cat. 2, 3                                 |                    |                   |
|                | Shoreline Substantial Development Permit* |                    |                   |
+----------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------+-------------------+
| Type 4         | Conditional Use Permit                    | Hearing Examiner   | Superior Court*   |
|                | Planned Residential Development           |                    |                   |
|                | Preliminary Plat                          |                    |                   |
|                | Shoreline Conditional Use Permit*         |                    |                   |
|                | Shoreline Variance*                       |                    |                   |
|                | Unit Lot Subdivision (5 or More Lots)     |                    |                   |
|                | Variance                                  |                    |                   |
|                | Wireless Communications Facilities,       |                    |                   |
|                | Tier 4                                    |                    |                   |
+----------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------+-------------------+
| Type 5         | Code Amendment                            | City Council       | Growth Management |
|                | Comprehensive Plan Amendment              |                    | Hearings          |
|                | Development Agreement                     |                    | Board             |
|                | Rezone                                    |                    |                   |
+----------------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------+-------------------+
*The appeal authority for Shoreline Substantial Development Permits, Shoreline Conditional Use Permits, and Shoreline Variances shall be the Washington State Shoreline Hearings Board.
    1. Type 1 Decisions. The Type 1 process includes permits and approvals that are based on compliance with specific criteria that is nondiscretionary and clearly defined in the code. These permits have no notice requirements and are reviewed administratively.
    2. Type 2 Decisions. The Type 2 process includes permits and approvals that are based on standards and clearly defined criteria. These permits require written documentation and may include conditions for the proposal to reach consistency with applicable requirements. These permits have no notice requirements and are reviewed administratively.
    3. Type 3 Decisions. The Type 3 process includes permits and approvals that are based on standards and clearly defined criteria. These permits require written documentation and may include conditions for the proposal to reach consistency with applicable requirements. Public notice is required for these permit types. Approvals are subject to appeal to the Hearing Examiner.
    4. Type 4 Decisions. The Type 4 process includes permits and approvals that require an open record public hearing and involve discretionary judgment based on criteria. Public notice is required for these permit types. The Department forwards a staff report with a recommendation regarding the proposal’s consistency with criteria to the Hearing Examiner. Following the open record public hearing, the Hearing Examiner issues a written decision with findings, conclusions, and conditions, if any. These permits are subject to appeal to the Superior Court.
    5. Type 5 Decisions. The Type 5 process includes permits and approvals that require a public hearing before the City Council. A public hearing before the Planning Commission is typically held prior to City Council, with the recommendation of the Planning Commission being forwarded to the City Council as well as public testimony and other information provided at the public hearing. Public notice is required for these permit types. The decision is subject to appeal to the Growth Management Hearings Board.
    6. Nonpermit Actions. The following actions are not permits for the purpose of this Development Code and do not appear in the permit classification table. These actions shall not be processed as Type 1 through 5 decisions:
        a. Minor approvals for use of public properties.
        b. Administrative adjustments of impact fee amounts (in-kind mitigation).
        c. Minor amendments to permits.
        d. Historic District designations.
        e. Landscape approvals.
        f. Petitions for annexation.
        g. Street vacations.
        h. Hydrant use permit.
        i. Mobile food vendor approvals.
    7. Procedures. The following review procedures apply to the permit classifications described above.
    +-----------------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+-----------+-----------+
    |       Procedure       |    Type 1    |    Type 2    |   Type 3    |  Type 4   |  Type 5   |
    +-----------------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+-----------+-----------+
    | Pre-Application       | Not required | Not required | Recommended | Required  | Required  |
    +-----------------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+-----------+-----------+
    | Determination         | No           | Yes          | Yes         | Yes       | Yes       |
    | of Completeness       |              |              |             |           |           |
    +-----------------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+-----------+-----------+
    | Notice of Application | No           | No           | Yes         | Yes       | Yes       |
    +-----------------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+-----------+-----------+
    | SEPA Review           | No           | Potential    | Potential   | Potential | Yes       |
    +-----------------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+-----------+-----------+
    | Design Review         | Potential    | Potential    | Potential   | Potential | Potential |
    +-----------------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+-----------+-----------+
    | Open Record           | No           | No           | No          | Yes       | Yes       |
    | Public Hearing        |              |              |             |           |           |
    +-----------------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+-----------+-----------+
    | Notice of Decision    | No           | No           | Yes         | Yes       | Yes       |
    +-----------------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+-----------+-----------+
(Ord. 2338, 2017; Ord. 2353, 2018)

14.20.030 Consolidation of Permits.
If a proposal requires more than one permit, review of all permits shall be consolidated where practicable, consistent with the following:
A. Reports, hearings, notices, recommendations, and decisions shall address the project as a whole, except when expediency requires otherwise such as when the proponent requires one authorization before another. Separate processing must be approved by the Planning Director, to ensure cumulative impacts are addressed.
B. The Planning Director shall administer the permit process in accordance with all of the requirements set forth in this title for the particular types of permit being applied for. The consolidated single process used shall be that which corresponds to the highest decision classification.
C. If one permit cannot be reasonably processed until another is issued, such as a boundary line adjustment that cannot be processed until a variance is issued, the 120 days within which a notice of decision must be issued for the latter permit shall not begin until the former permit has been issued.
D. Appeals of more than one of the permits required for a project shall be consolidated in a single appeal if this title provides for the same appellate body to consider each of the appeals. (Ord. 2338, 2017)

14.20.040 Pre-Application Process.
It is required that applications for Permit Types 4 and 5, and recommended for applications for Permit Type 3, go through the pre-application process prior to submitting an application for development. The purpose of the pre-application is to acquaint the applicants with the requirements of the code and the project review process, and for City staff to perform a preliminary review of the proposal for the purpose of determining appropriate review procedures, identifying potential issues, and facilitating the application and project review process. In order to ensure that the pre-application is meaningful, the applicant is requested to provide the information listed on the forms supplied by the department. City staff will respond to a pre-application submittal with written comments. The applicant may then request a conference if necessary. (Ord. 2338, 2017)

14.20.050 Design Review.
Proposals subject to design review require a design review determination from the Planning Director. The design review process shall be consistent with the process discussed in Chapter 14.225 or 14.230 SMC, as applicable. The Planning Director shall not approve the permit unless he or she finds that the proposal is consistent with the applicable design standards. (Ord. 2338, 2017)

14.20.060 Application Information Requirements.
A. Submittal Criteria. A land use permit application is complete for the purposes of this section when it meets the submittal requirements established by the Department. Required submittals shall meet the following minimum criteria:
    1. Applications and related submittals shall contain at least the minimum amount of information necessary to allow for review of the project to progress even though additional information may be required or project modifications may be undertaken subsequent to the initial project review.
    2. Applications and related submittals shall be comprehensible, legible, and in a format typical for the information being provided.
    3. Applications and related submittals shall meet minimum code requirements for the type of application applied for.
B. All applications for development permits, design review approvals, variances, and other City approvals under the Development Code shall be submitted on forms provided by the Planning and Development Services Department.
C. Depending on the nature of the application, the required information may include the following:
    1. The name, address, telephone number and e-mail address of the property owner. The name, address, telephone number and e-mail address of the developer/applicant, if different from the owner. A signature of the property owner or authorized official. If the developer/applicant is not the owner, a letter from the owner authorizing the developer/applicant to process the application on behalf of the owner.
    2. Names and addresses of all property owners within 300 feet of the subject property, according to the County Assessor, provided on mailing labels.
    3. Description of the proposed action in accordance with the appropriate City application form, including a written explanation of how the proposal meets the requirements and intent of this title.
    4. Name and address of the proposed site, project, or action.
    5. Vicinity map identifying the project site, adjacent streets, and bordering lines of adjacent properties and adjacent uses.
    6. Legal description of the subject property and of the existing lots, tracts or parcels and easements therein.
    7. Subdivision or site plan map of the proposed project or subdivision showing the land use designation, lot sizes in square feet, and dimensions of all existing and proposed lots with lot numbers, setbacks for each lot, parcels and tracts to be reserved or dedicated for streets or other public uses. The map shall be to a scale appropriate for 24-inch by 36-inch paper, or as otherwise required by the Planning Director.
    8. Existing conditions map identifying the location, character, and required buffer areas for any critical or sensitive environmental areas including steep slopes, streams, lakes, wetlands, wildlife habitat or migration corridors, woodlands, and existing vegetation in accordance with the definitions and requirements of this code. These must be located by a qualified professional as defined in WAC 365-195-905(4).
    9. Photographs identifying existing vegetation, buildings, views, and other characteristics on and off the site, and of and from adjacent properties that may be impacted by the proposed action.
    10. Existing topographic contours of the subject property at intervals of not less than two feet, referred to by datum identification.
    11. Geotechnical studies identifying the characteristics and capabilities of site soils and landform features.
    12. Grading plan identifying roads, streets, building pads, and other major changes in the topographic grade.
    13. Site plan indicating the location of any existing and proposed buildings, streets, parking areas, or other impervious surfaces identifying setback, coverage, and other dimensional requirements of this code.
    14. Building plan illustrating the size, placement, elevation, architectural detail and character of any existing and proposed structures or improvements and a detailed description of proposed building materials.
    15. Landscape plan identifying the species, size, placement, irrigation, planting and staking details, and other characteristics of all existing and proposed trees, plantings, contours at two-foot intervals, fences, rockeries, required landscape screens and other site improvements.
    16. Access plan identifying the right-of-way, pavement, construction material, traffic channelization, and other characteristics of all existing and proposed public and private streets, alleys, parking areas, trails, sidewalks, and other circulation systems.
    17. Utilities plan identifying the right-of-way or easement, size or capacity of all existing and proposed sewer, water, stormwater, power, telecommunications, and other public or private systems. If the property is within the NE Sewer Area, the utilities plan will show how compliance with SMC 15.04.047 will be achieved.
    18. Flood control certification and impact studies including:
        a. Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures.
        b. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been floodproofed.
        c. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the floodproofing criteria specified in this code.
        d. Description of the extent to which a watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development and impacts to downstream properties.
        e. Documentation of compliance with the Endangered Species Act.
    19. Engineering or working drawings in accordance with City Engineer specifications that detail:
        a. Street, curb and gutter, parking area, sidewalk, trail, and other transportation system locations, profiles, cross-sections, construction materials and specifications.
        b. Sewer and water main sizes, material types, grades, manholes, valves, individual stub lines, hydrants, and stormwater management systems including pipes, swales, oil/water separators and retention/detention ponds, and other public and private utilities, including easements and/or dedications to the City.
        c. Building floor plans, sections, and elevations defining grading, foundation, structural, electrical, mechanical, landscape, materials, finish, and other features.
    20. Civil drawings in accordance with City Engineer specifications must be submitted with any building permit for multifamily, commercial and industrial construction. Preliminary civil drawings will be required for preliminary plats.
    21. Survey and monument placements in accordance with City Engineer specifications. The site survey will be accomplished under the supervision of a professional land surveyor registered in the state of Washington and will locate monuments or markers on site for street intersections, roadway placements, lot and block corner lines, and other requirements listed by the City Engineer.
    22. Final plat or site plan prepared by or under the supervision of a professional land surveyor registered in the state of Washington. The final plat or site plan shall conform to the specifications provided by the City Engineer including appropriate certification statements, signatures, and seals.
    23. Draft of any proposed public or private covenants, restrictions, or easements.
    24. State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA) checklist summarizing the impacts the proposed project action will have on all of the natural and human elements of the environment. The checklist shall include a site plan that identifies the existence of all sensitive environmental areas.
    25. Drainage basin resource determination or delineation for streams, wetlands or other water bodies. Submitted plans must include the delineated critical areas and their required buffer.
    26. The appropriate fee to cover all costs of processing the application.
D. Change in Submittal Requirements. The Department shall establish and may revise written submittal requirements for each type of land use, project, or other development permit or approval type. The requirements shall be made available to the public in a checklist or other form that clearly describes the material and number of copies that must be submitted for an application to be considered complete. The Department shall provide public notice of any changes to the submittal requirements at least 30 days prior to their effective date.
E. Waiver of Submittal Requirements. Submittal requirements shall not be waived, except that the Department may determine in writing that a particular requirement is not applicable upon a clear showing by the applicant that the requirement is not relevant to the proposed action and is not necessary to demonstrate compliance with applicable requirements and City codes.
F. Additional Information. Even after a determination of completeness, the Department may require the submittal of additional information or studies as it determines necessary for review of the application. The submittal of additional information or studies shall not affect the validity of the vesting of the application pursuant to SMC 14.20.180, unless the information is requested because incorrect or false information was submitted by the applicant and if the incorrect information would materially affect the final decision on the application. (Ord. 2338, 2017)

14.20.070 Acknowledgement of Owner.
All applications shall be signed by the property owner or an authorized representative and shall include an accurate description of the property to be subject to the requested permit. (Ord. 2338, 2017)

14.20.080 Determination of Legal Status of Lot or Parcel.
Prior to further processing of a permit application, the Planning Director shall determine whether or not the lot or parcel being developed is a legal lot of record in compliance with state and City regulations. In so determining, the Planning Director may require the applicant to provide necessary research and background information. (Ord. 2338, 2017)

14.20.090 Concurrency.
A. For permit processes that require concurrency review in accordance with Chapter 36.70A RCW, the application shall include the traffic study or other information necessary to determine concurrency. The Planning Director shall issue the concurrency determination, if applicable, at any appropriate point in the permit process prior to or concurrent with the decision on the permit application.
B. If construction of any system improvements, which are scheduled to occur concurrent with a development proposal or in the next six years per the Transportation Improvement Plan, will still result in the development causing the level of service of transportation facilities to drop below the standard established in the Comprehensive Plan, the City shall not issue a permit for the development.
C. The Planning Director may exempt from concurrency review those permits typically unassociated with significant traffic generation, such as proposals that will create fewer than 10 peak hour trips. (Ord. 2338, 2017)

14.20.100 Land Use Permit Review Process.
A. When the City receives a land use development permit application, consistency between the proposed project and the applicable regulations and Comprehensive Plan shall be determined through the process in this section and concurrently through the City’s adopted SEPA ordinance (Chapter 14.90 SMC). An approved land use permit as defined in SMC 14.20.020(D) shall be issued by the City only after the proposal has met all the requirements of the Snohomish Municipal Code.
B. During land use development permit review, the City shall determine whether the proposed project is consistent with applicable development regulations. In the absence of applicable development regulations, the City shall determine whether the adopted Comprehensive Plan contains policies which address the unregulated impacts. This determination of consistency shall include evaluation of the following:
    1. The type of land use permitted at the site, including uses that may be allowed under certain circumstances, such as conditional uses, if the criteria for their approval have been satisfied;
    2. The level of development, such as units per acre or other measures of density or intensity;
    3. Availability and adequacy of infrastructure, public facilities and services identified in the Comprehensive Plan and needed to serve the development; and
    4. The character of the development and consistency with development standards.
C. The following types of permits require at least one public hearing:
+----------------------------------------------+------------------------------+
|               Hearing Examiner               |         City Council         |
+----------------------------------------------+------------------------------+
| Conditional Use Permit                       | Comprehensive Plan Amendment |
| Planned Residential Development              | Development Agreement        |
| Preliminary Plat                             | Rezone                       |
| Variance                                     | Street Vacation              |
| Wireless Communications Facilities (Category |                              |
| 3 Tier 4)                                    |                              |
+----------------------------------------------+------------------------------+
D. SEPA Analysis. 
    1. The City shall review the land use development permit application for compliance with the State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA), Chapter 43.21C RCW, the SEPA Rules, Chapter 197-11 WAC, and the City’s SEPA ordinance, Chapter 14.90 SMC, and shall:
        a. Determine whether the applicable regulations require studies that adequately analyze all of the land use development permit application’s specific probable adverse environmental impacts;
        b. Determine if the applicable regulations require measures that adequately address such environmental impacts;
        c. Determine whether additional studies are required and/or whether the land use development permit application should be conditioned with additional mitigation measures; and
        d. Provide prompt and coordinated review by government agencies and the public regarding compliance with applicable environmental laws and plans, including mitigation for specific project impacts that have not been considered and addressed at the plan or development regulation level.
    2. In its review of a land use development permit application, the City may determine that the requirements for environmental analysis, protection and mitigation measures in the applicable development regulations, Comprehensive Plan and/or in other applicable local, state or federal laws provide adequate analysis of and mitigation for the specific adverse environmental impacts of the application.
        a. The City may make the determination provided for in this subsection if:
            i. In the course of land use development permit review, including any required environmental analysis, the City considers the specific probable adverse environmental impacts of the proposed action and determines that these specific impacts are adequately addressed by the zoning and development standards or other applicable requirements of the Comprehensive Plan, or other local, state, or federal rules or laws; and
            ii. The City bases or conditions its approval on compliance with these requirements or mitigation measures.
        b. If the City’s Comprehensive Plan and development regulations adequately address a project’s probable specific adverse environmental impacts, as determined under this subsection, the City shall not impose additional mitigation under SEPA during project review. Project review shall be integrated with environmental analysis under this chapter.
        c. A Comprehensive Plan or development regulation shall be considered to adequately address an impact if the City, through the planning and environmental review process under Chapters 36.70A and 43.21C RCW, has identified the specific adverse environmental impacts and:
            i. The impacts have been avoided or otherwise mitigated; and
            ii. The City Council has designated acceptable certain level of service, land use designations, development standards or other land use planning required or allowed by Chapter 36.70A RCW.
    3. If the City bases or conditions its approval of the land use development permit application on compliance with the requirements of mitigation measures described in subsection (D)(1) of this section, the City shall not impose additional mitigation under SEPA during project review.
    4. In its decision whether a specific adverse environmental impact has been addressed by an existing rule or law of another agency with jurisdiction with environmental expertise with regard to a specific environmental impact, the City shall consult orally or in writing with that agency and may expressly defer to that agency. In making this deferral, the City shall base or condition its land use development permit approval on compliance with these other existing rules or laws.
    5. Planned Actions. 
        a. A planned action does not require a threshold determination or the preparation of an environmental impact statement under SEPA, but is subject to environmental review and mitigation under SEPA.
        b. A “planned action” means one or more types of project action that:
            i. Are designated planned actions by an ordinance or resolution adopted by the City;
            ii. Have had the significant impacts adequately addressed in an environmental impact statement prepared in conjunction with:
                AA Comprehensive Plan or subarea plan adopted under Chapter 36.70A RCW, or
                BA fully contained community, a master planned development or a phased project;
            iii. Are subsequent or implementing projects for the proposals listed in subsection (D)(5)(b)(ii) of this section;
            iv. Are located within an urban growth area, as defined in RCW 36.70A.200;
            v. Are not essential public facilities, as defined in RCW 36.70A.200; and
            vi. Are consistent with the City’s Comprehensive Plan adopted under Chapter 36.70A RCW.
        c. The City shall limit planned actions to certain types of development or to specific geographical areas that are less extensive than the jurisdictional boundaries of the City, and may limit a planned action to a time period identified in the environmental impact statement or in the ordinance or resolution designating the planned action under RCW 36.70A.040.
E. Upon determination that the proposed project is consistent with the Snohomish Comprehensive Plan, adopted development regulations and standards, and SEPA, a single staff report shall be prepared which consolidates all land use development permit decisions. The report shall state any mitigation required or proposed under the development regulations or through SEPA. If a threshold determination, other than a determination of significance, has not been previously issued by the City, the report shall include or append the SEPA threshold determination for the project. The SEPA threshold determination shall be issued at least 15 calendar days prior to the opening of the public hearing.
F. If the applicant so elects, an application that involves two or more land use development permits may be processed under a consolidated review and approval process. The consolidated single process used shall be that which corresponds to the highest decision classification. The single process shall include a single staff report and final decision, and shall require, at a maximum, a single open record hearing, with the exception of Type 5 permits, and no more than one closed record appeal. If an applicant elects not to have the multi-permit application processed under the consolidated process, all permits shall be processed individually according to the process applicable to each permit. (Ord. 2338, 2017)

14.20.110 Determination of Completeness and Review Timeframes.
A. Completeness Determination. 
    1. Determination of Completeness. The Department shall determine in writing whether a project permit application is complete or incomplete within 28 days after receiving an application. The written determination shall be mailed, faxed, e-mailed, or delivered to the applicant or the applicant’s representative within the required time period. The determination shall state:
        a. That the application is complete; or
        b. That the application is incomplete and include a statement as to necessary actions to make the application complete.
            i. If the applicant does not submit the required information within 90 days after receiving the determination that their application was incomplete, the application shall automatically lapse for failure to submit the necessary information in a timely manner and close the permit application file.
            ii. Upon written request by the applicant prior to expiration of the initial 90 days, the Director may grant a time extension to submit the required information, not to exceed an additional 90 days.
            iii. When applications lapse for failure to submit the required information within the necessary time period, or when the applicant requests their application be withdrawn, the applicant may request a refund of the unused portion of the application fee by submitting a written request to the Director. If a notice of application has been issued then no refunds shall be issued. Refunds shall be processed in accordance with the City’s normal refund practices.
    2. Resubmittals. If the Department determines an application is incomplete and the applicant submits additional documents identified by the Department as necessary for a complete application, the Department shall notify the applicant within 14 days of the submittal that the application is complete or what additional information is necessary to make the application complete.
    3. Department’s Failure to Provide a Determination of Completeness. If the Department has not issued a determination of completeness as described above within 28 days after receiving an application, or within 14 days after receiving additional information in response to the necessary actions required to make the application complete, as described above, the application shall be deemed complete.
    4. Identification of Other Agencies with Jurisdiction. A written determination of completeness shall, to the extent known by the department, identify other local, state, or federal agencies with jurisdiction concerning the application and permits requested. The department may include other information or conditions in the determination of completeness.
B. Within 14 days of determination of completeness of an application, the Planning Director shall publish a notice of application in accordance with SMC 14.20.130. The public comment period for the notice of application shall be 15 days.
C. As required by Chapter 36.70B RCW, the City shall issue a decision on complete project applications within 120 days of the determination that the application is complete; provided, that the following time periods shall not count toward the 120-day period:
    1. Any period commencing with a request by the City that the applicant provide any further information or an environmental impact statement until the applicant provides said information.
    2. Any period during which the applicant is not current in payment of City permit review fees.
    3. Any period during which a Comprehensive Plan or development regulation amendment is being processed preliminarily to deciding upon a permit application.
    4. Any period between the initial determination of completeness and any subsequent determination of completeness should the applicant substantially revise the proposal.
    5. Any period during which any decision related to the permit application is being appealed.
    6. Any period mutually agreed upon by the applicant and the City.
D. If the proposal requires City acceptance of public improvements such as street, sidewalk, stormwater, or other utility improvements, the Planning Director’s decision may be a preliminary approval of the proposal in the form of a letter to the applicant stating any conditions of approval. The Planning Director shall coordinate with the City Engineer in determining acceptance of public improvements. The Planning Director and City Engineer shall not give final approval, nor shall any plat be recorded, until the stipulated public improvements are complete or bonded for, in compliance with Chapter 14.215 SMC.
E. Time Limits for Submittal of Required Information. 
    1. Upon the issuance of a notice of incomplete permit application, the applicant shall submit the necessary information within 90 days. The Planning Director may extend this time period an additional 90 days upon written request of the applicant prior to the expiration of the 90-day period.
    2. Following a determination that a permit application is complete, the Planning Director may notify the applicant when new information is necessary or changes or corrections to the application materials are required before a permit may be approved. Upon the issuance of a notice of required changes or corrections to a complete permit application, the applicant shall submit the necessary information to the City within 90 days. If the applicant does not submit the necessary information within 90 days, the application shall lapse and shall become nullified. The director may extend this time period an additional 90 days upon written request of the applicant prior to the expiration of the 90-day period.
    3. If the information and/or corrections required pursuant to subsection (E)(1) or (E)(2) of this section are not received within the specified timeframe, the Planning Director shall notify the applicant that the permit application is nullified. Unexpended application fees and deposits may be refunded to the applicant.
F. Delayed Threshold Determination. If the Planning Director is unable to make a threshold determination within the same 14-day time period as the determination of completeness, he or she shall issue a notice of application within 14 days of determination of completeness, which notice shall have a comment period of at least 14 days. Thereafter, the Planning Director shall issue a notice for SEPA and public hearing if applicable, complying with the permit procedure applicable to that type of permit. (Ord. 2338, 2017)

14.20.120 Permit Approval Timeframes and Expiration.
A. Any land use development permit approved pursuant to this code shall be commenced, performed and completed in compliance with the provisions and conditions of the permits under which the project was approved. The permit shall be valid as outlined in the table below from the date that the permit is approved. Approval periods and extensions for permits issued under the provisions of the building code shall be as set forth in Chapter 19.04 SMC and are not subject to the timeframes of this chapter.
+-----------------------------------+------------------------------------+------------+
|            Permit Type            |          Approval Period           | Extensions |
+-----------------------------------+------------------------------------+------------+
| Preliminary Short Plat            | 5 years                            | 1 year     |
+-----------------------------------+------------------------------------+------------+
| Preliminary Plat                  | 5 years                            | 1 year     |
+-----------------------------------+------------------------------------+------------+
| Boundary Line Adjustment          | 1 year                             | 1 year     |
+-----------------------------------+------------------------------------+------------+
| Shoreline Substantial Development | • 2 years to show substantial      | 1 year     |
| Permit (RCW 90.58.143)            | progress                           |            |
|                                   | • 5 years to complete construction |            |
+-----------------------------------+------------------------------------+------------+
| All other permits not listed      | • 2 years to show substantial      | 1 year     |
| above and not excepted under      | progress                           |            |
| this chapter                      | • 5 years to complete construction |            |
+-----------------------------------+------------------------------------+------------+
B. The City shall mail notice of the expiration of any permit application to the address of the applicant as contained in the permit file and shall also place a copy of the expiration notice in the file. If the City fails to mail the expiration notice, the permit period shall not be extended except as provided in subsection (C) of this section.
C. Upon written request by the applicant received prior to a permit’s expiration date, the Planning Director, in his or her sole discretion, may extend the date of permit expiration for up to one year. The applicant’s written request shall provide justification for the delay and list reasonable grounds why the extension is necessary. (Ord. 2338, 2017)

14.20.130 Public Notice.
A. All notices required by this Development Code shall include the information required by RCW 36.70B.110(2) and the appeal information required by WAC 197-11-680(5), if applicable; provided, that:
    1. SEPA-related information shall not be required for SEPA-exempt permits.
    2. All notices shall contain at least:
        a. Name of the applicant;
        b. Project description, including permits required;
        c. Project location;
        d. Time period and contact information for commenting; and
        e. Information regarding the public hearing, if applicable.
B. The public comment period shall, at a minimum, extend to and include the fifteenth day after the date of publication. The Planning Director, in his or her sole discretion on a case-by-case basis, may require a longer comment period. The date of publication shall be the date on which all of the required methods of publication have been implemented.
C. Public notice shall be consistent with the following parameters:
+----------------+---------------+--------------+-----------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------+
| Public Notice  |                                     Method of Notification                                     |
|      Type      |                                                                                                |
+----------------+---------------+--------------+-----------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------+
| "              |    Mail to    |  Advertise   | Post site |    Publish to     | Mail to Snohomish | Mail/e-mail |
|                | 300’ property | in newspaper |           | City website/post |  County Assessor  | to parties  |
|                |    owners     |  of record   |           |     City Hall     |                   |  of record  |
+----------------+---------------+--------------+-----------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------+
| Notice of      | ✓             | ✓            | ✓         | ✓                 |                   | ✓           |
| Application    |               |              |           |                   |                   |             |
+----------------+---------------+--------------+-----------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------+
| SEPA Threshold | ✓             | ✓            | ✓         | ✓                 |                   | ✓           |
| Determination  |               |              |           |                   |                   |             |
+----------------+---------------+--------------+-----------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------+
| Notice of      | ✓             | ✓            | ✓         | ✓                 |                   | ✓           |
| Public Hearing |               |              |           |                   |                   |             |
+----------------+---------------+--------------+-----------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------+
| Notice of      |               |              |           | ✓                 | ✓                 | ✓           |
| Decision       |               |              |           |                   |                   |             |
+----------------+---------------+--------------+-----------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------+
    1. Notices of application, hearing, and/or determination of significance/scoping shall be:
        a. Mailed by first-class mail to the applicant and all owners of property within 300 feet of any portion of the proposed action according to the County Assessor’s current records;
        b. Posted on the development site, at location(s) which the Planning Director deems suitable to reach the attention of the public, on a sign(s) at least two feet by three feet in size; and
        c. Posted at City Hall and on the City website.
    2. Notices of decision shall be mailed to the applicant, the County Assessor, and anyone who, prior to the decision, requested notice of the decision or submitted substantive comments on the application or was otherwise a party of record.
    3. Projects with multiple notices may have notices combined in a single publication or issuance.
D. The Planning Director may publicize a given permit proposal more broadly or by additional means than stated herein, if in the Planning Director’s sole discretion a greater level of public awareness is deemed necessary.
E. Notices of public hearing shall be published between 15 and 30 days before the scheduled hearing. If a public hearing is continued to a date certain, no further notice is required. (Ord. 2338, 2017)

14.20.140 Permit Conditions.
A. In granting a permit, the City may attach thereto such conditions as necessary to make the permit compatible with the criteria applicable to that permit.
B. The City may require, as a condition of any permit approval, the posting of a cash performance bond or other security or surety sufficient to fulfill the requirements of this Development Code and any conditions upon which the permit is granted.
C. To the extent appropriate and allowed by law, the City may require that conditions of permit approval be recorded as binding on the property and successors in interest.
D. The following process may be used by the City to provide applicants notice of permit conditions and to receive notice from applicants of any objections to such conditions:
    1. At any point in the permit process, the City may provide written notice to the applicant that the City intends to recommend or impose one or more conditions of permit approval and that, if the applicant objects to any of said conditions, the applicant is required to provide written notice to the City of which conditions the applicant objects to and the reasons for the applicant’s objections.
    2. For the purpose of this subsection, written notice may be given either by e-mail, fax, first-class mail, or hand delivery.
    3. The applicant’s written notice of objections to permit conditions shall be given to, and received by, the City no later than seven calendar days from the applicant’s receipt of the written notice from the City.
    4. If the applicant receives written notice from the City of the City’s intent to recommend or impose permit conditions within seven calendar days of a hearing on the permit application, then the applicant shall provide written notice to the City of the applicant’s objections to any such conditions, which notice shall be given to, and received by, the City at any time prior to the commencement of the hearing. (Ord. 2338, 2017)

14.20.150 Assignability of Permits.
Development permits shall run with the land and be freely assignable. (Ord. 2338, 2017)

14.20.160 Minor Changes.
A. The Planning Director may approve minor changes to the permit only if the proposed changes:
    1. Do not create any additional lots or impacts;
    2. Are so insignificant that, in the Planning Director’s judgment, the changes would not have affected the decision of the original decision-makers; and
    3. The proposal still complies with the Development Code and the Comprehensive Plan.
B. If the Planning Director determines that proposed changes are not minor, then the applicant shall either reduce the proposed changes or submit a new permit application for the revisions. (Ord. 2338, 2017)

14.20.170 Appeals.
A. Appeal of Planning Director’s Actions. 
    1. All final actions of the Planning Director, including Type 1, 2, or 3 permit decisions, preliminary short plat approvals, SEPA threshold determinations, code interpretations, notices of violation, and approvals of minor changes to permits, shall be final unless the applicant, a department of the City, or other party of record or agency with jurisdiction files with the City Clerk a written appeal to the Hearing Examiner within 14 days after one of the following:
        a. The decision, if the decision process does not provide for a comment period or notice of decision;
        b. The notice of decision if the permit process provides for such notice; or
        c. The end of the comment period in the case of SEPA threshold determinations.
    2. Appeals shall include:
        a. A detailed statement of the grounds for appeal, referencing each allegedly erroneous finding, conclusion, or condition.
        b. A detailed statement of the facts upon which the appeal is based.
        c. The name, address, e-mail address and daytime telephone number of each appellant, together with the signature of at least one appellant or attorney thereof.
        d. A statement of the standing of the appellant to make such an appeal.
    3. Appeals shall be accompanied by the required fee; provided, that such appeal fee shall not be charged to a department of the City or to other than the first appellant dealing with an identical issue. The unused portion of the fee shall be refunded if the appeal is dismissed without a hearing due to untimely filing, lack of standing, lack of jurisdiction, or other procedural defect.
    4. The timely filing of an appeal shall delay the effective date of the administrative staff decision until such time as the appeal is decided by the Hearing Examiner or is withdrawn.
    5. Following the timely filing of an appeal, and at least 10 days prior to the hearing, notice of the date, time, and place of an open record hearing before the Hearing Examiner shall be mailed to the applicant and to all parties of record. The notice shall indicate the deadline for submittal of written comments.
    6. Appeal proceedings shall be limited to those issues raised in the written appeal.
    7. The Hearing Examiner shall receive comment and decide the appeal.
B. Appeal of Building Official’s Actions. Appeals of Building Official actions are appealable to the Hearing Examiner, who acts as the Building Code Board of Appeals.
C. Appeal of Hearing Examiner’s Actions. 
    1. Actions of the Hearing Examiner are appealable to Snohomish County Superior Court pursuant to Chapter 36.70C RCW, except for shoreline permit actions, which are appealable to the State Shoreline Hearings Board pursuant to Chapter 90.58 RCW.
    2. Notice of the appeal and any other pleadings required to be filed with the Court or the Shoreline Hearings Board shall be filed and served as required by the applicable statute.
    3. The cost of transcribing and preparing all records ordered certified by the Court or the Shoreline Hearings Board or desired by the appellant for such appeal shall be borne by the appellant. The appellant will be provided copies of hearing audio recording by the City and will be responsible for their transcription.
D. Open and Closed Record Appeals. Only one open record hearing is allowed per project, as set forth in Chapter 36.70B RCW. Accordingly, if an open record hearing has already occurred for a project permit being appealed, then the appeal shall be a closed record appeal and the evidentiary record for the appeal shall be restricted to the record of the prior open record hearing with no new evidence or limited new evidence or information allowed to be submitted and with only appeal argument allowed. (Ord. 2338, 2017)

14.20.180 Vesting of Applications.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to implement local vesting regulations that are best suited to the needs of the City and consistent with state law. This section is intended to provide property owners, permit applicants, and the general public assurance that the development regulations for project development will remain consistent during the life of an application.
B. Vesting. An application for a land use, project, or other development permit or approval type which vests shall be considered under the development regulations in effect on the date the application is determined to be fully complete pursuant to SMC 14.20.110. Once an application is approved and a permit is issued the project is vested to the regulations under which the application was reviewed.
C. Applications which Vest. The following applications for a permit or approval types as set forth in this title and SMC Title 19 shall vest to the development regulations in effect at the time the application is determined to be complete pursuant to SMC 14.20.110:
    1. Binding site plan.
    2. Boundary line adjustment.
    3. Building permit.
    4. Conditional use permit.
    5. Development agreement.
    6. Fence permit.
    7. Flood hazard area development permit, subject to the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program where applicable.
    8. Retaining wall permit.
    9. Shoreline.
        a. Conditional use permit.
        b. Substantial development permit.
        c. Variance.
    10. Site civil permit.
    11. Site development plan.
    12. Subdivisions.
        a. Preliminary fee simple unit lot subdivision.
        b. Preliminary subdivision (preliminary plat).
        c. Preliminary short subdivision (preliminary short plat).
        d. Planned residential development.
    13. Sign permit.
    14. Sidewalk use permit.
    15. Variance.
        a. Minor.
        b. Major.
D. Subsequent Applications. Development permit applications related to the development identified in subsection (C) of this section that are submitted after the initial application shall vest to the development regulations in effect at the time the initial application for development identified in subsection (C) of this section was determined to be complete pursuant to SMC 14.20.110. However, any subsequent permit application must be determined to be complete pursuant to SMC 14.20.110 prior to the expiration date of the initial permit(s) or approval(s) issued for the application types listed in subsection (C) of this section.
E. Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to applications for the following permit or approval types, including when the application is a subsequent application to an initial application that has vested. However, if vesting is provided elsewhere in this code or in state and federal regulations, they may be applicable.
    1. All permit or approval types set forth in SMC Title 15;
    2. All permit or approval types set forth in SMC Title 20;
    3. Wireless telecommunication facilities permits as set forth in Chapter 14.242 SMC;
    4. Comprehensive Plan amendments as set forth in this title;
    5. Rezones as set forth in this title; and
    6. Temporary permits as set forth in Chapter 14.60 SMC.
F. For the purpose of this section, “development regulation” means those provisions of Snohomish Municipal Code that exercise a restraining or directing influence over land, including provisions that control or affect the type, degree, or physical attributes of land development or use but shall not include:
    1. Permit processing fees and taxes or administrative fees;
    2. Procedural rules and regulations; and
    3. Regulations that specify or are based upon adopted SEPA policies for the exercise of SEPA substantive authority, including the SEPA ordinance.
G. A complete building permit application shall always be subject to that version of SMC Title 19 in effect at the time the building permit application is submitted.
H. Notwithstanding any other provision in this section, any application dependent on approval of a rezone, Comprehensive Plan amendment, variance, or conditional use application shall not vest until the underlying rezone, Comprehensive Plan amendment, variance, or conditional use application is approved.
I. Review of a project proposal during a pre-application process and/or conference does not vest the application.
J. Stormwater regulations cannot be vested through the provisions of this section.
K. Fees, including, but not limited to, environmental impact mitigation fees, permit processing fees, latecomer agreement fees, and taxes or administrative fees cannot be vested through the provisions of this section.
L. All vested rights associated with a permit application or permit are lost when that application or permit expires as provided for in SMC 14.20.120. (Ord. 2338, 2017)

Chapter 14.55 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS

Sections:
14.55.010    Applicability
14.55.020    Approval Criteria

14.55.010 Applicability.
A “C” in the box at the intersection of the column and the row in the tables in SMC 14.207.070 through 14.207.150 means a conditional use. Conditional uses are allowed only with a conditional use permit, and are subject to conditions imposed as specified herein. The purpose of the conditional use permit is to allow flexibility in the application of the Development Code while ensuring compatibility of uses. (Ord. 2338, 2017)

14.55.020 Approval Criteria.
A. The criteria for deciding conditional use permits shall be as follows:
    1. Adequate streets, sidewalks, transit stops, open spaces, parks, schools, water, sewer, and stormwater facilities shall be available to the proposed development.
    2. The design and appearance of the structure shall be compatible with surrounding developments that are in conformance with the land use designation.
    3. The development shall be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan.
    4. The development shall mitigate any significant adverse environmental impacts.
    5. Concurrency requirements (SMC 14.20.090) shall be complied with.
    6. The development shall be consistent with the health, safety, and general welfare.
B. In granting a conditional use permit, to protect the health, safety and general, the City may:
    1. Require a site plan showing exact location and dimensions of existing and proposed structures or equipment. (Ord. 2338, 2017)

Chapter 14.60 TEMPORARY PERMITS

Sections:
14.60.010    Purpose
14.60.020    Procedure

14.60.010 Purpose.
The purpose of temporary permits is to allow temporary uses and construction activities which nominally do not conform to this ordinance but are consistent with the City’s Comprehensive Plan, Development Code, and other applicable land use regulations and are in the public interest. Examples which may qualify include contractors’ offices, equipment storage on construction sites, minor and incidental commercial events that are subject to the City’s special events permit process, and emergency responses.

14.60.020 Procedure.
A. The application form shall establish the submittal requirements, which shall include a reasonably accurate site plan.
B. The City Planner may issue a temporary permit if he or she finds that, based on the duration of the permit and conditions imposed, the temporary use or construction activity:
    1. Conforms to the goals of the Comprehensive Plan and this Development Code;
    2. Conforms with all other applicable development regulations;
    3. Will not adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare; and;
    4. Is categorically exempt from the State Environmental Policy Act.
C. Under normal circumstances, permits for temporary uses shall not be given for more than 60 days. The City Planner may renew a temporary permit, provided its total duration does not exceed one year. Any temporary structure shall be removed from the premises not more than 30 days after the permit expires or the reason for the temporary permit ceases, whichever is sooner.
D. A construction office for which a temporary permit has been granted shall not also require a building permit, provided that it has the appropriate Washington State Department of Labor and Industries label. (Such construction offices are not intended for visitation by the general public.) (Ord. 2082, 2005)

Chapter 14.65 SITE DEVELOPMENT PLANS

Sections:
14.65.010    Applicability
14.65.020    Approval Criteria
Prior legislation: Ords. 2111 and 2296.

14.65.010 Applicability.
A site development plan shall be required for all new development and redevelopment that alters the site or building footprint for all development types except detached single-family residential. No site development plan shall be required for construction of one single-family home on one lot, where permitted. In each instance where the approval of site development plan is required, specific issues are noted that must be addressed as part of the approval and will be discussed in the staff report and included in the recommended action. (Ord. 2338, 2017)

14.65.020 Approval Criteria.
A. The criteria for approval of a site development plan shall be as follows:
    1. Adequate streets, sidewalks, transit stops, open spaces, parks, schools, water, sewer, and stormwater facilities shall be available to the proposed development.
    2. The design and appearance of the structure shall be compatible with applicable design standards and guidelines.
    3. The development shall be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan.
    4. The development shall mitigate any significant adverse environmental impacts.
    5. Concurrency requirements (SMC 14.20.090) shall be complied with.
    6. The development shall be consistent with the health, safety, and general welfare.
C. In approving a site development plan, to protect the health, safety and general welfare, the City may:
    1. Require a site plan showing exact location and dimensions of existing and proposed structures or equipment.
    2. Require dedication to the public of land for street rights-of-way or other public purposes, to the extent necessary to implement the City’s Transportation Plan or mitigate environmental impacts, provided the dedication does not constitute an unconstitutional taking of private property.
    3. Require improvements designed to mitigate the proposal’s environmental impacts.
    4. Otherwise impose conditions as may be consistent with the purpose of this title or the purpose of the land use designation. (Ord. 2338, 2017)

Chapter 14.70 VARIANCES

Sections:
14.70.010    Purpose
14.70.020    Minor Variances
14.70.030    Major Variances
14.70.040    Criteria For Minor And Major Variances

14.70.010 Purpose.
The purpose of variances is, under circumstances as set forth in the variance criteria in SMC 14.70.040, to provide flexibility in the administration of certain provisions of this Development Code as set forth in SMC 14.70.020 and 14.70.030.

14.70.020 Minor Variances.
Minor variances are departures of no more than 10% from the dimensional requirements of this Development Code and shall be Type 2 permits (see Ch. 14.20 SMC).

14.70.030 Major Variances.
A. Major variances are all variances other than minor variances, are generally referred to simply as variances, and can potentially be granted from any provision of this Development Code except:
    1. Administrative provisions, including procedures, SEPA regulations, and fees;
    2. Provisions pertaining to permitted, conditional, and prohibited uses;
    3. Maximum residential densities; and
    4. Regulations pertaining to shoreline development, drainage basin protection, geologic hazard areas, and wildlife habitat, provided that those regulations may have their own processes for granting exceptions.
B. Major variances shall be Type 4 permits (see Ch. 14.20 SMC)

14.70.040 Criteria For Minor And Major Variances.
No variance shall be granted unless it is found that:
A. There are special circumstances relating to the size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings of the subject property that do not similarly exist with regard to other properties in the vicinity and in the same land use designation in which the subject property is located; and
B. The variance is necessary to preserve and/or enjoy a substantial property right, which others in the vicinity and in the same land use designation have but because of special circumstance is denied to the subject property; and
C. The variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the property or improvements in the vicinity and designation in which the subject property is situated; and
D. The granted variance will not be in conflict with the Comprehensive Plan. (Ord. 2082, 2005)

Chapter 14.80 NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES

Sections:
14.80.010    Applicability
14.80.020    Nonconforming Uses
14.80.030    Nonconforming Structures
Prior legislation: Ord. 2082.

14.80.010 Applicability.
A. Where modifications to existing buildings and/or existing land uses are proposed, the Planning Director or designee shall determine whether a proposed development activity constitutes full, partial, or incidental development as described below. The purpose of this determination is to specify the extent to which the development site’s nonconforming conditions shall be remedied.
B. Full development refers to construction or development and/or changes in use or occupancy that warrant compliance with all, or virtually all, applicable development regulations. Compliance with applicable development regulations will eliminate all, or virtually all, nonconforming conditions. Examples of full development include:
    1. Construction of a new primary structure, with or without demolition of an existing primary structure.
    2. A change of use of the primary structure or the majority of the site, along with the demolition and reconstruction of site’s parking, access, or similar significant modifications that affect the appearance and function of, and circulation on, the site.
C. Partial development refers to construction or development and/or changes in use or occupancy of all or portions of an existing developed site that warrant compliance with those development regulations specifically related to and proportionate to the proposed change. Compliance with applicable development regulations will eliminate nonconforming conditions specifically related to and proportionate to the proposed change. Examples of partial development include:
    1. Construction or reconstruction of an accessory structure.
    2. Expansion of an existing structure that results in less than 25 percent increase gross floor area.
    3. A change in use of the primary structure with a reconfiguration of the existing off-street parking.
D. Incidental Development. A minor change to a development site that does not warrant compliance with development regulations not directly related to the proposed change. Examples of incidental development include:
    1. Installation of one or more windows or similar exterior modifications intended as aesthetic improvements.
    2. Construction of an enclosure to screen solid waste containers.
    3. Removal and replacement of a building sign, except that compliance with all regulations in Chapter 14.245 SMC is required.
    4. Building improvements internal to an existing structure.
E. As provided by SMC 14.05.050(A), the Planning Director shall interpret and apply the provisions of the Land Use Development Code in a consistent manner. The Planning Director shall employ consistent reasoning and criteria in determining whether a proposed development activity constitutes full, partial, or incidental development. Determinations made by the Planning Director pursuant to this chapter shall be appealable to the hearing examiner as provided by Chapters 14.20 and 14.90 SMC. (Ord. 2338, 2017)

14.80.020 Nonconforming Uses.
A. Continuation. Any legally established nonconforming use may be continued subject to the provisions of this section; provided, that other than ordinary maintenance and repair, the nonconforming use or building is not changed, enlarged, or extended in a manner which increases or reinforces its degree of nonconformity.
B. Abandonment. If a nonconforming use is abandoned or discontinued for a period of 12 consecutive months or more, the nonconforming status of the use is terminated, and any future use of the land or structures shall be in conformity with the provisions of this title. The mere presence of a structure, equipment, or material shall not be deemed to constitute the continuance of a nonconforming use unless the structure, equipment, or material is actually being occupied or employed in maintaining such use.
C. Change in Tenancy. Change of tenancy, ownership, or management shall not affect legal nonconforming status.
D. Nuisances. Nuisances as defined by state law or City ordinance shall not enjoy legal nonconforming status.
E. Ordinance 1419. No downzone provided for in the areas of the City rezoned by Ordinance 1419 shall be deemed to have the effect of creating a nonconforming use of multifamily dwelling structures, which were permitted uses on March 20, 1979. Permitted multifamily units existing on March 20, 1979, in the areas rezoned by Ordinance 1419, shall continue without any nonconforming use status attaching to those existing uses; provided, that any reconstruction, remodeling or other revision of such multifamily dwelling structures will be subject to the provisions of this title. (Ord. 2338, 2017)

14.80.030 Nonconforming Structures.
A. Continuation. Any legally established nonconforming structure is permitted to remain in the form and location in which it existed on the effective date of the nonconformance.
B. Improvements. Nonconforming structures may be structurally altered or enlarged only if the setback, height, lot coverage, and open space requirements of the zone in which the structure is located are met, except that repair to the existing structure including ordinary maintenance or replacement of walls, fixtures, or plumbing shall be permitted so long as the exterior dimensions of the structure, as it existed on the effective date of the nonconformance, are not increased.
C. Restoration. A structure that is accidentally destroyed may be fully restored only if the dimensional requirements of Chapter 14.210 SMC are met unless the structure is listed on the list of historic buildings, in which case the structure may be restored and located in its former location despite noncompliance with the dimensional requirements; provided, that:
    1. To restore a destroyed nonconforming structure, a building permit must be submitted to the department within one year of the destruction; and
    2. A structure shall be considered destroyed for purposes of this section if the restoration costs exceed 75 percent of the assessed value of record when the damage occurred. (Ord. 2338, 2017)

Chapter 14.85 ENFORCEMENT

Sections:
14.85.010    Purpose
14.85.020    Violations
14.85.030    Nature of Violation – Penalties
14.85.040    Right of Inspection
14.85.050    Stop Work Order
14.85.060    Other Recourse

14.85.010 Purpose.
The purposes of this Chapter are:
A. To provide fair and effective means of enforcing the Development Code, Title 14 SMC;
B. To provide the opportunity for a prompt hearing and resolution of alleged violations of Title 14 SMC;
C. To establish civil and criminal penalties for violations of Title 14 SMC; and
D. To abate and/or otherwise bring into compliance violations of Title 14 SMC.

14.85.020 Violations.
A. It shall be a violation of the Development Code to:
    1. Violate any of its provisions;
    2. Proceed with a development without first obtaining a required permit;
    3. Violate any condition of a permit issued pursuant to the Development Code;
    4. Violate any order issued pursuant to the Development Code;
    5. Aid or abet a violation of the Development Code;
    6. Knowingly falsify any document required by the Development Code; or
    7. Falsify or tamper with any monitoring device or record required in the administration of the Development Code.
B. Proof that a violation of the Development Code exists on a property shall constitute prima facie evidence that the owner of the property is the violator. However, this shall not relieve or prevent enforcement against any other responsible person.
C. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. Each sale or transfer of each separate lot or tract of land in violation of the Development Code shall constitute a separate offense.

14.85.030 Nature of Violation – Penalties.
A. Any violation of the Development Code shall be a civil violation pursuant to SMC 1.01.080 and Chapter 1.14 SMC, except as otherwise provided therein.
B. Violations of the Development Code shall also be classified as nuisances under Chapter 9.94 SMC.
C. Payment of a penalty shall not relieve the violator of the duty to correct the violation.

14.85.040 Right of Inspection.
The City Planner or his or her representative may inspect buildings, structures, or premises for compliance with the Development Code as allowed by law, including but not limited to the following circumstances:
A. With the written permission of the owner or owner’s representative, which may include a written statement included on the permit application form;
B. With the verbal permission of the owner, tenant, or other responsible party; or
C. With an administrative search warrant.

14.85.050 Stop Work Order.
In addition to the stop work and stop use provisions of Ch. 1.14 SMC, the City Planner or his or her representative may order any development stopped if:
A. A required permit was not obtained;
B. The development violates the Development Code or any permit requirement or condition;
C. The permit was based on erroneous information submitted by the applicant; or
D. The work has become a hazard to life or property due to weather or other unforeseen conditions.

14.85.060 Other Recourse.
In addition to the other violation remedies set forth in this section, the City may also:
A. Revoke, place further conditions on, or suspend processing of permits pertaining to the violator or the premises on which the violation occurred;
B. File for injunctive or other civil relief in Superior Court; or
C. Pursue any other recourse available under law. (Ord. 2155, 2008)

Chapter 14.90 STATE ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY ACT (SEPA)

Sections:
14.90.010    Adoption by Reference of Chapter 197-11 WAC
14.90.020    Designation of SEPA Responsible Official
14.90.030    Initiation of Environmental Review
14.90.040    Categorical Exemptions
14.90.050    Environmental Checklist
14.90.060    Mitigated Determination of Non-Significance (MDNS)
14.90.070    Cost of Environmental Impact Statement (EIS)
14.90.080    Substantive Authority
14.90.090    Environmentally Sensitive Areas

14.90.010 Adoption by Reference of Chapter 197-11 WAC.
Pursuant to the State Environmental Policy Act, RCW 43.210.120, (“SEPA”) the City hereby adopts Chapter 197-11 WAC by reference.

14.90.020 Designation of SEPA Responsible Official.
The City Planner shall administer this chapter and shall be the City’s responsible official under SEPA pursuant to WAC 197-11-910. Other City officials initiating SEPA applicable actions shall notify and coordinate with the City Planner.

14.90.030 Initiation of Environmental Review.
Pursuant to WAC 197-11-055(4), environmental review may begin whenever, in the opinion of the City Planner and consistent with WAC 197-11-100 and WAC 197-11-335, sufficient information exists to reasonably assess the environmental impact of a proposal.

14.90.040 Categorical Exemptions.
All of the categorical exemptions in WAC 197-11-800(1) shall apply in the City of Snohomish, except that in the environmentally sensitive areas designated in SMC 14.90.090 the exemptions set forth in WAC 197-11-800(1) and 197-11-800(24) shall not apply.

14.90.050 Environmental Checklist.
Pursuant to WAC 197-11-315, the City shall provide the applicant, and the applicant shall complete and submit to the City, an environmental checklist, and the applicant shall pay the City the fee set by Council resolution for review of environmental checklists.

14.90.060 Mitigated Determination of Non-Significance (MDNS).
Pursuant to WAC 197-11-350, all mitigation measures incorporated in an MDNS shall be deemed conditions of approval of the underlying permit decision and shall be enforced as provided in Chapter 14.85 SMC.

14.90.070 Cost of Environmental Impact Statement (EIS).
Pursuant to WAC 197-11-100 and WAC 197-11-420, the applicant shall pay all costs associated with preparation and circulation of an EIS to evaluate the environmental impact of the applicant’s proposed development. The draft and final EIS shall be prepared under the direct supervision of the City Planner, pursuant to a 3-party contract involving the applicant, the City, and the preparer. The City may in part offset these costs by charging non-governmental entities for copies of any documents prepared under this section. The City Planner shall have the authority to determine that the EIS preparer is qualified to perform the work.

14.90.080 Substantive Authority.
The City may condition or deny a permit application, even though it may conform to this Development Code, as necessary to mitigate environmental impacts pursuant to WAC 197-11-660, provided said condition or denial is based on the Comprehensive Plan, the Development Code, the Shoreline Management Master Program, the Design Standards (both inside and outside the Historic District), the Building Codes, the City’s Utility Extension Policy, the City’s Stormwater Management regulations (Ch. 15.16 SMC), or the agency responsibilities established by RCW 43.21C.020(2), which are hereby adopted by reference. (Ord. 2173, 2009)

14.90.090 Environmentally Sensitive Areas.
A. The map(s) associated with Chapters 14.255 through 14.280 SMC identify the areas of the City that are considered environmentally sensitive. The categorical exemptions in WAC 197-11-800 that are inapplicable for these areas are WAC 197-11-800(1) and 197-11-800(24). All other categorical exemptions shall continue to apply within environmentally sensitive areas.
B. The City shall treat proposals located wholly or partially within an environmentally sensitive area no differently than other proposals under this chapter, making a threshold determination for all such proposals. The City shall not automatically require an EIS for a proposal merely because it is proposed for location in an environmentally sensitive area.
C. Certain categorical exemptions in WAC 197-11-800 do not apply on lands covered by water, and this remains true regardless of whether or not lands covered by water are mapped. (Ord. 2082, 2005)

Chapter 14.95 HEARING EXAMINER

Sections:
14.95.010    Authority And Duties
14.95.020    Ex Parte Communication/ Appearance of Fairness/Conflict of Interest
14.95.030    Rights And Responsibilities Of Applicants, Appellants, And Parties Of Record
14.95.040    Rights And Responsibilities of the City Planner
14.95.050    Elements Of Public Hearing
14.95.060    Evidence
14.95.070    Continuation Of Hearing
14.95.080    Additional Evidence
14.95.090    Record Of Hearing
14.95.100    Decision
14.95.110    Reconsideration

14.95.010 Authority And Duties.
A. The Hearing Examiner shall have all of the authority and duties granted in state statutes and the Snohomish Municipal Code. Among other duties, the Hearing Examiner shall:
    1. Conduct fair and impartial hearings.
    2. Avoid delaying proceedings.
    3. Maintain order.
B. The Hearing Examiner may:
    1. Administer oaths and affirmations.
    2. Issue subpoenas.
    3. Rule upon offers of proof and receive evidence.
    4. Conduct view trips.
    5. Regulate the course of the hearing and the conduct of the parties.
    6. Question any party presenting testimony at the hearing.
    7. Require briefs on legal issues.
    8. Consider and rule upon procedural and other motions.
    9. Make and file recommendations or decisions.
C. The Hearing Examiner may hold pre-hearing conferences to clarify issues or structure the proceeding, provided all affected parties receive reasonable notice and either attend or waive their right to attend. At the hearing, or by pre-hearing order, the Hearing Examiner shall communicate for the record the time, purpose, and result of the conference.
D. No elected official, officer, employee, or agent of the City shall supervise or direct the Hearing Examiner’s adjudicative functions.

14.95.020 Ex Parte Communication/ Appearance of Fairness/Conflict of Interest.
A. The appearance of fairness doctrine, as specified in Chapter 42.36 RCW, shall apply to Hearing Examiner proceedings and shall result in the examiner’s disqualification when necessary. The Hearing Examiner shall not participate in any proceeding in which the Examiner has a prohibited personal interest which might influence the Examiner. In the event of a conflict of interest, the hearing shall be conducted by a hearing examiner pro tem.
B. The Hearing Examiner shall not communicate ex parte directly or indirectly with any person, or his or her agent or representative, having an interest in an application before the Hearing Examiner.
C. If a prohibited ex parte communication occurs, it shall be publicly disclosed in accordance with Chapter 42.36 RCW, and the Hearing Examiner shall determine whether to disqualify himself or herself for that application.

14.95.030 Rights And Responsibilities Of Applicants, Appellants, And Parties Of Record.
A. Hearing attendees shall conduct themselves civilly and courteously or be removed from the hearing.
B. All testimony before the Hearing Examiner shall be given under oath to tell the truth, administered by the Hearing Examiner.
C. Whenever possible, the applicant and any parties planning to present legal briefs or testimony shall provide the City Planner and the Hearing Examiner with the material at least one week in advance. Such materials shall be available to the public, subject to payment therefore.
D. The applicant or appellant shall have the right of notice, cross-examination, presentation of evidence, objection, motion, argument, timely access to the City’s staff report, and all other rights essential to a fair hearing.
E. Parties of record shall have the right to present evidence and testimony at hearings. The right of parties of record to cross-examine, object, submit motions and arguments shall be at the discretion of the Hearing Examiner.
F. The Hearing Examiner may reasonably limit the number of witnesses heard and the nature and length of testimony. Cross-examination is permitted as necessary for a full disclosure of the facts, but the Hearing Examiner shall control the amount and style of cross-examination.
G. Participants in hearings, including the City itself, may be represented by legal counsel.

14.95.040 Rights And Responsibilities of the City Planner.
A. In addition to duties elsewhere stated, the City Planner shall deliver a staff report, a statement or proof of notices published, and any necessary plans and documentation to the Hearing Examiner at least seven days prior to a hearing. The City Planner shall also present materials at the hearing as necessary.
B. The City Planner may present evidence and testimony, object, make motions, arguments, recommendations, and all other rights essential to a fair hearing.

14.95.050 Elements Of Public Hearing.
A public hearing usually will include but not be limited to:
A. The Hearing Examiner’s brief explanation of the process.
B. Presentation of staff report.
C. Testimony by the applicant or petitioner and cross-examination of same.
D. Testimony in support.
E. Testimony of opposing parties.
F. Opportunity for cross-examination and rebuttal.
G. Opportunity for questions by the Hearing Examiner.

14.95.060 Evidence.
A. The applicant shall have the burden of proof to show compliance with applicable laws and regulations of Washington State and the City of Snohomish.
B. The hearing generally will not be conducted according to strict legal rules of evidence and procedure. Any relevant and probative evidence shall be admitted. The rules of privilege shall be effective to the extent recognized by law. The Hearing Examiner shall decide the admissibility of evidence.
C. Documentary evidence may be received in the form of copies. Upon request, parties shall be given an opportunity to compare the copy with the original.
D. The Hearing Examiner may take judicial notice of judicially cognizable facts and in addition may take notice of general, technical, or scientific facts within his/her specialized knowledge. The Hearing Examiner shall not take notice of disputed adjudicative facts that are determinative of the outcome of a particular proceeding.
E. If a document is referred to at a public hearing and the Hearing Examiner requests a copy of the document, said document may so enter the record.
F. All parties will be allowed opportunity to make a record of evidence admitted or denied during the course of the hearing. This record shall include offers of proof.

14.95.070 Continuation Of Hearing.
The Hearing Examiner may continue the hearing until a certain date to allow all comments to be heard or to gather more information. No further notice of that hearing need be given. Any party of record may request a hearing be continued, which request the Hearing Examiner shall grant or deny.

14.95.080 Additional Evidence.
At any time prior to the filing of the final decision, the Hearing Examiner may reopen the proceeding to receive evidence that was unavailable at the time of the hearing. Such reopening may be initiated by a party of record requesting permission to present such evidence. The Hearing Examiner shall grant the request only upon a showing of significant relevance and good cause for delay in its submission. All parties of record will be given notice of the consideration of such evidence and granted an opportunity to review such evidence and file rebuttals.

14.95.090 Record Of Hearing.
Hearings shall be electronically recorded and such recordings shall be a part of the official case record, all components of which shall be available to the public, provided the requester pays reasonable costs of copying or transcripts. No minutes of the hearing will be kept. The record of hearing shall include:
A. The application or petition.
B. The staff report.
C. A statement of notices published.
D. Evidence received, including oral testimony and exhibits.
E. Electronic recordings.
F. The decision together with findings and conclusions.
G. The SEPA threshold determination and other environmental documents, if applicable.

14.95.100 Decision.
A. The Hearing Examiner’s written decision shall include:
    1. The nature and background of the proceeding.
    2. Concise findings of fact addressing contested issues of fact, based exclusively on the record.
    3. Conclusions referencing permit criteria and other specific provisions of the law, together with reasons and precedents relied upon.
    4. The Hearing Examiner’s determination of the appropriate rule, order, or relief, based upon a consideration of the whole record and supported by reliable, probative and substantial evidence.
    5. The time frames for reconsideration and appeal.
B. The Hearing Examiner shall deliver the written decision to the City Planner, who then shall mail copies of the decision to all parties of record. (Ord. 2092, 2006)

14.95.110 Reconsideration.
Prior to six days after the date of the Hearing Examiner’s decision, a party of record may request reconsideration. The request shall set forth alleged errors of fact, law, or procedure, or issues omitted from the Hearing Examiner’s decision. Any request for reconsideration shall stay further issuance of City permits but shall not stay the time frame for appeal of the Hearing Examiner’s decision. Within seven days after receiving the request, the Hearing Examiner shall either:
A. Correct or amend the decision without an additional public hearing; or
B. Set the matter for additional public hearing, in which case notice shall be published anew, including to all parties of record; or
C. Confirm the original decision. (Ord. 2082, 2005)

Chapter 14.100 DEFINITIONS

Sections:
14.100.010   General
14.100.020   Definitions

14.100.010 General.
In this title, words in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter, words in the singular include the plural, and words in the plural include the singular. Words not defined in this title shall have their customary meanings. Texts shall control captions, titles, and maps. Where any requirement of this title results in a fraction, a fraction of five-tenths or more shall be rounded up and a fraction of less than five-tenths shall be disregarded.

14.100.020 Definitions.
Abutting means the state of being next to with no physical separation.
Accessory dwelling unit means a separate, complete dwelling unit, of a limited size, attached to or contained within the structure of the primary dwelling; or contained within a separate structure that is accessory to the primary dwelling unit on the premises.
Accessory means secondary and subordinate to the premise’s primary use, building, or structure.
Accessory use, when applied to a residence, means a use or structure that is subordinate and incidental to a residence, including:
    1. Fallout/bomb shelters.
    2. Household pets, provided the number, location, type or other characteristic does not adversely affect public health and they are not for a commercial purpose as in a kennel, cattery, or stable.
    3. Private gardens, pea-patch farms, fish and wildlife ponds.
    4. On-site rental office.
    5. Pools, private docks, piers.
    6. Private garages.
    7. Other accessory uses as specified in this Development Code.
Adult family home means a regular family abode of a person or persons licensed and regulated by the state under Chapter 70.128 RCW to provide personal care, special care, room, and board on a 24-hour basis to more than one but not more than six adults who are not related by blood or marriage to the person or persons providing the services.
Adult use means a commercial establishment that functions in whole or substantial part as an adult arcade, adult entertainment cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult retail store, or other adult entertainment facility.
Agriculture means the tilling of the soil, the raising of crops, horticulture, viticulture, small livestock farming, poultry, dairying, and/or animal husbandry.
Agricultural crop sales mean the retail sale of agricultural products such as from roadside stands or self-pick establishments.
Airport/heliport means a facility for the landing and taking off of public or private aircraft, including taxiways, tie-down areas, hangars, servicing and terminals.
Alley means a public vehicular thoroughfare, occupying City right-of-way parallel to and between named or numbered City streets.
Alteration means any change, modification, or addition to a building, site, or land use.
Amusement arcade means a facility in which five or more pinball machines, video games, or other player-operator amusement devices (excluding juke boxes or gambling-related machines) are operated as a commercial activity.
Animal See Title 7 SMC for definitions relating to animals.
Annexation means the addition of territory to the City as provided by State statute.
Applicant means a person applying for permission for a land use or development regulated by this title.
Arterial means a street designated as an arterial in the Comprehensive Plan.
Auction house means an establishment where the property of others is sold by a broker or auctioneer to persons who attend scheduled sales periods or events.
Automotive service and repair means the storage and repair of trucks and automobiles, including mechanical work, body and fender works, and painting. The term does not encompass the business of wrecking automobiles or impound car lots, when conducted outside of a structure.
Automotive dismantling and/or wrecking means any dismantling or wrecking of motor vehicles or trailers, or the storage, sale, or dumping of dismantled or wrecked vehicles or their parts.
Auto supply store means a retail business supplying goods and services for the operation and maintenance of automobiles and motorists’ needs, including petroleum products, tires, batteries, accessories and parts.
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Basement means a building story partly or wholly underground and having at least one-half of its height, measured from its floor to its finished ceiling, below the average adjoining grade.
Bed and breakfast means a single family residence within which up to four bedrooms are available for short term lodging for paying guests.
Bed and breakfast inn means a residential facility, but not necessarily a family home, within which up to six bedrooms are available for short term lodging for paying guests.
Bond means a security provided by a bonding company, in an amount and form satisfactory to these regulations, to insure that required improvements are installed, and providing a warranty against defective material or workmanship.
Book, stationery, video, and art supply means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of books and magazines, stationery, video, and/or art supplies.
Buffer means an area adjacent to a critical area, consisting of naturally occurring or re-established vegetation and having a width adequate to protect the critical area.
Buildable area means the portion of a lot free of special restrictions that can be developed subject only to the dimensional and other requirements established in Chapter 14.210 SMC. Buildable area does not include setback areas established by this Development Code for the land use designation area in which the lot is located nor any easements, native growth protection areas, open space tracts, drainage facilities, or other similar restrictions on construction.
Building means a roofed structure designed to shelter persons, animals, or property.
Building, hardware, and garden materials means an establishment engaged in selling lumber and/or other building materials, feed, and lawn and/or garden supplies.
Building height means the vertical distance from the average adjoining curb elevation to the highest point of the roof surface of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof, and to the mean height level between the eaves and ridge for a gable, hip or gambrel roof; provided, however, that where the buildings are set back more than ten feet from the property line adjacent to a street, the height of the building shall be measured from the average elevation of the finished grade of the building, as shown in the illustration below.
[IMAGE: <14.100.020_001.png>]
Building Official means the person responsible for administering building codes in the City of Snohomish.
Bulk retail means a land use that is primarily engaged in the retail sale of bulk goods, including food, building, hardware and garden materials, dry goods, apparel and accessories, home furnishings, house wares, drugs, auto supplies, hobby, toys, games, photographic supplies, and equipment, and electronics.
Campground means a facility for temporary occupancy of tents, recreational vehicles, and similar abodes without hook-up facilities, primarily for recreational purposes, as an on-going or commercial activity.
Cemetery, columbarium or mausoleum means land or structures used for burial of the dead. For purposes of this code, pet cemeteries are considered a subclassification of this use.
Cemetery Creek Special Project means the Cemetery Creek Sewer Trunkline, Segments 1-4.
Childcare means the same as daycare.
Church, synagogue, temple, or mosque means a place where gathering for worship is the principal purpose of the use. Typical accessory uses associated with this use include private schools, reading rooms, assembly rooms, and residences for nuns and clergy, but excluding facilities for training of religious orders and homeless encampments.
City Attorney means the Snohomish City Attorney.
City Council means the Snohomish City Council.
City Engineer means the Snohomish City Engineer.
City Planner means the same as Planning Director.
Civil drawings mean construction drawings, calculations, and specifications prepared by a licensed engineer detailing the engineering aspects of a development proposal.
Clearing means the removal of timber, brush, ground cover, or other vegetation from a site and does not include grading.
Clinic means a building for licensed outpatient health services.
Club means a non-commercial association of persons for a common purpose.
Commercial/industry accessory use means a use that is subordinate and incidental to a commercial or industry use; including employee exercise facilities, employee food service facilities, and employee day care facilities; incidental storage of raw materials and finished products sold or manufactured on-site, and business owner or caretaker residence.
Commercial use means activities which provide goods, merchandise, and/or services for compensation.
Community-based theater means a land use where musical and dramatic performances are staged for public audiences. The term includes only those facilities owned and operated by a non-profit organization. Accessory uses may include arts education, assembly uses, ticket sales, and concessions.
Community residential facility means living quarters meeting applicable federal and state standards that function as a single housekeeping unit for eight or more individuals excluding staff, providing such supportive services as counseling, rehabilitation, and medical supervision, excluding drug and alcohol detoxification and prisoner release participants.
Community residential facility - prisoner release means a community residential facility for prisoner release participants and programs such as half-way houses.
Community stable means a facility in which horses or other livestock are kept for boarding, training, breeding, rental, or riding lessons.
Comprehensive Plan means the City of Snohomish Comprehensive Plan.
Conditional use means a use allowed on a property within a designation only after review by the Hearing Examiner and with approval of permit conditions as necessary to make the use compatible with other permitted uses in the same vicinity and designation.
Condominium means real property, portions of which are designated for separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common ownership solely by the owners of those portions. Real property is not a condominium unless the undivided interests in the common elements are vested in the unit owners. A condominium is not effected until a declaration of condominium and a survey map and plans have been recorded pursuant to Chapters 64.32 and/or 64.34 RCW.
Conference center means a meeting facility, sometimes including accessory facilities for recreation, lodging, and related activities.
Congregate care/assisted living facilities means housing for seven or more elderly and/or disabled persons with services provided such as meals, laundry, housekeeping, personal care assistance, and assistance during temporary illness, but not medical care for the chronically ill or infirm. Kitchens and dining space may be provided in individual dwelling units. Practical nursing and Alzheimer’s care, recreational programs, and facilities may be provided. “Disabled” shall not include current illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance, nor shall it include any person whose residency in the facility would constitute a direct threat to the health and safety of other individuals. The term shall not include alcoholism or drug treatment centers or housing facilities serving as an alternative to incarceration. Land uses for which the definition herein of family also applies shall be regulated as a family rather than a congregate care/assisted living facility. For the purposes of this definition, the “elderly” refers to persons 55 years and older.
Convenience Store means a small version of a food or grocery store having a limited stock of items both in regard to variety and quantity. Some convenience stores may also have an associated vehicle fueling facility located in the paved parking area.
Conversion means a change in use of a structure.
Cottage means a small, detached dwelling unit, not greater than 1,000 square feet in total floor area that is developed at a density not greater than the underlying zone, with more than one unit occupying a single lot.
Cottage Housing Development means two or more cottage dwellings constructed upon a single lot.
County auditor means the Snohomish County official as defined in Ch. 36.22 RCW.
County treasurer means the Snohomish County official as defined in Ch. 36.29 RCW.
Covenant means a legal restriction on the actions of any land owner who is party to a contractual provision that is binding on real property.
Critical area report means an investigation, report, map, study and/or evaluation, which may be required to demonstrate that a proposed development activity is in compliance with this title. As applicable, a critical area report may be a habitat management plan or a geotechnical report.
Critical areas refer to environmentally sensitive areas of land, such as steep slopes, wetlands, flood plains, unstable soils, erosion hazard areas, areas of geologic hazard, or other conditions needing protection or not suitable for intensive development.
Critical wildlife habitat means habitat areas, which are associated with threatened, endangered, sensitive, or priority species of plants or wildlife and which, if altered, could reduce the likelihood that the species will maintain and reproduce over the long term. Such areas are documented in lists, categories, and definitions of species promulgated by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife (Non-Game Data System Special Animal Species) as identified in WAC 232-12-011 or 232-12-014, and in the Priority Habitat Species lists compiled per WAC 365-190-080; or by rules and regulations adopted currently or hereafter by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Critical wildlife habitat also includes:
    A. Regionally rare native fish and wildlife habitat (i.e. one of five or fewer examples of the habitat type within Snohomish County);
    B. Fish and wildlife habitats with irreplaceable ecological functions, and
    C. Documented habitat of regional or national significance for migrating birds.
Cul-de-sac means a road closed at one end, where the closed end is a circular or near circular shape providing a permanent turnaround.
Daycare means licensed care of children, including preschool and early learning services, away from their own home a substantial portion of the day but less than twenty-four (24) hours, by persons other than their parents or legal guardian. All daycare facilities shall be licensed by the Washington State Department of Early Learning pursuant to Chapter 170-295 WAC as exists now or is hereafter amended.
Daycare, commercial means a daycare facility for more than six (6) children within a nonresidential building or within the nonresidential portion of a mixed use building.
Daycare, family means a daycare facility provided in a residential dwelling unit in which the full-time occupant provides daycare for children other than his/her own family and the children of close relatives. Family daycare facilities may provide care for up to twelve (12) children, including the children living in the home or children of close relatives cared for in the home, between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
Dedication means conveyance of land to a public agency for general public purposes by deed or some other instrument of conveyance, or by dedication on a plat, short plat, or binding site plan and record of survey.
Density means the number of dwelling units on one acre of land.
Department means the City of Snohomish Department of Planning and Development Services.
Department store or variety store means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of various merchandise, such as dry goods, apparel, accessories, home furnishings, and house wares.
Destination resort means an establishment for resource-based recreation which is intended to utilize outdoor recreational opportunities and which includes related services, such as food, overnight lodging, equipment rentals, entertainment, and other conveniences for guests of the resort.
Detached means physically separated.
Detached Condominium means a detached dwelling unit, not greater than 2,000 square feet in total floor area that is developed at a density not greater than the underlying zone, with more than one dwelling occupying a single lot.
Detached Condominium Development means two or more detached condominiums constructed upon a single lot.
Detention means the temporary storage of storm water runoff to control peak discharge rates and allow settling of storm water sediment.
Detention facility means an above- or below- ground drainage facility, such as a pond or tank, that temporarily stores storm water runoff and releases it at a slower rate than it is collected by the drainage facility. The facility includes the flow control structure, the inlet and outlet pipes, and all maintenance access points.
Developer means a person who owns, holds a purchase option on, or otherwise controls property which the person proposes for development.
Development activity means any construction, development, earth movement, clearing, demolition or other site disturbance, which either requires a permit, approval or authorization from the City or is proposed by a public agency.
Diversity, when applied to habitat, means diversity or complexity of vegetation as indicated by stratification of plant communities, variety of plant species, and spacing of vegetation.
Downstream analysis means an analysis of potential drainage impacts and drainage facilities downstream of the subject property and/or development activity.
Driveway means a facility for the passage of vehicles, constructed in accordance with the City of Snohomish street standards, which provides access from a public or private road to an individual development.
Drug store means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of prescription drugs, nonprescription medicines, cosmetics, and related supplies.
Duplex means a residential structure containing two dwelling units that have a contiguous wall, which structure is located on one lot. The term does not include a mobile home or a structure containing an attached or detached accessory dwelling unit.
Dwelling unit means one or more rooms with internal accessibility, designed for one family to live or sleep in, containing kitchen facilities and a bathroom. The term includes individual apartment units and manufactured homes.
Easement means a right granted by a property owner to specifically named parties or to the public for the use of certain land for specified purposes. Where appropriate to the context, “easement” may also refer to the land covered by the grant. “Easement” may include access, pedestrian paths, bicycle paths, utility easements, drainage, native growth protection areas, or open space.
Elementary and middle/junior high school means institutions of learning required by the State of Washington with grades kindergarten through 9, including associated meeting rooms, auditoriums, and athletic facilities.
Enclosed, when applied to an activity, means totally concealed from expected human viewpoints by building, wall, fence, or other structure. When applied to a building, enclosed means totally enclosed via floor, walls, roof, and closable doors or windows.
Energy resource recovery facility means a facility for recovering energy from the incineration, pyrolysis, or use of heat from solid waste.
Enhancement, whenapplied to wildlife habitat, wetlands, or wetland buffers, means improvement such as by increasing plant density or diversity, removing non-indigenous or noxious species, or controlling erosion.
Environmental checklist means a form filled out to determine whether an action might have an impact on the environment, pursuant to Ch. 43.21C RCW.
Environmental impact statement means a written document required under the State Environmental Policy Act, describing the impacts that could result from an action and how such impacts might be mitigated, prepared in accordance with Chapter 197-10 WAC.
Erosion means the wearing away of the earth’s surface by wind, water, or other natural agents.
Erosion hazard areas means those areas with naturally occurring slopes, containing soils which are at high risk from water erosion according to the mapped description units of the United States Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service Soil Classification System.
Existing and ongoing agricultural activities means activities conducted on lands as defined in RCW 84.34.020(2), involving the production of crops and livestock, including operation and maintenance of farm and stock ponds, drainage ditches, irrigation systems, changes between agricultural activities, and normal maintenance and repair of existing serviceable structures and facilities. Such activity ceases to be ongoing when the area is converted to a non-agricultural use or has lain idle for longer than five years, unless the idle land is registered in a federal or state soils conservation program. This definition excludes forest practices.
Fabric shop means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of sewing supplies and accessories.
Fabrication shop means an establishment for the fabricating of goods. The term includes welding, cabinet, machine, and other similar shops.
Family means one or more persons related by blood, adoption, or marriage, or a group of not more than five persons not related by blood, adoption, or marriage, living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit. For the purposes of this definition and notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, children with familial status within the meaning of Title 42 United States Code, Section 3602(k) and persons with handicaps within the meaning of Title 42 United States Code, Section 3602(h) will not be counted as unrelated persons. Adult family homes and foster homes, as defined herein, shall be included within this definition of family. Facilities housing individuals who are incarcerated as the result of a conviction or other court order shall not be included within this definition of “family”.
Family childcare means the same as family daycare.
Federal methodology means the methodology for identifying wetlands in the field as described in the Corps of Engineers Wetlands Delineation Manual (January 1987).
Fence means a manmade barrier erected to enclose, screen or separate areas of land. Vegetation, such as a hedge, is not a fence.
Fence, open means a chain link fence without slats or a fence where there is a minimum of one inch opening for every two inches of solid material evenly distributed across the length of the fence.
Fence, solid means a fence with no openings or openings less than one inch wide or with less than one inch opening for every two inches of solid material.
Filling means a deposit of earth material placed by mechanical means.
Final plat means the final drawing of a subdivision and dedication prepared for filing for record with the County Auditor.
Flood means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters or the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood hazard area, special (“Special flood hazard area”) means the land in the flood plain that is subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
Floodplain means a land area adjoining a river, stream, watercourse, ocean, bay, or lake which is likely to be flooded. The extent of the floodplain may vary with frequency and volume of flooding. The floodplain typically consists of the floodway and the floodway fringe.
[IMAGE: <14.100.020_002.png>]
Flood proofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to properties and structures, which reduces or eliminates flood damages to lands, water and sanitary facilities, structures and contents of buildings.
Floor area means the space defined by the exterior walls, floor and ceiling of a building or structure.
Floor area ratio means the gross floor area of all buildings on a lot divided by the area of that lot.
Florist shop means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of flowers and plants.
Forest product sales means the sale of goods produced, extracted, or harvested from a forest, including trees, logs, firewood, cones, Christmas trees, berries, herbs, or mushrooms.
Forest research means the performance of scientific studies relating to botany, hydrology, silviculture, biology, and other branches of science in relation to management of forest lands.
Foster home means a residence licensed by the state to provide care on a 24-hour basis to at least one but not more than six unrelated persons under the age of eighteen years.
Fraternity, sorority, or group student house means a building occupied by and maintained exclusively for students affiliated with an academic or professional college or university or other recognized institution of higher learning and when regulated by such institution.
Freestanding wall means a standalone wall not attached to a structure. Freestanding walls can be decorative or functional.
Freestanding wall, decorative means a wall with a primary purpose other than to resist the lateral displacement of soil. For the most part, the primary purpose of decorative freestanding walls is to serve an aesthetic, screening, or buffering purpose.
Freestanding wall, functional means a wall whose primary purpose is to resist the lateral displacement of soil. Retaining walls and rockeries are functional freestanding walls.
Front yard area or front yard setback area means the space between the front property line and the front setback line and between the side property lines.
Frontage improvements means improvements to roadways abutting a development and required as a result of that development. Generally, frontage improvements shall consist of appropriate base materials, maximum of one lane of paved road section (up to 12 feet), bus pullouts and waiting areas where necessary, bicycle lanes and bicycle paths where applicable, storm drainage improvements, curbs, gutters and sidewalks.
Functions and values mean those functions and values of a critical area or buffer, which are highly beneficial to the maintenance of the aquatic system and surrounding environment. As used in this title, “functions and values” for wetlands, streams and buffers are limited to the following elements:
    1. Streams. Fish and wildlife habitat, water quality maintenance, water supply and water conveyance.
    2. Wetlands. Fish and wildlife habitat, water quality maintenance, pollution assimilation, shore stabilization, sediment retention, runoff and floodwater storage and conveyance, runoff control, stream base-flow maintenance, and groundwater discharge/recharge.
    3. Buffers. Fish and wildlife habitat, runoff absorption, pollution assimilation, stream bank stabilization, sediment entrapment, water quality maintenance, noise and visual screening, upland flood protection, recreation, and provision of nutrients and woody debris for streams.
Furniture and home furnishings store means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of household furniture and furnishings for the home.
Garage, private (“Private garage”) means a building or a portion of a residential building designed or used primarily for shelter or storage of vehicles or boats, but not airplanes. Where any vehicles or boats are equipped for operation, repaired, or kept for remuneration, hire or sale, the term “private garage” does not apply.
Garage, public (“Public garage”) means a building or a portion of a commercial building designed or used primarily for temporary shelter or storage of vehicles in exchange for a fee, or accessory to a commercial use.
Gasoline service station means a facility for the retail sale of gasoline and other automobile fuels available at pump islands, together with light general maintenance of automobiles.
General business service means an establishment providing services to businesses or individuals, with no outdoor storage or fabrication.
General personal service means an establishment engaged in providing services to individuals, such as cleaning and laundry, beauty and barber shops, shoe and other clothing repair shops, photographer, bookkeeping, tax preparation, and other personal services.
Geologically hazardous area means an area susceptible to significant or severe risk of landslides, erosion, or seismic activity.
Golf facility means a public or private facility for playing golf, including golf courses, driving ranges, miniature golf, and related pro shops, caddy shacks, restaurants, offices, meeting rooms, and storage facilities.
Governmental facility means a facility owned or leased and operated, by an agency of the federal, state, or local government.
Grade means an established elevation provided by the City Engineer, or, when such information is not available, the elevation of the sidewalk at the property line, or, when there is no sidewalk, the average elevation of the street adjacent to the property line.
Grading means the excavation, filling, leveling, or contouring of the ground surface by human or mechanical means.
Gross floor area means the sum of all spaces defined by exterior walls, floors, and ceilings, including basements, mezzanines and all floor levels.
Habitable floor means any floor usable for living, working, sleeping, eating, cooking, or recreation, excluding floors used only for storage.
Hazardous tree means a tree which poses an imminent danger of falling.
Hearing Examiner means the City of Snohomish Hearing Examiner.
Heavy equipment repair means the repair and maintenance of self-powered, self-propelled, or towed mechanical devices used for commercial purposes, including tandem axle trucks, graders, backhoes, tractor trailers, cranes, and lifts, but excluding repair of automobiles, recreational vehicles, boats, and recreational trailers.
Helipad means a landing area designed for the landing of helicopters, including associated parking, lighting, and related safety/security improvements.
Hobby, toy, and game shop means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of toys, games, hobby, or craft kits.
Home occupation means a limited-scale service activity undertaken for financial gain with minimal or no on-site sales, which occurs in a dwelling unit or accessory building and is subordinate to the primary use of the premises as a residence.
Homeless encampment means an emergency homeless encampment, sponsored by a religious organization and managed by said religious organization or other managing agency, which provides temporary housing to homeless persons either within buildings located on the property owned or leased by a religious organization or located elsewhere on said property outside of buildings. The term “homeless encampment” shall not apply to the provision of indoor temporary housing or indoor sleeping accommodations to homeless persons where the period of accommodation lasts less than 48 consecutive hours.
In-kind mitigation means replacement of wetlands with wetlands whose characteristics closely approximate those destroyed or degraded.
Individual transportation and taxi means an establishment engaged in furnishing individual or small group transportation by motor vehicle.
Industry use means all activities involved in the processing or fabricating of a product.
Jail means a facility operated by a governmental agency for the incarceration of persons for the purpose of punishment, correction, and rehabilitation following conviction of an offense.
Jewelry store means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of a variety of jewelry products.
Land use designation means a classification of land according to the general use allowed therein, under which certain regulations are imposed and which appears in one or more locations on the City of Snohomish Comprehensive Plan’s Land Use Map.
Land Use Map means that official City of Snohomish map which is a part of the Comprehensive Plan, and which defines the boundaries of the land use designations included in the Land Use Development Code.
Landscaping means the artificial application of natural and manmade materials to improve the appearance of real property.
Landslide means down slope movement of a mass of soil, rock, snow or ice including, but not limited to, rock falls, slumps, mud flows, debris flows, torrents, earth flows and snow avalanches.
Landslide hazard area means areas that, due to slope and soil permeability, are susceptible to land sliding.
Landing field means a runway or landing area which is designed, used or intended to be used by private aircraft, including necessary taxiways, storage, and tie-down areas.
Level of service means a qualitative measure, describing operational conditions within a traffic stream and the perception thereof by road users. Level-of-service standards may be evaluated in terms such as speed and travel time, freedom to maneuver, traffic interruptions, comfort, convenience, geographic accessibility, and safety. The highway capacity manual defines six levels of service for each type of facility for which analysis procedures are available. They are given letter designations, from A to F, with level-of-service A representing the best operating condition and level-of-service F the worst, as calculated by a methodology endorsed by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE).
Light manufacturing means processing and fabricating activities which provide minimal hazards or nuisance related to noise, vibration, glare, odor, smoke, dust, air pollution, toxins, fire, explosion, or traffic. Light manufacturing uses include, but are not limited to, the processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging, incidental storage, and distribution of previously prepared materials or finished products or parts. Light manufacturing uses do not include the basic industrial processing of unfinished unprocessed raw materials.
Loading space means an area required to be maintained on certain business, commercial and industry lots, in addition to regular yard requirements, used for the loading and unloading of trucks and other vehicles.
Log storage means a facility for open or enclosed storage of logs, including incidental offices and repair facilities for on-site equipment.
Lot means a piece of land having fixed boundaries, either as part of a subdivision or through metes and bounds description, including tracts and parcels. The term does not include divisions or descriptions created solely for access purposes, utility purposes, open space or mitigation purposes, or tax record purposes by the Snohomish County Assessor’s Office.
Lot area means the total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot, as shown in the following diagram:
[IMAGE: <14.100.020_003.png>]
Lot, corner (“corner lot”) means a lot bounded by more than one street, road or, private road.
Lot coverage means the area of a lot that can be covered with a building, structure, or required parking. An example of lot coverage is shown in the diagram below which illustrates both lot lines and lot coverage.
Lot, interior (“interior lot”) means a lot bounded by no more than one street, road, or private road with the remainder of the lot lines abutting other lots, tracts, or alleys.
Lot line means a boundary of a lot, as shown in the following diagram. Property line means the same as lot line.
[IMAGE: <14.100.020_005.png>]
Lot line adjustment means a division made for the purpose of adjusting boundary lines, which does not create any additional lot, cause any lot to contain insufficient area, dimensions, or building setbacks, relocate an entire lot from one parent parcel into another parent parcel, or reduce the overall area in a plat or short plat devoted to open space, and which is not inconsistent with any restrictions or conditions of approval for a recorded plat or short plat, does not involve lots which do not have a common boundary, and does not circumvent the subdivision or short subdivision procedures set forth in this title.
Lot, parent (“parent lot”) means the initial lot from which unit lots are subdivided pursuant to SMC 14.215.125.
Lot, unit “(unit lot”) means one of the individual lots created by the subdivision of a parent lot pursuant to SMC 14.215.125.
Lot width means the distance between the side lines of a lot. Lot width shall be measured by scaling a circle of the applicable diameter within the boundaries of the lot, provided that an access easement shall not be included within the circle. Examples of how lot width is measured are shown in the following diagram.
[IMAGE: <14.100.020_006.png>]
Lots, contiguous (“contiguous lots”) means lots with a common property line.
Low impact development (LID) is a stormwater and land use management strategy that strives to mimic pre-disturbance hydrologic processes of infiltration, storage, and transpiration by emphasizing conservation, use of on-site natural features, site planning, and distributed stormwater management practices that are integrated into a project design.
Low impact development (LID) facilities are distributed stormwater management practices, integrated into a project design, that emphasize pre-disturbance hydrologic processes of infiltration, filtration, storage, evaporation, and transpiration. LID best management practices include, but are not limited to, bioretention, rain gardens, permeable materials, roof downspout controls, dispersion, soil quality and depth, minimal excavation foundations, vegetated roofs, and water reuse.
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area of a building including the basement and excluding unfinished enclosures used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage other than in the basement.
Manufactured home means a structure as defined in RCW 35.63.160(2), constructed after June 15, 1976, in compliance with Housing and Urban Development standards. For floodplain management purposes, “manufactured home” also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar vehicles placed on the site for greater than one hundred eighty consecutive days.
Marina means an establishment providing docking, moorage space, and related activities limited to the provisioning or minor repair of pleasure boats and yachts, and personal services including but not limited to showers, toilets, self-service laundries and boat fueling.
Maximum dwelling units (density) means the maximum number of units per acre permitted in the project’s land use designation.
Minimum lot size means the specified minimum lot area required for a property to be used for uses allowed under the land use designation in which it is located.
Minor variance means a minor variance as defined in SMC 14.70.020.
Mitigation means a measure taken to reduce or eliminate impacts of development, including:
    A. Avoiding the impact altogether by not taking the proposed action.
    B. Minimizing impact by limiting the magnitude of the action.
    C. Rectifying the impact by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the affected environment.
    D. Reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation and maintenance.
    E. Compensating for the impact by providing substitute resources or environments.
    F. Monitoring the impact and taking appropriate corrective measures.
Mobile home park means a development with two or more improved pads or spaces designed to accommodate mobile homes.
Multi-family means a building or site designed or used to house two or more families independently, excluding accessory dwelling units.
Multi-family unit means an attached or detached dwelling unit in a multi-family structure or on a multi-family site.
Native, whenapplied to vegetation, means pre-existing on a site and indigenous to the area.
NE Sewer Area means an area either within the City of Snohomish’s Urban Growth Boundary or within the City limits of the City of Snohomish and located generally north of Blackmans Lake and east of State Route 9. The area is depicted on a map attached as Exhibit A to Ordinance 2252.
Non-conforming means a structure or use lawfully existing until passage of an ordinance codified in this title and not conforming to said ordinance.
Nursing/convalescent home means a structure and/or premises required to be licensed as a nursing home under Chapter 18.51 RCW and providing convalescent or chronic care, or both, for a period in excess of twenty-four consecutive hours for patients who, by reason of illness or infirmity, are unable to properly care for themselves; but excluding contagious, communicable, or mental illness cases and surgery or primary treatments such as are customarily provided for in hospitals. Group residential facilities and treatment centers are also excluded.
Off-premises sign means a sign which advertises a product, service, or company, not located on the property on which the sign is situated.
Off-street parking means parking that is not in a public right-of-way and is reserved for a specific land use.
Open space means the area of a lot not covered by structures, streets, driveways, parking and loading spaces, and storage yards.
Ordinary high water mark means that mark on the bank of a lake, stream, or tidal water body, where the presence and action of water is as common and usual in all ordinary years as to make the soil distinct from that of the abutting upland with respect to the type of vegetation produced.
Out-of-kind mitigation means replacement of wetlands with wetlands whose characteristics do not closely approximate those being damaged or degraded.
Park means a piece of ground maintained for purposes of recreation, including pleasure, exercise, amusement or ornamentation.
Parking requirement means the number of parking spaces required by this development code for a certain use.
Parking space means the area required to store a vehicle plus the necessary maneuvering area.
Party of record means the applicant or a person who testifies at a hearing or in writing about a matter before the Hearing Examiner.
Permitted use means a use that is unconditionally allowed in a land use designation.
Person means a person, party, firm, corporation, agency, or other entity.
Pet shop means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of pets, pet supplies, or grooming of pets.
Photographic and electronic shop means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of cameras and photographic supplies and/or a variety of household electronic equipment.
Planning Commission means the City of Snohomish Planning Commission.
Planning Director means the manager of the City of Snohomish Department of Planning and Development Services. It means the same as City Planner as provided for in Chapter 2.34 SMC.
Plat means the drawing of a subdivision of land and other elements as required pursuant to Ch. 58,17 RCW.
Processing means those activities which alter or refine an existing product.
Professional office means a place of business which is used by licensed professionals or persons in generally recognized professions, requiring training or knowledge of a technical, scientific, or other academic discipline as opposed to manual skills, and which does not involve either outside storage or fabrication, or on-site sale or transfer of commodities.
Preliminary plat means a neat and approximate drawing of a proposed subdivision showing the general layout of streets and alleys, lots, blocks, and other elements of a subdivision, which furnishes a basis for the approval or disapproval of the general layout of the subdivision.
Premises mean a lot with or without structures.
Print shop means an establishment employing 25 or fewer persons, which provides custom printing services to the public. The term may include publishing of books, magazines, periodicals or newspapers.
Property line means the same as “lot line.”
Property line, front means the property line separating the lot from the street. In the case of corner lots where there are two or more property lines that abut streets, the front property line shall be the property line abutting the street from which the primary pedestrian entrance is taken.
Property line, rear means the property line which is opposite and most distant from the front property line. In the case of triangular or other irregularly shaped lots, an imaginary line 20 feet in length located entirely within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line. When a lot extends into and beyond the mean low water line of a body of water, the rear property line shall be the mean low water line.
Property line, side means any property line other than a front or rear property line.
Public agency office means an office for the administration of any governmental activity or program.
Public agency training facility means an establishment for training in law enforcement, fire safety, national guard, and transit operations, including classrooms, dining, overnight accommodations, shooting ranges, auto test tracks, and fire suppression simulations.
Public agency yard means a facility for open or enclosed storage, repair, and maintenance of vehicles, equipment, or related materials, excluding document storage.
Public hearing means a formal meeting on a particular matter for which notice has been given, the public is allowed to comment, and comments become part of the record.
Public street means a roadway which is controlled by the City, other than an alley.
Public use means an activity operated by the federal, state, county, or City government or a special purpose district.
Qualified consultant means a scientist or other professional with the expertise and credentials necessary to provide competent advice on the matter in question.
Qualified landscape designer means a person who possesses a degree from an accredited institute of higher learning in one of the following fields or who has completed apprenticeship requirements in one of the following fields: landscape architecture, horticulture, floriculture, arboriculture, botany, wetland science, urban forestry, or a similar field. A qualified landscape designer may also be a person determined by the City Planner to be qualified based upon that person’s education, professional referrals, related experience, work history, and examples of comparable landscape design projects.
Rear yard area or rear yard setback area means the space between the rear property line and the rear setback line and between the side property lines.
Recorded development plan means a plan approved by the City and recorded by the developer, whereby the development of a site is regulated in a manner which allows some flexibility in order to promote more rational planning and development, while still being consistent with the requirements of this title.
Recreational vehicle parks means land on which two or more recreational vehicles, including hook-up facilities, are located for occupancy by the general public as temporary living or recreation quarters.
Residence or residential refers to a building or part thereof containing dwelling units or rooming units, including houses, multi-family dwellings, boarding houses, and rooming houses. The term excludes hotels, motels, and correctional, medical, and convalescent facilities.
Resource accessory use means a use, structure, or part of a structure, that is customarily subordinate and incidental to an agricultural resource use, including housing of agricultural workers on site, on-site storage of agricultural products or equipment, or other uses as specified in this Development Code.
Retail use means those activities which feature the sale of commodities for compensation.
Retaining wall means a wall of any material to resist the lateral displacement of soil, the slope of which is greater than 1.5 horizontal to 1 vertical. Retaining walls are not subject to the setback requirements in Chapter 14.210 SMC. Retaining walls are a type of functional freestanding wall. Rockeries are a type of retaining wall.
Retirement apartments mean dwelling units exclusively designed for and occupied by senior citizen residents 62 years of age or older in accordance with the requirements of state and/or federal programs for senior citizen housing. There is no minimum age requirement for the spouse of a resident who is 62 years of age or older.
Retirement housing means dwellings exclusively designed for and occupied by senior citizen residents 62 years of age or older, in a building with central kitchen facilities providing meals for the residents. There is no minimum age requirement for the spouse of a resident who is 62 years of age or older.
Right-of-way means land purchased by or dedicated to the public for the movement of vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
Rockery means the same as “retaining wall.” Rockeries are a type of functional freestanding wall.
Roomer/boarder means a resident of a single-family dwelling or approved accessory dwelling unit who is not a member of the family occupying the single-family dwelling. Compensation may or may not be provided.
School means any institution, such as an elementary, middle, junior high, senior high, be it public, private, or parochial, which offers instruction as required by the State Board of Education.
School bus base means an establishment for the storage, dispatch, repair, and maintenance of school transit vehicles.
School district support facility means facilities other than schools and bus bases, which are necessary for operating a school district, including central kitchens and maintenance or storage facilities.
School impact fee means a payment of money imposed upon residential development as a condition of approval to pay for school facilities needed to serve the development. The school impact fee does not include a permit fee, application fee, administrative fee for collecting and handling impact fees, or the cost of reviewing independent fee calculations.
Screening means any fence, horticulture, or other sight-obscuring barrier, which separates two activities.
Self-service storage facility means a facility for leasing or renting individual storage units.
SEPA means the State Environmental Policy Act, Ch. 43.21C RCW.
Setback means the required minimum distance between structures on a lot and a property line, measured horizontally and at a 90-degree angle to the property line if straight or to a tangent thereto if curved.
Shall means the prescribed action is mandatory.
Shoreline, whenapplied to areas regulated by the Washington State Shoreline Management Act, means all water areas within the Snohomish City limits, but excluding streams upstream of a point where their mean annual flow is twenty cubic feet per second or less, together with the land extending landward for two hundred feet in all directions measured on a horizontal plane from the ordinary high water mark and all wetlands and flood plains associated with said water areas.
Short plat means the drawing of a subdivision of land into four or fewer lots.
Short subdivision means the division of land into four or less lots or tracts for the purpose of sale or lease.
Side yard area or side yard setback area means the space between a side property line and the nearest side yard setback line and between the front setback line and the rear setback line.
Sight obstruction means any building, structure or horticultural material, which restricts the vision of automobile and/or pedestrian traffic while using the right-of-way for travel.
Sign area means that area enclosed by straight lines drawn around the periphery, of the sign, excluding any supporting structure which does not form a part of the sign. The area of a double-faced sign (display surface on opposite sides of a single board) shall be computed on the basis of one sign face.
Significant stand of trees means trees covering an area of at least 2,500 square feet, where the drip line of the trees covers half of the area which according to an arborist is necessary for the trees to remain healthy and viable.
Significant tree means a deciduous and evergreen tree eight (8) inches or greater in diameter measured at a point four (4) feet above the ground, other than alders and cottonwoods (Alnas rubra and Populis trichocarpa).
Single-family, attached means any residential dwelling sharing a vertical wall with one or more dwellings on separate lots, with each dwelling having its own access to the outside. No portion of an attached single-family dwelling is located over another dwelling.
Single-family detached means a single-family dwelling not attached to any other dwelling.
Single-family dwelling means a building containing one dwelling unit on one lot. The term excludes non-HUD-certified mobile homes and travel trailers, recreational vehicles, tents, and other forms of portable or temporary housing.
Site plan means a map or drawing showing the location of buildings, structures, landscaping, parking areas, driveways, streets, and other pertinent features drawn to scale.
Slope means an inclined earth surface, the inclination of which is expressed as the ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance.
Specialized instruction school means an establishment providing specialized instruction in such matters as art, dance, music, cooking, driving, pet obedience training and other technical and general educational areas, but not having the full range of facilities, such as sports fields and auditoriums, commonly included in a typical high school or college campus.
Sporting goods store means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of sporting goods and equipment.
Sports club means an establishment operating facilities for physical fitness, sports, or recreation.
Storage means the placement of commodities either enclosed or not enclosed for an indefinite period of time.
Story means that portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above. In situations where the finished floor level directly above a basement or cellar is more than six (6) feet above grade, the basement or cellar shall be considered a story.
Street means a way for public circulation of vehicles and pedestrians.
Street vacation means the process whereby the City agrees to relinquish its ownership of a street right-of-way to a land owner.
Structure means an object composed of one or more pieces, in a fixed position relative to the ground, not completely buried and below grade. Retaining walls are excluded from the definition of structure for the application of setback requirements in Chapter 14.210 SMC.
Subdivision means the division, for the purpose of sale or lease, of land into five or more lots each capable of being sold separately, including re-subdivisions.
Subregional utility means an above-ground facility, with incidental storage buildings, which is a subset of a regional utility.
Substantial development means a substantial development as defined in RCW 90.58.30(3)(e).
Substantial improvement, when applied to a flood prone area, means a repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair, or, if the structure has been damaged, before the damage occurred, excluding 1) improvements to structures to comply with state or local health, sanitary, or safety codes and 2) alterations of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or State Inventory of Historic Places.
Supervised drug injection facility means a legally supervised, medically supervised facility designed to provide a location where individuals are able to consume illicit drugs intravenously. “Supervised drug consumption facility” and “safe injection site” mean the same as supervised drug injection facility.
Theater means an establishment primarily engaged in the indoor exhibition of motion pictures or of live theatrical presentations.
Threshold determination means the decision required under SEPA as to whether a proposal will (determination of significance) or will not (determination of non-significance) require an environmental impact statement.
Title, when applied to real estate, means a document evidencing ownership.
Tract means a separate piece of property created as part of a subdivision and intended for a particular specialized purpose other than an individual subdivided lot.
Transfer station means a staffed facility where individuals and route collection vehicles deposit solid waste for transport to a permanent disposal site, including solid waste recycling facilities.
Transit park and ride lot means a vehicle parking area for access to a public transit system.
Travel trailer means an enclosed space mounted on wheels for towing, designed as a human domicile, which is not a manufactured home.
Use means the existing or intended purpose of land or structures.
Vegetated low impact development (LID) facilities include bioretention, rain gardens, dispersion, vegetated roofs, and natural treatment areas. (Ord. 2082, 2005; Ord. 2127, 2007; Ord. 2133, 2007; Ord. 2193, 2010; Ord. 2240, 2012; Ord. 2252, 2013; Ord. 2268, 2014; Ord. 2301, 2016; Ord. 2312, 2016; Ord. 2315, 2016; Ord. 2325, 2017; Ord. 2347, 2018; Ord. 2348, 2018)

Chapter 14.205 PERMITTED LAND USES

Sections:
14.205.005   Purpose
14.205.010   Map of Land Use Designations
14.205.020   Single-Family Residential Designation
14.205.025   Low Density Multi-Family Residential Designation
14.205.030   Medium Density Multi-Family Residential Designation
14.205.035   High Density Multi-Family Residential Designation
14.205.040   Commercial Designation
14.205.045   Neighborhood Commercial Designation
14.205.050   Historic Business Designation
14.205.055   Business Park Designation
14.205.060   Industry Designation
14.205.065   Airport Industry Designation
14.205.070   Mixed Use Designation
14.205.075   Open Space Designations
14.205.080   Urban Horticulture Designation
14.205.090   Public Park Designation
14.205.100   Historic District

14.205.005 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish land use designations that are designed to implement the goals, policies, and vision statement of the City of Snohomish Comprehensive Plan. The purpose and general uses allowed in each designation are stated in Sections 14.205.020 through 14.205.090 SMC and more specifically in the Land Use Tables in Chapter 14.207 SMC.

14.205.010 Map of Land Use Designations.
The City of Snohomish Official Map of Land Use Designations is hereby adopted by reference and shall be kept in the Planning and Development Services Department. Said map will be revised by the City Planner and signed by the Mayor whenever amendments are adopted pursuant to Chapter 14.15 SMC.

14.205.020 Single-Family Residential Designation.
The purpose of this designation is to maintain and develop single-family areas which provide suitable living environments for individuals and families, and which have the following characteristics: quietness, privacy, safety, and land use stability and compatibility.
The following general criteria shall govern development in this designation:
1. Residential density shall not exceed six (6) units per acre.
2. The predominant use shall be single-family detached housing. Accessory dwelling units and adult family homes will be allowed, subject to the provisions of Title 14 SMC.
3. Individual lots should have direct access onto local or private streets with close proximity to major thoroughfares and bus transportation. When access to a local or private street is not practical, access by means of a collector or arterial will be considered. Arterials shall serve as boundaries of single-family areas, and local residential streets shall provide internal circulation.
4. Single-family development should be located on varying terrain which avoids poorly drained areas and complies with environmental regulations as found in this title.
5. Single-family development shall be served by City services, such as water and sewer. Annexed existing single-family residences served by septic tanks must connect to City sewer lines within five (5) years after service is extended to the properties. (Ord. 2268, 2014)

14.205.025 Low Density Multi-Family Residential Designation.
The purpose of this designation is to maintain and develop adequate multi-family housing to provide a suitable living environment and the lowest range in multiple-family residential density, housing types, ownership patterns, lifestyles, and economic needs of the population.
The following general criteria shall govern development in this designation:
1. Low density multi-family housing shall not exceed twelve (12) units per acre, except where low-income housing incentives are approved as provided in Chapter 14.285 SMC. Low density multi-family areas should be located in the outlying areas of the City where needed services are available, as transitional areas between different land uses, and in areas requiring restrictions on the height of structures.
2. The predominant use shall be multi-family housing. The density of apartment developments should be based upon topography, availability of utilities, and proximity to adequate transportation corridors and commercial areas.
3. Mobile home parks will be allowed as conditional uses, subject to review and appropriate design and development standards, and will be limited to multi-family areas, excluding the Historic District. Mobile home parks require a recorded development plan and will conform to the density requirements and the development standards of the medium density multi-family residential designation.
4. Streets providing access to apartments should have the capacity to serve the vehicular and pedestrian traffic which will be generated by the given density of the apartment development.
5. Multi-family development should be located on varying terrain, which avoids poorly drained areas and complies with critical area regulations.
6. Multi-family development shall be served by adequate City water, sanitary sewer, and storm drainage utilities.
7. Multi-family areas should be located adjacent to commercial areas and shall be used as a buffer between single-family areas and commercial and industry areas. (Ord. 2143, 2008)

14.205.030 Medium Density Multi-Family Residential Designation.
The purpose of this designation is to maintain and develop adequate multi-family housing to provide a suitable living environment and the medium range in multiple-family residential density, housing types, ownership patterns, lifestyles, and economic needs of the population.
The following general criteria shall govern the development in this designation:
1. Medium density multi-family housing shall not exceed eighteen (18) units per acre, except where low-income housing incentives are approved as provided in Chapter 14.285 SMC.
2. Medium density multi-family development should be confined to areas near major transportation corridors and commercial areas.
3. The predominant use shall be multi-family housing. The density of apartment developments should be based upon topography, availability of utilities, and proximity to major transportation corridors and commercial areas.
4. Mobile home parks will be allowed as conditional uses, subject to review and appropriate design and development standards, and will be limited to multi-family areas, excluding the Historic District. Mobile home parks require a recorded development plan and will conform to the density requirements and the development standards of the medium density multi-family residential designation.
5. Multi-family development shall occur near arterials and bus routes in order to provide direct connections to places of work, shopping, and recreation. Streets providing access to apartments should have the capacity to serve the vehicular and pedestrian traffic which will be generated by the given density of the apartment development.
6. Multi-family development should be located on varying terrain, which avoids poorly drained areas and complies with critical area regulations.
7. Multi-family development shall be served by adequate City water, sanitary sewer, and storm drainage utilities.
8. Multi-family areas should be located adjacent to commercial areas and shall be used as a buffer between single-family areas and commercial and industry areas. (Ord. 2143, 2008)

14.205.035 High Density Multi-Family Residential Designation.
The purpose of this designation is to maintain and develop adequate multi-family housing to provide a suitable living environment and the highest range in multiple-family residential density, housing types, ownership patterns, lifestyles, and economic needs of the population.
The following general criteria shall govern the development in this designation:
1. High density multi-family housing shall not exceed twenty-four (24) units per acre.
2. The predominant use shall be multi-family housing. The density of apartment developments should be based upon topography, availability of utilities, and proximity to major transportation corridors and commercial areas.
3. Mobile home parks will be allowed as conditional uses, subject to review and appropriate design and development standards, and will be limited to multi-family areas, excluding the Historic District. Mobile home parks require a recorded development plan and will conform to the density requirements and the development standards of the medium density multi-family residential designation.
4. Multi-family density shall not exceed twenty-four (24) units per acre, except where low-income housing incentives are approved as provided in Chapter 14.285 SMC, subject to verification that such development will have a low impact on the neighborhood and City services.
5. Multi-family development shall occur near arterials and bus routes in order to provide direct connections to places of work, shopping, and recreation. Streets providing access to apartments should have the capacity to serve the vehicular and pedestrian traffic which will be generated by the given density of the apartment development.
6. Multi-family development should be located on varying terrain, which avoids poorly drained areas and complies with critical area regulations.
7. Multi-family development shall be served by adequate City water, sanitary sewer, and storm drainage utilities.
8. Multi-family areas should be located adjacent to commercial areas and shall be used as a buffer between single-family areas and commercial and industry areas. (Ord. 2143, 2008)

14.205.040 Commercial Designation.
The purpose of this designation is to provide a commercial area suitable for shopping centers, as well as concentrations of individual shops and stores, which are auto-oriented and located along major arterials in the City. Such commercial areas should provide a wide range of convenience and general merchandise goods and services. This designation is oriented towards service and automotive shopping and toward serving a local market as well as having a City wide draw.

14.205.045 Neighborhood Commercial Designation.
The purpose of this designation is to provide a local commercial service area of limited size and scale. Specialty shops and small office facilities will be allowed along with neighborhood services. New residential uses will be allowed only on the second floor above the primary uses allowed in this designation.

14.205.050 Historic Business Designation.
The purpose of this designation is to provide a commercial area which is in the Historic District. The Historic Business Designation (HBD) is both pedestrian and auto-oriented, and will provide a broad range of pedestrian-oriented commercial services and goods, including offices, specialty shops, and entertainment activities, and has reduced parking requirements to encourage the preservation and renovation of existing structures.

14.205.055 Business Park Designation.
The purpose of this designation is to provide areas suitable for a mix of light manufacturing and commercial uses while discouraging strip commercial development. The purpose of this designation is also to broaden the array of developable areas to include those with environmental constraints. Development will occur under strict aesthetic and environmental controls. This designation is intended to designate and preserve properties for commercial and manufacturing activities, which could improve the economic base of the City. Multiple-family type residential use is permitted in conjunction with commercial use on the same site.
A. Business Parks shall have access to at least one major arterial. Access to the adjacent arterial and other streets will be provided in accordance with City traffic plans and will be constructed per Public Works Design and Construction Standards.
B. Criteria for approval of the site development plan shall include the prevention of strip commercial development and the protection of environmentally critical areas. The City and the applicant may agree to process a site development plan application as a Type 4 instead of a Type 2 permit.
C. A minimum of five acres will normally be required for a Business Park development; however, existing smaller parcels that cannot be aggregated together to establish a five-acre project will be allowed subject to appropriate review and conditions.
D. Townhouse and apartment styles of residential use are permitted in conjunction with commercial use on the same site.
E. In Business Park areas, the Planning Director or Hearing Examiner may determine that two or more noncontiguous parcels constitute one development site when all of the following conditions are satisfied:
    1. The parcels are within 0.25 mile, measured between nearest property lines, so that land development conditions and issues are substantially similar.
    2. The parcels are in common ownership throughout the permitting and construction process.
    3. Construction activity upon all parcels is requested, reviewed, and permitted through one land use development application.
    4. Signs, structures, and other improvements on all parcels exhibit common architectural design features.
    5. The names given to development on the noncontiguous parcels have common words and themes.
    6. The parcels are connected by pedestrian walkway. (Ord. 2111, 2006; Ord. 2338, 2017)

14.205.060 Industry Designation.
The purpose of this designation is to maintain and develop sufficient industry areas of varying size and type in order to achieve economic stability and employment growth, to encourage the development of the City as a small diversified manufacturing center, and to provide locations for land uses that create compatibility problems with other kinds of land uses but do not create excessive amounts of noise, light, noxious odors, or hazardous products or by-products. Adult uses will be allowed in the area designated for industry located between Bonneville Avenue, Highway 9 and Seventh Street.

14.205.065 Airport Industry Designation.
A. Harvey Airfield and the immediate surrounding area should be protected as a regional resource. This designation will protect it from incompatible land uses, allow its orderly expansion, and provide for its further development as a regional reliever field as designated by the FAA. This designation is also intended to reduce the impact of airport uses on adjacent properties.
B. The Airport Industry designation will allow a mix of certain commercial and light industry uses compatible with airport activities. This designation allows recreation uses as well as aviation related schools and associated student housing. Developable areas include those with environmental constraints and resource lands. Airport Industry development in the density fringe area will be with fewer improvements than in more land extensive uses and must comply with the density fringe regulations.
C. Development will be pursuant to site development plan.
    1. Criteria shall include protection of environmentally critical areas and limited access onto adjacent public right-of-way.
    2. Airport Industry development in the density flood fringe area shall have minimal improvements, extensive open land use, and must comply with the federal government’s density flood fringe regulations. (Ord. 2338, 2017)

14.205.070 Mixed Use Designation.
This designation applies to areas of the City in which housing, shopping, and working activities can be compatibly mixed to encourage infill of under-utilized lots and reduce auto work and shopping trips. Mixed Use areas will encourage a mix of single- and multifamily residential, commercial, and light industry uses in the same area, on the same site, and in the same structure. Compatibility among mixed uses shall be increased by application of the City’s design standards for areas outside the Historic District to both the site and structures and the use of the conditional use permit process to provide better control over some types of allowed uses.
A. Mixed Use areas shall be located in areas already characterized by mixed uses, served by arterials, and within walking distance of bus service.
B. The development of mixed uses on the same site and/or in the same structure will be encouraged by incentives such as shared parking. (Ord. 2111, 2006; Ord. 2338, 2017)

14.205.075 Open Space Designations.
The purpose of this designation is to preserve and enhance as open space environmental resources and amenities in order to retain the sense of place. Open Space areas include environmentally sensitive areas.
The following general criteria shall govern the development in this designation:
1. Areas will be designated Open Space only when the property owners agree to donate, sell or provide appropriate open space or conservation easements to the City. No properties will be changed to Open Space unless the property owner voluntarily agrees to the designation.
2. The City may attempt to buy, trade, or exchange surplus City-owned property resources for Open Space property.
3. Lands designated as Open Space will not be developed, although extensive recreational activities are allowed.
4. Open Space areas could include stream corridors and wildlife habitat.

14.205.080 Urban Horticulture Designation.
The Urban Horticulture designation provides a buffer between the urban areas of the City and adjacent agricultural lands. Land uses within this designation will be low density and will have low impact to adjacent agricultural areas.
The following general criteria shall govern development in this designation:
1. Land uses are allowed that do not require extensive structures or development and that do require large land areas, such as intensive agriculture operation, sales of agriculture products, sales of landscaping materials and supplies, farmer’s markets, outdoor recreation activities, and log and lumber storage.
2. This designation shall be for lands that are within the City limits, are adjacent to agriculture areas, and are either currently in agricultural uses or vacant.
3. Minimal structures shall be allowed for development, and 80 percent of a lot shall be left unbuilt and unpaved.
4. Uses which negatively impact adjacent agricultural uses shall be discouraged.
5. Flood protection requirements of Title 14 SMC shall be met for all development located in the flood plain.
6. Single-family residences shall be allowed at a density of no more than one (1) unit per ten (10) acres.

14.205.090 Public Park Designation.
1. The purpose of this designation is to:
    a. Identify publicly-owned land used or planned for use as a public park.
    b. Protect and promote land use compatibility between public parks and neighboring land uses.
    c. Prevent the displacement or elimination of public parks, except as may be allowed through the amendment process for the Land Use Designation Map.
2. New public parks and public trails may be established and are permitted in any land use designation. At the next appropriate opportunity, the Land Use Designation Map shall be amended to reflect the presence of the new public park.
3. A change in land use designation shall be required prior to the conversion of a property designated Public Park for other than public recreational use.
4. For land uses designated as permitted (P) by Chapter 14.207 SMC, the initial development of or a substantive alteration of a public park will require an administrative development plan. The City and the applicant may agree to process an administrative development plan application as a Type 5 instead of a Type 1 permit or a Type 6 instead of a Type 4 permit.
5. For land uses designated as conditional uses (C) by Chapter 14.207 SMC, the initial development of or a substantive alteration of a public park will require approval of a conditional use permit per SMC 14.65.010. (Ord. 2214, 2011)

14.205.100 Historic District.
The purpose of establishing a Historic District for the City of Snohomish and the standards and regulations applicable to the Historic District are set forth in Chapter 14.225 SMC. (Ord. 2082, 2005)

Chapter 14.207 LAND USE TABLES

Sections:
14.207.010   Guide to Use of Land Use Tables
14.207.020   Permitted Uses
14.207.030   Conditional Use Permits
14.207.040   Specific Regulations Pertaining to the Use in the Land Use Designation
14.207.050   Uses Not Permitted in a Land Use Designation
14.207.060   Interpretation of the Land Use Tables
14.207.065   Prohibited Uses
14.207.070   Residential Land Use Table
14.207.075   Residential Land Use: Regulations
14.207.080   General Services Land Use Table
14.207.085   General Services Land Uses: Regulations
14.207.090   Government/Business Services Land Use Table
14.207.095   Government/Business Services Land Uses: Regulations
14.207.100   Retail Land Use Table
14.207.105   Retail Land Uses: Regulations
14.207.110   Manufacturing Land Use Table
14.207.115   Manufacturing Land Uses: Regulations
14.207.120   Regional Land Use Table
14.207.125   Regional Land Uses: Regulations
14.207.130   Recreational/Cultural Land Use Table
14.207.135   Recreational/Cultural Land Uses: Regulations
14.207.140   Resource Land Use Table
14.207.145   Resource Land Uses: Regulations
14.207.150   Essential Public Facility Regulations
14.207.155   Essential Public Facilities: Regulations
14.207.160   Accessory Uses

14.207.010 Guide to Use of Land Use Tables.
A. The use of a property is considered permanent when that use has been in continuous operation for more than sixty days. A use for less than sixty days is considered a temporary use (see Chapter 14.60 SMC).
B. The land use tables in SMC 14.207.120 through 14.207.160 determine whether a use is allowed in a land use designation. The land use designations set forth in Chapter 14.205 SMC relate to the tables’ columns while the land uses relate to the tables’ rows.
C. If no symbol appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the use is not allowed in that district, except for certain temporary uses.

14.207.020 Permitted Uses.
If the letter “P” appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the use is permitted in that district, subject to the review procedures and general requirements specified in Title 14 SMC.

14.207.030 Conditional Use Permits.
If the letter “C” appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the use is allowed only if the City grants a conditional use permit for that use per SMC 14.65.010.

14.207.040 Specific Regulations Pertaining to the Use in the Land Use Designation.
If in addition to a “P” or “C” a number appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, then the corresponding regulation in the section following the land use table applies to the use.

14.207.050 Uses Not Permitted in a Land Use Designation.
If there is neither a “P” or a “C” in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the use is not allowed in that land use designation.

14.207.060 Interpretation of the Land Use Tables.
A. If a proposed land use is not specifically listed in a land use table, the City Planner shall determine whether the land use will be allowed in a land use designation. The City Planner shall make that determination based on consistency with the purposes of Title 14 SMC and the Comprehensive Plan, considering the following factors:
    1. The physical characteristics of the use and its supporting structures, including scope, traffic, hours of operation, and other impacts.
    2. Whether the use is compatible with other uses permitted in the land use designation.
B. The City Planner shall issue a written interpretation formalizing the determination, in order to make a record of the decision and establish a clear precedent for similar future occurrences. The issuance of an interpretation by the City Planner may be appealed in accordance with the provisions of SMC 14.20.170.

14.207.065 Prohibited Uses.
Until such time as this chapter is amended to provide specific provisions and land use controls allowing and regulating the following uses, such uses shall be prohibited and not allowed in any zone within the City. No prohibition under this section shall be superseded by an administrative determination to allow a use pursuant to SMC 14.207.060 or by any other provision of this chapter.
A. Production, processing, retail sale of marijuana and marijuana-infused products subject to, eligible for, or in receipt of a license issued by the State of Washington, all as defined in Initiative Measure No. 502, as codified in the Revised Code of Washington, and implementing regulations in Chapter 314-55 WAC, as now existing or hereafter amended.
B. The siting or operation of a supervised drug injection facility. (Ord. 2348, 2018)

TABLES AND REGULATIONS

14.207.070 Residential Land Use Table.
+-----------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
|       Land Use        | Open  | Public |    Urban     |   Single    |     Low     |   Medium    |    High     | Commercial | Neighborhood | Historic | Business | Industrial | Airport  | Mixed |
|                       | Space |  Park  | Horticulture |   Family    |   Density   |   Density   |   Density   |            |   Business   | Business |   Park   |            | Industry |  Use  |
|                       |       |        |              | Residential | Residential | Residential | Residential |            |              | District |          |            |          |       |
+-----------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Dwelling Units                                                                                                                                                                                  |
+-----------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Adult family          |       |        |              | p           | p           | p           | p           | p          |              |          |          |            |          | p     |
| home                  |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-----------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Caretaker residence   | p5    | p      |              |             |             |             |             |            | p14          |          | p5       | p5         |          |       |
+-----------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Foster home           |       |        |              | p           | p           | p           | p           | p          |              |          |          |            |          | p     |
+-----------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Manufactured          |       |        | p1           | p           | p           | p           | p           |            |              |          |          |            |          | p     |
| home                  |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-----------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Mobile home           |       |        |              |             | c9          | c9          | c9          |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| park                  |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-----------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Multifamily           |       |        |              |             | p           | p           | p           | p10        |              | p        | c6       |            |          | p7    |
+-----------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Single-family         |       |        | p1           | p           | p           | p           | p           | p16        |              | p        | p16      |            |          | p     |
| detached              |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-----------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Single-family         |       |        |              | p17         | p           | p           | p           | p10        |              | p        | p6       |            |          | p7    |
| attached              |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-----------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Group Residences                                                                                                                                                                                |
+-----------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Community residential |       |        |              |             | c           | c           | c           | c          |              | c        |          |            |          | p7    |
| facility-CRF          |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-----------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| CRF-prisoner          |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          | c          |          |       |
| release               |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-----------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Fraternity,           |       |        |              |             | c           | c           | c           |            |              |          |          |            |          | c     |
| sorority,             |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| group student         |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| house                 |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-----------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Accessory Uses                                                                                                                                                                                  |
+-----------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Accessory dwelling    |       |        |              | p2          | p2          | p2          | p2          | p2         | p14          | p2       |          |            |          | p2    |
| units                 |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-----------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Accessory structures  |       | p      |              | p           | p           | p           | p           |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-----------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Accessory uses        |       | p      | p11          | p11         | p11         | p11         | p11         |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-----------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Home occupation       |       |        | p3           | p3          | p3          | p3          | p3          | p3         |              | p3       |          |            |          | p     |
+-----------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Limited agricultural  |       |        | p12          | p12         |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| uses                  |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-----------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Animals (see          |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| Ch. 7.04 SMC)         |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-----------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Private kennels       |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| (see Ch. 7.04         |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| SMC)                  |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-----------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Roomers/boarders      |       |        |              | p8          | p8          | p8          | p8          |            |              | p8       | p8       | p8         |          | p8    |
+-----------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Temporary Lodging                                                                                                                                                                               |
+-----------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Bed and breakfast     |       |        |              | c4          | p           | p           | p           | p          |              | p        |          |            |          | p     |
+-----------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Bed and breakfast     |       |        |              |             | p           | p           | p           | p          |              | p        |          |            |          | p     |
| inn                   |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-----------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Hotel/motel           |       |        |              |             |             |             | p           | p          |              | p        |          |            |          | p     |
+-----------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Recreational          |       | c      |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          | c13        |          |       |
| vehicle parks         |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-----------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
(Ord. 2143, 2008; Ord. 2180, 2009; Ord. 2193, 2010; Ord. 2214, 2011; Ord. 2240, 2012; Ord. 2268, 2014)

14.207.075 Residential Land Use: Regulations.
1. Related to the operation of a farm, one (1) unit per ten (10) acres.
2. Accessory dwelling units must meet the following conditions:
    a. One (1) unit must be owner occupied.
    b. The design of any exterior alteration or new structure necessary for the unit must comply with the City’s design standards adopted in Chapters 14.225 and 14.230 SMC.
    c. One (1) additional on-site parking space must be provided.
    d. If the accessory unit is in a separate structure, it must be no greater than eight hundred (800) square feet or half the floor area of the existing structure, whichever is less.
    e. Occupancy of the accessory unit, together with all roomers or boarders permitted under SMC 14.207.075(8), shall not exceed three (3).
3. Home occupations must meet the following conditions:
    a. The occupation shall be conducted within an enclosed building.
    b. No indication of the occupation, such as outdoor storage areas, abnormally higher traffic volumes, noise, vibration, dust, smoke or odors, shall be evident from outside the building in which the occupation is located.
    c. The occupation shall not produce ground water pollution or introduce objectionable waste into the City sewer system.
    d. Not more than one (1) person outside the immediate family group residing on the premises shall engage in such occupation.
    e. Signing must comply with Chapter 14.245 SMC.
    f. The occupation cannot exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the home square footage.
    g. The occupation must have a City business license.
    h. The premises must be occupied by the occupation owner.
4. Bed & Breakfast (B&B) establishments must meet the following conditions:
    a. The residence must be owner-occupied.
    b. The Design Review Board must review the plan for off-street parking and, if the property is located within the Historic District, the design of the sign.
    c. No more than four B&B rooms per residence.
    d. One (1) on-premise parking space must be provided per B&B room, in addition to parking required for the residence.
    e. B&B rooms must be located in the structure of the principal residence.
    f. No meals other than breakfast shall be provided, and no meals shall be sold to non-renters.
    g. No room shall be rented to the same person or persons for more than thirty (30) days per year.
    h. No rooms shall be rented on a permanent basis, and no other business activity may be conducted on the premises.
    i. The B&B must maintain a City business license.
5. Employee living quarters as an accessory use shall meet the following conditions:
    a. Living quarters shall be restricted to the use of caretakers, watchmen, and special employees in training.
    b. Living quarters may be a separate building, manufactured home, or a portion of another building.
    c. Only two (2) dwelling units shall be used for employee living quarters.
6. Multi-family housing is allowed in conjunction with commercial use as a mixed use.
    a. The gross square footage of multi-family housing must not exceed the gross square footage of commercial use.
    b. Multiple family density may not exceed eighteen (18) units/acre, in accordance with Chapter 14.210 SMC.
7. Requires an approved administrative development plan.
8. Up to three roomers or boarders may reside in an owner-occupied, single family home, or accessory dwelling unit associated with the owner-occupied, single family home, irrespective of the definition of family in Chapter 14.100 SMC, provided that, with the exception of an approved accessory dwelling unit, the property contains only one dwelling unit, and provided that any nonfamily members occupying the accessory dwelling unit shall be counted against the limit of three roomers or boarders.
9. Must meet mobile home park design requirements set forth in SMC 14.210.220.
10. Except where a higher density is permitted by SMC 14.285.060 for low-income senior housing, multi-family residential density may not exceed eighteen (18) units per acre, in accordance with SMC 14.210.210.
11. Signs, fences, landscaping and screening in compliance with Title 14 SMC.
12. Agricultural uses shall be limited in accordance with SMC 14.210.320.
13. Recreational Vehicle Parks must meet the following conditions:
    a. Maximum of fifteen (15) dwelling units per acre.
    b. Type III landscaping as defined in SMC 14.240.040(F)(3) shall be required along all property lines.
    c. An emergency flood evacuation plan must be submitted to the City and be approved by the City Planner and City Fire Official. The City Planner and City Fire Official shall develop minimum requirements for the contents of flood evacuation plans.
    d. Must comply with the requirements of Chapter 20.04 SMC relating to the establishment of trailer camps.
    e. Length of stay shall be a total of not more than ninety (90) days in any calendar year.
    f. Recreational trailer camps shall be only permitted south of the Snohomish River.
14. Employee and/or accessory living quarters as an accessory use shall meet the following conditions:
    a. Living quarters must be on the second floor above the primary commercial use on the site.
    b. The density of the employee and/or accessory living quarters shall not exceed the density of the highest density adjacent residential designation.
15. Reserved.
16. Permitted only through the unit lot subdivision process in SMC 14.215.125 and only where in compliance with the standards in SMC 14.210.215.
17. Permitted only in conjunction with a planned residential development under the provisions of Chapter 14.220 SMC. (Ord. 2092, 2006; Ord. 2104, 2006; Ord. 2111, 2006; Ord. 2143, 2008; Ord. 2180, 2009; Ord. 2240, 2012; Ord. 2268, 2014)

14.207.080 General Services Land Use Table.
+------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
|        Land Use        | Open  | Public |    Urban     |   Single    |     Low     |   Medium    |    High     | Commercial | Neighborhood | Historic | Business | Industrial | Airport  | Mixed |
|                        | Space |  Park  | Horticulture |   Family    |   Density   |   Density   |   Density   |            |   Business   | Business |   Park   |            | Industry |  Use  |
|                        |       |        |              | Residential | Residential | Residential | Residential |            |              | District |          |            |          |       |
+------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Personal Services                                                                                                                                                                                |
+------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Adult uses             |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          | p7         |          |       |
+------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Automotive             |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              | p1       | p1       | p          | p1       |       |
| repair                 |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Automotive             |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              | p        | p        | p          | p        | p     |
| service                |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Cemetery, columbarium  |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              | p        | p        | p          |          |       |
| or mausoleum           |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Childcare              |       | c      |              |             | p2          | p2          | p2          | p2         | p2           |          | p        |            |          | p2    |
+------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Childcare,             |       | c      | c            | c           | c           | c           | c           | c          |              | c        |          |            |          | c     |
| family – 12            |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| children or            |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| less                   |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Childcare,             |       | c      | p            | p           | p           | p           | p           | p          |              | p        |          |            |          | p     |
| family – 6             |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| children or            |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| less                   |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Church, synagogue,     |       |        |              | c9          | c           | c           | c           | p          |              | p        | p        | p          | p        | p     |
| temple, mosque         |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Community stable       |       | c      | p            |             |             | c           |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Funeral home/crematory |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              | p        | p        | p          |          |       |
+------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| General personal       |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              | p        | p        | p          | p        | p     |
| services               |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Industrial             |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          | p        | p          |          |       |
| launderers             |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Commercial             |       |        | p4           | p4          |             |             |             | p          |              |          | p        | p          |          |       |
| kennel or              |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| cattery                |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Animal grooming        |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              | p        | p        | p          |          | p     |
| w/o kenneling/boarding |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Miscellaneous          |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              | p        | p        | p          | p        | p     |
| repair                 |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Social services        |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              | p        | p        | c          |          | c     |
+------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Veterinary             |       |        | c8           |             |             |             |             | p4         |              | p4       | p4       | p          |          | p4    |
| clinic w/o             |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| kenneling/boarding     |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Veterinary             |       |        | c8           |             |             |             |             | p4         |              |          | p4       | p          |          | p4    |
| clinic w/              |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| kenneling/boarding     |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Health Services                                                                                                                                                                                  |
+------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Hospital               |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              | p        | p        | p          |          | p     |
+------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Medical/dental         |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              | p        | p        | p          |          | p     |
| lab                    |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Miscellaneous          |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              | p        | p        | p          |          | p     |
| health                 |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Nursing/convalescent   |       |        |              | c6          | c           | p           | p           | p          |              | p        | p        | p          |          | p     |
| home                   |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Office/patient         |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          | p            | p        | p        |            |          | p     |
| clinic                 |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Congregate             |       |        |              | c6          | c           | p           | p           | p          |              | p        | p        |            |          | p     |
| care/assisted          |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| living                 |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Supervised             |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| drug injection         |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| facility               |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Education Services                                                                                                                                                                               |
+------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Elementary             |       |        |              | c           | c           | c           | c           | p          |              |          | p        |            |          | p     |
| or middle/junior       |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| School district        |       |        |              |             | c           | c           | c           | p          |              | p        | p        | p          |          | p5    |
| support facility       |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Secondary or           |       |        |              | c           | c           | c           | c           | p          |              |          | p        |            |          | p     |
| high school            |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Specialized            |       | c      | c            |             | c           | c           | c           | p          |              | p        | p        |            | p        | p     |
| instruction            |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| school                 |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Vocational             |       |        |              |             | c           | c           | c           | p          |              | p        | p        | p          | p        | p     |
| school                 |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
(Ord. 2180, 2009; Ord. 2193, 2010; Ord. 2214, 2011; Ord. 2268, 2014; Ord. 2296, 2016; Ord. 2348, 2018)

14.207.085 General Services Land Uses: Regulations.
1. Except tire retreading. See Manufacturing Land Uses Table.
2. Subject to a child drop off and pick up system that meets DSHS standards and subject to design features for use of outside play areas that will protect adjacent uses from significant noise levels.
3. Only as an accessory to a cemetery.
4. Animal cremation services are not permitted.
5. Only when adjacent to an existing or proposed school.
6. Subject to the following conditions:
    a. Minimum contiguous site area of three acres.
    b. Parking areas shall be screened from adjacent streets and residential uses.
    c. All structures shall be offset from property lines a minimum of 20 feet.
7. Adult uses will be allowed in the area designated for Industry located between Bonneville Avenue, Highway 9 and Seventh Street.
8. Limited to large animal veterinaries.
9. Site must be located less than 300 feet from a street designated as a collector or arterial. (Ord. 2193, 2010; Ord. 2268, 2014; Ord. 2296, 2016)

14.207.090 Government/Business Services Land Use Table.
+--------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
|         Land Use         | Open  | Public |    Urban     |   Single    |     Low     |   Medium    |    High     | Commercial | Neighborhood | Historic | Business | Industrial | Airport  | Mixed |
|                          | Space |  Park  | Horticulture |   Family    |   Density   |   Density   |   Density   |            |   Business   | Business |   Park   |            | Industry |  Use  |
|                          |       |        |              | Residential | Residential | Residential | Residential |            |              | District |          |            |          |       |
+--------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Government Services                                                                                                                                                                                |
+--------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Court                    |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              | p        | p        | p          |          | p     |
+--------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Fire facility            |       |        |              | c1          | c1          | c1          | c1          | p          |              | p        | p        | p          | p        | c     |
+--------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Police facility          |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              | p        | p        | p          |          | c     |
+--------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Public agency            |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              | p        | p        | p          | p        | p     |
| archives                 |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+--------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Public agency            |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              | p        | p        | p          | p        | p     |
| office                   |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+--------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Public agency            |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              |          | p        | p          | p        | c     |
| yard                     |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+--------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Sub regional             |       |        | c            | c           | c           | c           | c           | c          |              | c        | c        | c          | c        | c     |
| utility                  |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+--------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Business Services                                                                                                                                                                                  |
+--------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Professional             |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              | p        | p        | p          | p        | p     |
| office                   |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+--------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Automobile               |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          | c10        |          | c10   |
| dismantling              |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+--------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Automobile               |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          | c11        |          |       |
| wrecking &               |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| scrap metal              |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+--------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Automotive               |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              | c        | p        | p          | p        | p     |
| parking                  |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+--------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Automotive               |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              | p6       | p        | p          | p        | p6    |
| rental and               |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| leasing                  |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+--------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Commercial/industrial    |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p7         |              | p7       | p7       | p          | p        | p7    |
| accessory                |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| uses                     |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+--------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Communication            |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p2         |              | p2       | p        | p          | p        | p2    |
| offices                  |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+--------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Construction             |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p2         |              | p2       | p2       | p          | p        | p2    |
| and trade                |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+--------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Farm product             |       |        | p6           |             |             |             |             | p6         |              |          | p        | p          | p        |       |
| refrigeration/storage    |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+--------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Farm product             |       |        | p6           |             |             |             |             | p6         |              |          | p6       | p          | p        | p6    |
| warehousing              |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+--------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Freight and              |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p2         |              | p2       | p        | p          | p        | p2    |
| cargo service            |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+--------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| General business         |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              | p        | p        | p          | p        | p     |
| service                  |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+--------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Heavy equipment          |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              |          | p        | p          | p        | p     |
| and truck                |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| repair                   |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+--------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Helipad                  |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            | p        |       |
+--------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Individual               |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p2         |              | p2       | p        | p          | p        | p2    |
| transportation           |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| and taxi                 |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+--------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Log storage              |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          | p          |          |       |
+--------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Miscellaneous            |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              | p6       | p        | p          | p        | p6    |
| equipment                |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| rental                   |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+--------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Outdoor advertising      |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p6         |              | p6       | p6       | p          | p        |       |
| service                  |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+--------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Passenger transportation |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p2         |              | p2       | p        | p          | p        | p2    |
| service                  |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+--------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Professional             |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p2         |              | p2       | p2       | p          | p        | p2    |
| sport teams/promoters    |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+--------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Research, development    |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              | p        | p        | p          | p        | p     |
| and testing              |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+--------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Self-service             |       |        |              |             | p4          | p4          | p4          | p6         |              |          | p        | p          | p        |       |
| storage                  |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+--------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Telegraph and            |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p2         |              | p2       | p        | p          | p        | p2    |
| other communications     |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+--------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Transportation           |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p2         |              | p2       | p        | p          | p        | p2    |
| service                  |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+--------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Trucking and             |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p2         |              | c3       | p        | p          | p        | p2    |
| courier service          |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+--------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Warehousing              |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p6         |              |          | p6       | p          | p        | p2    |
| and wholesale            |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| trade                    |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+--------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
(Ord. 2180, 2009; Ord. 2214, 2011; Ord. 2301, 2016)

14.207.095 Government/Business Services Land Uses: Regulations.
1. Fire facilities shall meet the following conditions:
    a. All buildings and structures shall maintain a minimum distance of twenty (20) feet from adjoining residential property lines.
    b. Any buildings from which fire-fighting equipment emerges onto a street shall maintain a distance of thirty-five (35) feet from such street.
    c. No outside storage.
2. Limited to office use and related parking for vehicles and equipment.
3. Limited to courier service, except by air.
4. Accessory to a multi-family development of at least twelve units, provided that:
    a. The gross floor area in the self-service storage shall not exceed the total gross floor area of the multi-family dwellings.
    b. All outdoor lights shall be shaded and deflected downward away from all adjoining property.
    c. The use of the facility shall be limited to the occupants’ household goods.
    d. No servicing or repair of motor vehicles, boats, trailers, lawn mowers, or similar equipment.
    e. No outdoor storage or storage of flammable liquids, highly combustible or explosive materials, or hazardous chemicals.
    f. No residential occupancy of the storage units.
    g. No business activity other than the rental of storage units by occupants.
    h. A resident shall be required on the site and shall be responsible for maintaining the operation of the facility in conformance with the conditions of approval.
    i. May not be located within any required setback.
5. Limited to products grown on-site.
6. No outdoor storage unless it is screened.
7. Storage limited to accessory storage of commodities sold at retail on the premises or materials used in the fabrication of commodities sold on the premises.
8. Limited to emergency medical evacuation sites in conjunction with police, fire, or health services facility.
9. Cellular communication antennas shall be allowed without a conditional use permit, provided that there are no more than one set of 3 antennas located on a replacement utility pole that is no more than twenty feet higher than the original pole, that all ground mounted or lower pole mounted equipment is located away from the street the pole is adjacent to on private or public owned property; and that the equipment is enclosed in an enclosure which is approved by the City of Snohomish PDS staff.
10. All activities must be within an enclosed building.

14.207.100 Retail Land Use Table.
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
|     Land Use      | Open  | Public |    Urban     |   Single    |     Low     |   Medium    |    High     | Commercial | Neighborhood | Historic | Business | Industrial | Airport  | Mixed |
|                   | Space |  Park  | Horticulture |   Family    |   Density   |   Density   |   Density   |            |   Business   | Business |   Park   |            | Industry |  Use  |
|                   |       |        |              | Residential | Residential | Residential | Residential |            |              | District |          |            |          |       |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Retail Land Uses                                                                                                                                                                            |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Agricultural      |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              | p        | p        | p          |          | p     |
| crop sales        |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Apparel and       |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          | p4           | p        | p        |            |          | p     |
| accessory         |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| stores            |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Auction houses    |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              | p        |          | p          | p        |       |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Auto supply       |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p3         |              | p3       | p3       | p          |          | p3    |
| store             |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Bldg., hardware & |       |        | p1           |             |             |             |             | p          |              | p        | p        | p          |          | p     |
| garden materials  |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Book, stationary, |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          | p4           | p        | p        | p          |          | p     |
| video and         |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| art supply        |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Bulk retail       |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              | p        | p        | p          |          | c     |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Department        |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              | p        | p        |            |          | p     |
| and variety       |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| stores            |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Drug stores       |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              | p        | p        | p          |          | p     |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Eating, drinking  |       | p7     |              |             |             |             |             | p          | p6           | p        | p        | p          | p        | c     |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Fabric shops      |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              | p        | p        | p          |          | p     |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Florist shops     |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          | p4           | p        | p        |            |          | p     |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Food stores       |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          | p4/5         | p        | p        | p2         |          | p     |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Forest products   |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              | p        | p        | p          |          |       |
| sales             |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Fuel dealers      |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              |          | p        | p          | p        |       |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Furniture and     |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              | p        | p        |            |          | p     |
| home furnishing   |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| stores            |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Gasoline service  |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              | p        | p        | p          | p        | c     |
| station           |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Hobby, toy        |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          | p4           | p        | p        | p          |          | p     |
| and game shops    |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Jewelry stores    |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              | p        | p        |            |          | p     |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Liquor stores     |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              | p        | p        | p          |          | p     |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Monuments,        |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              |          | p        | p          |          | c     |
| tombstones,       |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| gravestones       |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Motor vehicle     |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              | p        | p        | p          |          | c     |
| and boat dealers  |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Personal medical  |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              | p        | p        |            |          | p     |
| supply stores     |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Pet store with    |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          | p4           | p        | p        | p          |          | p     |
| or w/o grooming   |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Photographic      |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              | p        | p        | p          |          | p     |
| and electronic    |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| shops             |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Sporting goods    |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              | p        | p        | p          |          | p     |
| and related       |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| stores            |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Used goods:       |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              | p        | p        | p          |          | p     |
| antiques/second   |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| hand              |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
(Ord. 2180, 2009; Ord. 2193, 2010; Ord. 2214, 2011)

14.207.105 Retail Land Uses: Regulations.
1. Only garden materials shall be permitted.
2. 
    a. Limited to fresh agricultural products.
    b. Covered sales area shall not exceed 1,000 square feet.
3. Only the sale of new or reconditioned automobile supplies is permitted.
4. The store size shall be limited to 3000 gross square feet.
5. With no gasoline sales.
6. With no drive thru food pick up.
7. When ancillary to a recreational land use. (Ord. 2214, 2011)

14.207.110 Manufacturing Land Use Table.
+-------------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
|           Land Use            | Open  | Public |    Urban     |   Single    |     Low     |   Medium    |    High     | Commercial | Neighborhood | Historic | Business | Industrial | Airport  | Mixed |
|                               | Space |  Park  | Horticulture |   Family    |   Density   |   Density   |   Density   |            |   Business   | Business |   Park   |            | Industry |  Use  |
|                               |       |        |              | Residential | Residential | Residential | Residential |            |              | District |          |            |          |       |
+-------------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Manufacturing land uses                                                                                                                                                                                 |
+-------------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Aircraft, ship                |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | c7         |              |          |          | p          | p        |       |
| and boating                   |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| building                      |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-------------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Apparel & other               |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          | p        | p          |          | c     |
| textile products              |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-------------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Computer and                  |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p9         |              |          | p9       | p          | p9       | p9    |
| office equipment              |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-------------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Custom metal                  |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p9         |              |          | p        | p          |          | c9    |
| working                       |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-------------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Electronic                    |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p9         |              |          | p9       | p          | p9       | c9    |
| and other                     |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| electric equipment            |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-------------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Fabricated                    |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p9         |              |          | p9       | p          | p9       | c9    |
| metal products                |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-------------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Food and kindred              |       |        | c1           |             |             |             |             |            |              | p2       | p2       | p2         | p2       |       |
| products                      |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-------------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Furniture and                 |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              | p        | p        | p          |          | c     |
| fixtures                      |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-------------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Heavy machinery               |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p9         |              |          | p9       | c          | p9       | c9    |
| and equipment                 |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-------------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Industrial                    |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p9         |              |          | p9       | p          | p9       | c9    |
| and commercial                |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| machinery                     |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-------------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Leather and                   |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p6         |              | p6       | p6       | p          |          | c6    |
| leather goods                 |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-------------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Measuring and                 |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              |          | p        | p          |          | c     |
| controlling                   |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| instruments                   |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-------------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Miscellaneous                 |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p9         |              |          | p        | p          | p        | c9    |
| light manufacturing           |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-------------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Miscellaneous                 |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          | p          |          |       |
| transportation                |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| vehicles                      |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-------------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Motor vehicle                 |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p9         |              |          | p        | p          |          | c9    |
| and bicycle                   |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| manufacturing                 |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-------------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Movie production/distribution |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              | p        | p        | p          |          | p     |
+-------------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Paper and allied              |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          | p          |          |       |
| products                      |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-------------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Printing and                  |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              | p        | p        | p          |          | c     |
| publishing                    |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-------------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Railroad equipment            |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          | p          | p        |       |
+-------------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Stone, clay,                  |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p8         |              | p8       | p8       | p          |          | c9    |
| glass and                     |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| concrete products             |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-------------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Textile mill                  |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          | p        | p          |          |       |
| products                      |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-------------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Tire retreading               |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          | c          |          |       |
+-------------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Winery/brewery                |       |        |              | p3          |             |             |             | p          |              | p        | p        | p          |          | c     |
+-------------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Wood products                 |       |        | c4           |             |             |             |             | p5         |              | p5       | p        | p          |          | c5    |
+-------------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
(Ord. 2180, 2009; Ord. 2213, 2011; Ord. 2214, 2011)

14.207.115 Manufacturing Land Uses: Regulations.
1. Limited to agricultural products grown on-site; provided that structures and areas used for processing shall maintain a minimum distance of seventy-five (75) feet from property lines adjoining residential areas.
2. Except slaughterhouses.
3. Only as a home occupation.
4. Limited to rough milling and planing of products grown on-site with portable equipment.
5. Limited to the manufacture of wood cabinets, furniture, home furnishings, millwork (excluding planing mills), and similar products.
(Ord. 2213, 2011)
6. Only within enclosed buildings and as accessory uses to retail sales. No uses associated with tanning and finishing.
7. Boat building or water related manufacturing uses are allowed in the shoreline management area of the Snohomish River in accordance with the City’s Shoreline Management Master Program and shoreline development regulations as set forth in Chapter 14.250 SMC.
8. Only within enclosed buildings and with accessory uses to retail sales except asbestos.
9. Only within enclosed buildings and with accessory uses to retail sales limited to assembly of elements shipped to the site into a final product for sale on-site. (Ord. 2213, 2011)

14.207.120 Regional Land Use Table.
+--------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
|      Land Use      | Open  | Public |    Urban     |   Single    |     Low     |   Medium    |    High     | Commercial | Neighborhood | Historic | Business | Industrial | Airport  | Mixed |
|                    | Space |  Park  | Horticulture |   Family    |   Density   |   Density   |   Density   |            |   Business   | Business |   Park   |            | Industry |  Use  |
|                    |       |        |              | Residential | Residential | Residential | Residential |            |              | District |          |            |          |       |
+--------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Regional land uses                                                                                                                                                                           |
+--------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Airport/heliport   |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            | p        |       |
+--------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| College/university |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              | p        | p        | p          | p        | p     |
+--------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Jail               |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p3         |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+--------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Landing field      |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            | p        |       |
+--------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Municipal water    |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          | p          |          |       |
| production         |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+--------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Non-hydroelectric  |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          | p          |          |       |
| generation         |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| facility           |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+--------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Public agency      |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          | p          |          |       |
| animal control     |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| facility           |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+--------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Public agency      |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          | p2         |          |       |
| training facility  |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+--------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| School bus         |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          | p        | p          |          |       |
| base               |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+--------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Stadium/arena      |       | c      |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+--------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Transfer station   |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          | c          |          |       |
+--------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Transit bus        |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          | c          |          |       |
| base               |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+--------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Transit park       |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              |          | p        |            | p        | p     |
| and ride lot       |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+--------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Wastewater         |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          | p          |          |       |
| treatment          |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| facility           |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+--------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Zoo/wildlife       |       | c      | p1           |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| exhibit            |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+--------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
(Ord. 2180, 2009; Ord. 2214, 2011; Ord. 2301, 2016)

14.207.125 Regional Land Uses: Regulations.
1. For arboretum -- see Recreational/ Cultural Land Use Table.
2. Except outdoor shooting ranges.
3. Twenty-four (24) hour holding cells as part of City Police Department. (Ord. 2301, 2016)

14.207.130 Recreational/Cultural Land Use Table.
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
|     Land Use      | Open  | Public |    Urban     |   Single    |     Low     |   Medium    |    High     | Commercial | Neighborhood | Historic | Business | Industrial | Airport  | Mixed |
|                   | Space |  Park  | Horticulture |   Family    |   Density   |   Density   |   Density   |            |   Business   | Business |   Park   |            | Industry |  Use  |
|                   |       |        |              | Residential | Residential | Residential | Residential |            |              | District |          |            |          |       |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Parks and Recreation                                                                                                                                                                        |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Campgrounds       | p     | p      |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Community stables |       | c      | c            |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Destination       |       | p      |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              | p        |          |            | p        |       |
| resorts           |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Marina            |       | p      | c            |             |             |             |             | p          |              | p        |          |            |          |       |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Public park       | p     | p      | p            | p           | p           | p           | p           | p          |              | p        | p        | p          | p        | p     |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Public trails     | p     | p      | p            | p           | p           | p           | p           | p          |              | p        | p        | p          | p        | p     |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Recreational      |       | p      |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              |          | p        |            |          |       |
| center            |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Recreational      |       | c      |              |             |             |             |             | p2         |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| vehicle park      |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Amusement/Entertainment                                                                                                                                                                     |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Amusement arcades |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              | p        | p        | p          |          | p     |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Bowling center    |       |        |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              |          | p        |            |          |       |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Golf driving      |       | c      |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            | c        |       |
| range             |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Golf facility     |       | c      |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Community-based   |       |        |              | c8          |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| theater           |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Shoot range       |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          | c6         |          |       |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Sports club       |       | p      |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              | p        | p        | p          |          | p     |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Theater           |       | p      |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              | p        | p        |            |          |       |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Cultural                                                                                                                                                                                    |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Arboretum         |       | p7     |              | p           | p           | p           | p           | p          |              | p        | p        | p          | p        | p     |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Conference        |       | p7     |              |             |             |             |             | p          |              | p        | p        | p          | p        | p     |
| center            |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Library           |       | p7     |              | c           | c           | c           | c           | p          |              | p        |          |            |          | p     |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Museum            |       | p7     |              | c           | c           | c           | c           | p          |              | p        | p        | p          |          | p     |
+-------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
(Ord. 2180, 2009; Ord. 2214, 2011; Ord. 2312, 2016)

14.207.135 Recreational/Cultural Land Uses: Regulations.
1. The following conditions and limitations shall apply:
    a. No stadiums on sites less than ten acres.
    b. Lighting for structures and fields shall be directed so as to minimize the impact on adjacent residential areas.
    c. Structures or service yards shall maintain a minimum distance of fifty (50) feet from adjoining residential property lines.
2. Recreational vehicle parks are subject to the following conditions and limitations:
    a. The maximum length of stay of any unit shall not exceed 180 days.
    b. The minimum distance between recreational vehicle pads shall be no less than ten (10) feet.
    c. Sewage disposal shall be by sewer service obtained from the City of Snohomish sanitary sewer utility.
3. Limited to transient moorage and shall not create a need for on-site services.
4. Only non-commercial recreational facilities.
5. Structures, driving ranges, and lighted areas shall maintain a minimum distance of fifty (50) feet from adjoining residential property lines.
6. Only in an enclosed building.
7. Uses permitted when related to the history, purpose, or function of the public park.
8. The following conditions and limitations shall apply to community-based theaters:
    a. The floor area of the facility is limited to 4,000 square feet.
    b. The facility shall be located within the Historic District.
    c. The site shall have direct access to a street designated as a collector arterial or minor arterial. (Ord. 2214, 2011; Ord. 2312, 2016)

14.207.140 Resource Land Use Table.
+--------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
|      Land Use      | Open  | Public |    Urban     |   Single    |     Low     |   Medium    |    High     | Commercial | Neighborhood | Historic | Business | Industrial | Airport  | Mixed |
|                    | Space |  Park  | Horticulture |   Family    |   Density   |   Density   |   Density   |            |   Business   | Business |   Park   |            | Industry |  Use  |
|                    |       |        |              | Residential | Residential | Residential | Residential |            |              | District |          |            |          |       |
+--------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Resource Land Uses                                                                                                                                                                           |
+--------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Growing and        |       | p      | p            |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| harvesting         |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| crops              |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+--------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Raising livestock, |       |        | p            | p4          |             |             |             | p4         |              |          | p4       | p4         | p4       |       |
| small animals      |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+--------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Forestry                                                                                                                                                                                     |
+--------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Forest research    | p     | p      | p            |             |             |             |             |            |              |          | p2       | p2         | p2       |       |
+--------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Growing and        |       |        | p            |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| harvesting         |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| forest products    |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+--------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Fish and wildlife management                                                                                                                                                                 |
+--------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Aquaculture        |       |        | p1           |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+--------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Hatchery/fish      |       | p1     | p1           |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| preserve           |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+--------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Wildlife shelters  |       |        | c            |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+--------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Mineral                                                                                                                                                                                      |
+--------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Asphalt paving     |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          | c          |          |       |
| mixtures and       |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| blocks             |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+--------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Mineral extraction |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          | c3       | c          |          |       |
+--------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Processing         |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          | c          |          |       |
| of materials       |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+--------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Resource accessory uses                                                                                                                                                                      |
+--------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Resource accessory |       |        | p            |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| uses               |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+--------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
(Ord. 2180, 2009; Ord. 2193, 2010; Ord. 2214, 2011)

14.207.145 Resource Land Uses: Regulations.
1. May be subject to the provisions of the City’s Shoreline Master Program, shoreline development regulations, and floodplain regulations.
2. Only forest research conducted within an enclosed building.
3. Only within an approved enclosed or contained facility subject to appropriate county and state requirements.
4. The keeping of animals shall conform to the provisions of Title 7 SMC. (Ord. 2193, 2010)

14.207.150 Essential Public Facility Regulations.
+------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
|        Land Use        | Open  | Public |    Urban     |   Single    |     Low     |   Medium    |    High     | Commercial | Neighborhood | Historic | Business | Industrial | Airport  | Mixed |
|                        | Space |  Park  | Horticulture |   Family    |   Density   |   Density   |   Density   |            |   Business   | Business |   Park   |            | Industry |  Use  |
|                        |       |        |              | Residential | Residential | Residential | Residential |            |              | District |          |            |          |       |
+------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Essential Public Facilities                                                                                                                                                                      |
+------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Airport                |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            | p        |       |
+------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Earth station          |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          | c          |          |       |
+------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Energy resource        |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          | c          |          |       |
| recovery facility      |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Hazardous waste        |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          | c          |          |       |
| storage &              |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| recycling              |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Natural gas/electrical |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          | p          |          |       |
| power generating       |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
| facility               |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Transfer station       |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          | c          |          |       |
+------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
| Work release           |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          | c          |          |       |
| facility               |       |        |              |             |             |             |             |            |              |          |          |            |          |       |
+------------------------+-------+--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+------------+--------------+----------+----------+------------+----------+-------+
(Ord. 2180, 2009; Ord. 2214, 2011)

14.207.155 Essential Public Facilities: Regulations.
Pursuant to the State Growth Management Act, Ch. 36.70A RCW, the siting and regulation of essential public facilities shall be consistent with the countywide essential public facilities siting process as adopted by Snohomish County.

14.207.160 Accessory Uses.
Accessory uses and structures are allowed for all uses in all land use designations consistent with applicable regulations and unless specifically prohibited or the context clearly indicates otherwise. (Ord. 2082, 2005)

Chapter 14.210 DIMENSIONAL AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS

Sections:
14.210.010   Purpose
14.210.020   Interpretation of Tables
14.210.030   Measurement Methods
14.210.040   Lot Area – Prohibited Reduction
14.210.050   Lot Divided By Land Use Designation Boundary
14.210.060   Division of Lots in Multi-Family Residential Use
14.210.070   Directional Sense of Lots
14.210.080   Contiguous Lots
14.210.090   Non-Contiguous Lots
14.210.100   Setbacks for Single-Family Residential Structures in Other Land Use Designations
14.210.110   Setbacks – Modifications
14.210.120   Setbacks – Utilities
14.210.130   Access Ways, Setbacks – Alleys, Easements, Private Roads
14.210.140   Setbacks – Adjoining Half-Street or Designated Arterial
14.210.150   Setbacks – Projections Allowed
14.210.160   Sight Clearance
14.210.170   Heights – How to Measure
14.210.180   Heights – Exceptions to Limits
14.210.190   Utility Distribution and Transmission Poles and Towers
14.210.210   Special Considerations for Multi-Family Developments in Non-Multi-Family Land Use Designations
14.210.215   Detached Condominiums and Cottage Housing
14.210.220   Mobile Home Park Requirements
14.210.230   Business Park and Airport Industry
14.210.235   Public Park
14.210.240   Design Requirements for Mixed Use and Planned Residential Developments (PRDs)
14.210.250   Accessory Buildings and Miscellaneous Structures in All Land Use Designations
14.210.260   Conversions
14.210.270   Swimming Pools
14.210.280   Street Frontage – Easements
14.210.290   Screening of Exterior Mechanical Equipment for Commercial and Multi-Family Developments
14.210.300   Infrastructure Improvements Required as a Condition of Building Permit
14.210.310   Location of New Utilities
14.210.320   Keeping of Animals
14.210.330   Dimensional Requirements
14.210.340   Severability

14.210.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish requirements for development with regard to basic dimensional standards, as well as specific rules for general application within land use designations. The standards and rules are established to provide flexibility in project design, provide solar access, and maintain privacy between adjacent uses.

14.210.020 Interpretation of Tables.
A. This chapter defines general design and dimension standards for the various land use designations as well as requirements specific to a particular land use designation.
B. There are two separate tables which are arranged in a matrix format. Table 1 contains the requirements for the Commercial and Industry land use designations. Table 2 contains the requirements for all of the residential land use designations, as well as the Open Space and Urban Horticulture land use designations. The types of dimensional standards are listed down the left side of the table and the land use designations are listed at the top. The matrix boxes contain the minimum dimensional requirements of the land use designation. A blank box indicates that there are no specific requirements. (Ord. 2187, 2010)

14.210.030 Measurement Methods.
The following measurement methods shall be used to determine compliance with the dimensional standards in this chapter:
A. Street setbacks shall be measured from the existing edge of a street right-of-way or temporary turnaround.
B. Lot widths shall be measured by scaling a circle of the applicable diameter within the boundaries of the lot; provided, that an access easement shall not be included within the circle.
C. For any calculation which ends in a fraction of 0.5 or greater, the number will be rounded up to the next whole number. Any fraction less than 0.5 will be rounded down to the next whole number.
D. Lot area shall be the total horizontal land area contained within the boundaries of a lot.
E. Open space calculations shall include areas of turf, landscaping, natural vegetation, or surface water retention/detention facilities, including vegetated areas within low impact development facilities. (Ord. 2315, 2016)

14.210.040 Lot Area – Prohibited Reduction.
Any portion of a lot that was required to calculate and ensure compliance with the standards and regulations of this title shall not be subsequently subdivided or segregated from such lot.

14.210.050 Lot Divided By Land Use Designation Boundary.
When a lot is divided by a land use designation boundary, the following rules shall apply:
A. When a lot contains both residential and non-residential land uses, the boundary between shall be considered a lot line for determining permitted building height and required setbacks on the site.
B. Uses on each portion of the lot shall only be those permitted in the land use designation applicable to such portion.

14.210.060 Division of Lots in Multi-Family Residential Use.
Where a lot is devoted to a Multi-family residential use involving more than one separate building, such lot shall not be divided except when each proposed division complies with the requirements as to minimum lot area, setback, parking, and other conditions required for the land use designation in which such lot is located, except as provided for unit lot subdivisions in SMC 14.215.125. (Ord. 2240, 2012)

14.210.070 Directional Sense of Lots.
For the purpose of applying regulations having a directional relationship to lots, the directional sense of lots shall be determined as follows:
A. Front Direction. 
    1. When a lot adjoins one street, front direction shall be toward the street.
    2. When the lot adjoins two streets which intersect on the boundaries of such lot, front direction shall be toward that street from which the address is based and the primary pedestrian entrance is taken.
    3. When the lot adjoins two streets which do not intersect on the boundaries of such lot, front direction may be taken toward either street; provided, that no other condition exists which, in the discretion of the City Planner, dictates the front direction.
    4. When the lot adjoins no street and access is by a private easement, the City Planner shall have discretionary authority to determine the front direction, considering location of entrance to such lot, topography, orientation of the proposed building, orientation of existing buildings and/or logical orientation of future buildings on adjoining lots, and any other considerations pertinent to a specific case.
B. Rear direction shall be taken as opposite to the front direction, or as nearly so as the lot shape permits.
C. Side direction shall be taken at a ninety-degree angle to the front direction, or as nearly so as the lot shape permits.

14.210.080 Contiguous Lots.
Contiguous lots, owned by the same person, may be used to satisfy the requirements of the respective land use designation, if the property owner is willing to consolidate the lots to reflect the single use of the land under the provisions of a recorded covenant.

14.210.090 Non-Contiguous Lots.
Non-contiguous lots, which are owned by the same individual but physically separated by a street, alley, river, or some other form of manmade or natural barrier, shall not be used jointly to satisfy the requirements of any land use designation except for off-street parking as described in Chapter 14.235 SMC and Business Parks as described in SMC 14.205.055. (Ord. 2087, 2005)

14.210.100 Setbacks for Single-Family Residential Structures in Other Land Use Designations.
All single-family residential structures in any Multi-family, Commercial, or Industry land use designation shall be required to meet the minimum setback requirements of the Single-Family Residential land use designation as set forth in SMC 14.210.330, as it now reads or is hereinafter amended. If any single-family structure is converted to a use other than single-family residential, it shall be required to meet the minimum requirements of the land use designation where it is located. (Ord. 2187, 2010)

14.210.110 Setbacks – Modifications.
The following setback modifications are permitted:
A. When a lot in a single-family designated area is located between lots having non-conforming front yard setbacks, the required front yard setback for such lot may be the average of the two (2) non-conforming setbacks or 60 percent of the required street setback, whichever results in the greater street setback.
B. When deviations from standard setbacks are permitted for unit lot subdivisions pursuant to the provisions of SMC 14.215.125. (Ord. 2240, 2012; Ord. 2296, 2016)

14.210.120 Setbacks – Utilities.
A. In subdivisions and short plats, areas used to convey public utility services shall be contained in separate tracts, rights-of-way, or easements.
B. For other types of land development permits, easements shall be used to delineate such corridors.
C. All buildings shall maintain a minimum distance of five (5) feet from an access easement.

14.210.130 Access Ways, Setbacks – Alleys, Easements, Private Roads.
Vehicle access points from garages, carports, or fenced parking areas shall be set back from the alley property line, easement line, or private roadway, so that an approach apron of at least twenty-five (25) feet is provided.

14.210.140 Setbacks – Adjoining Half-Street or Designated Arterial.
In addition to providing the standard street setback, a lot adjoining a half-street or half of a designated arterial may be required to provide an additional width of street setback sufficient to accommodate construction of the planned half-street or arterial.

14.210.150 Setbacks – Projections Allowed.
Certain structures may project into the required setbacks as follows:
A. For ground and upper floor uses in all districts and for upper floor uses only in the Historic Business District; fireplace structures, bay or garden windows, enclosed stair landings, closets, or similar structures may project into any setback; provided, that such projections are:
    1. Limited to two (2) per façade;
    2. Not wider than seven (7) feet; and
    3. Not more than twenty-four (24) inches into an interior setback or twenty-four (24) inches into a street or rear yard setback.
B. Uncovered porches and decks, which exceed eighteen (18) inches above the finished grade, may project:
    1. Eighteen (18) inches into interior setbacks; and/or
    2. Five (5) feet into the street setback.
C. Uncovered porches and decks, not exceeding eighteen (18) inches above the finished grade, may project to within five (5) feet of the rear property line.
D. Roof eaves, if at least seven (7) feet measured vertically above finish ground level in the vicinity of the projection, may not project more than twenty-four (24) inches into any required setback.

14.210.160 Sight Clearance.
At all intersections between streets, between streets and alleys, and between streets and private driveways, there shall be no sight obstruction. A visibility triangle shall be maintained for all corner lots in all residential districts. The visibility triangle shall be determined by measuring lines from the intersection of the property lines abutting two (2) intersecting streets for a distance of fifteen (15) feet in both directions. The terminus of the two line segments shall be connected by a third line to complete the area of the triangle in which sight obstruction shall not be permitted in conjunction with the normal side yard setback requirement of each land use designation.

14.210.170 Heights – How to Measure.
The building height is the vertical distance from the average adjoining curb elevation to the highest point of the roof surface of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof, and to the mean height level between the eaves and ridge for a gable, hip or gambrel roof; provided, however, that where the buildings are set back more than ten feet from the property line adjacent to a street, the height of the building shall be measured from the average elevation of the finished grade of the building.

14.210.180 Heights – Exceptions to Limits.
The following structures may be erected above the height limits set forth in SMC 14.210.330:
A. Roof structures housing or screening elevators, fire access stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or similar equipment required for building operation and maintenance.
B. Fire or parapet walls, skylights, flagpoles, chimneys, weathervanes smokestacks, church steeples, utility line towers, and poles.

14.210.190 Utility Distribution and Transmission Poles and Towers.
A conditional use permit shall be required for utility transmission poles and towers located on private property, if their height exceeds fifty (50) feet above the grade at the base of the pole. Utility distribution poles and towers are defined as those that support the systems for serving power, phone, television, and other wire utilities to the immediate area in which they are located. Utility transmission poles and towers are defined as those that support the systems for serving power, phone, television, and other wire utilities to utility distribution facilities.

14.210.210 Special Considerations for Multi-Family Developments in Non-Multi-Family Land Use Designations.
A. A Multi-family development outside the Historic District shall be reviewed consistent with the requirements of Chapter 14.230 SMC.
B. All Multi-family developments shall provide 20 percent of the site in open space.
C. All Multi-family developments shall meet the dimensional requirements of the MF-18 designation as set forth in SMC 14.210.330. The permitted density limitation of 18 dwellings per acre shall not apply where a higher residential density is authorized by Chapter 14.285 SMC. (Ord. 2104, 2006; Ord. 2143, 2008)

14.210.215 Detached Condominiums and Cottage Housing.
A. The purpose of this section is to: 1) Allow for the development of multiple detached dwellings without the subdivision of land in land use designations where multifamily dwellings are allowed; 2) Provide for innovative development of detached dwellings as an alternative to conventional attached multifamily dwellings or conventional single family dwellings upon individual lots; 3) Provide additional options for achievement of urban densities within the City; 4) Implement the Washington State Growth Management Act and the City of Snohomish Comprehensive Plan; and 5) Protect and advance the public’s health, safety, and welfare.
B. The development of more than one detached dwelling per lot within the Low Density Residential, Medium Density Residential, High Density Residential, Commercial, Mixed Use, Business Park, and Historic District land use designations is permitted only as detached condominium or cottage housing development.
C. Detached condominium and cottage housing shall conform to the provisions of this section.
D. All applicable development regulations required by the Snohomish Municipal Code shall apply, including but not limited to off-street parking, provisions for utilities, and emergency access. Where a conflict occurs, the provisions of this section shall control.
E. On a lot to be used for a detached condominium or cottage housing development, existing detached single-family residential structures, which may be nonconforming with respect to the standards of this section, shall be permitted to remain, but the extent of the nonconformity may not be increased.
F. Maximum residential density shall not exceed the density allowed in the land use designation.
G. Detached condominium and cottage housing development shall adhere to applicable design standards for multifamily development and for Planned Residential Developments (PRD).
H. Structures and accessory structures shall exhibit and embody an architectural style. Architectural detailing shall be provided on all facades. More than one architectural style may be used within a detached condominium development.
I. Accessory dwelling units are not permitted in detached condominium or cottage housing developments.
J. Detached condominium developments shall conform to the following provisions:
    1. Internal streets may be either public or private. Public streets shall conform to the City of Snohomish Engineering Design and Construction Standards.
    2. Private streets shall include the following improvements. The City Engineer may authorize variations to the following improvements when no adverse impact to public health, safety, and welfare would occur:
        a. A six-inch curb with gutter on each side.
        b. Street trees on one side.
        c. At least one side of each street shall include:
            i. An eight-foot-wide parking aisle along the inside of the curb, a landscape strip along the outside of the curb, and a sidewalk along the outside of the landscape strip. The landscape strip shall have a minimum width of four feet and the sidewalk shall have a minimum width of four feet.
            ii. Street light standards and fixtures that achieve illumination standards used for public streets. Street lights with decorative design detailing are encouraged.
        d. Unobstructed roadway width of 26 feet and as approved by the City Engineer.
    3. A pedestrian circulation system consisting of sidewalks and walkways shall provide access to the adjacent public streets, all homes, and common recreation areas.
    4. Residential structures shall be limited to 2,000 square feet of living area. Porches, garages, and basements are not included in the calculation of living area.
    5. Residential structures shall not exceed two stories and thirty feet in height.
    6. Minimum setbacks from perimeter property lines and from internal boundaries of exclusive use shall be as follows:
        a. Front. Ten feet, except that garages with doors facing the front shall be set back twenty feet.
        b. Side. Five feet, except that no side setback shall be required for detached garages located in the rear half of the lot or area of exclusive use.
        c. Rear. Fifteen feet for the dwelling. Garages with doors facing the rear shall be set back twenty feet. No rear setback shall be required for detached garages with doors facing the front or side.
        d. Arterial street. An additional five feet of setback shall be required where the building site abuts an arterial street.
        e. Side and rear setbacks shall provide for a minimum of 400 square feet of private open space for each dwelling.
    7. Design standards for Planned Residential Developments (PRD) and Small Lot Development shall apply.
K. Cottage housing developments shall conform to the following provisions:
    1. Cottage housing developments shall contain a minimum of four cottages arranged on at least two sides of a common open space, with a maximum of twelve cottages per development.
    2. Height Limit and Roof Pitch. 
        a. Maximum building height shall be eighteen feet.
        b. The ridge of pitched roofs with a minimum slope of 6:12 may extend up to twenty-eight feet. The ridge of pitched roofs with a minimum slope of 4:12 may extend up to twenty-three feet. All parts of the roof above eighteen feet shall be pitched.
    3. Lot Coverage and Floor Area. 
        a. The overall maximum lot coverage permitted for principal and accessory structures shall not exceed fifty percent.
        b. The lot coverage for an individual principal structure in a cottage housing development shall not exceed 650 square feet.
        c. The total floor area of each cottage shall not exceed 1,000 square feet.
        d. The floor area of enclosed space located either above or below the main level shall not exceed fifty percent of the enclosed space of the main level, or 375 square feet, whichever is less. This provision shall not apply to attic and crawl spaces.
    4. Minimum Setback from Perimeter Property Lines. 
        a. Front Yard. Ten feet.
        b. Side Yards. Five feet. Where there is a principal entrance along a side facade, the side yard shall be no less than ten feet along that side for the length of the pedestrian route. This ten foot side yard shall apply only to a height of eight feet above the access route. Where a side yard abuts a public street, the minimum side yard setback shall be no less than ten feet.
        c. Rear Yards. Not less than ten feet.
    5. Interior Separation for Cottage Housing Developments. There shall be a minimum separation of six feet between principal structures. Facades of principal structures facing facades of accessory structures shall be separated by a minimum of three feet. Where there is a principal entrance on an interior facade of either or both of the facing facades, the minimum separation shall be ten feet.
    6. Required Open Space. 
        a. Quantity of Open Space. A minimum of 300 square feet per unit of landscaped open space is required. This quantity shall be allotted as follows:
            i. A minimum of 150 square feet per unit shall be private usable open space; and
            ii. A minimum of 150 square feet per dwelling unit shall be provided as common open space.
        b. Development Standards. 
            i. The minimum horizontal dimension for private or common open space shall be ten feet.
            ii. Required common open space shall be provided in one contiguous area. Each cottage shall abut the common open space, and the common open space shall have cottages abutting at least two sides.
    7. Parking. 
        a. Access to parking shall be from the alley where the property abuts an alley.
        b. Location. 
            i. Parking may be in or under a structure, or outside a structure, provided that:
                AThe parking is screened from direct view.
                BParking outside a structure may not be located between cottages.
                CParking may not be located in the front yard.
                DParking may be located between any structure and the rear lot line of the lot, or between any structure and a side lot line which is not a street side lot line. (Ord. 2127, 2007)

14.210.220 Mobile Home Park Requirements.
Requests for a conditional use permit for the construction of a mobile home park in the Multi-family designation shall comply with the following requirements:
A. A mobile home park shall obtain a site development plan permit (see Chapter 14.20 SMC).
B. The minimum site for a mobile home park shall be one (1) acre.
C. No more than ten (10) mobile homes may be located on any one (1) acre of ground.
D. Each space or lot upon which a mobile home is to be located shall:
    1. Contain two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet and have a minimum width of thirty (30) feet for single-wides or three thousand two hundred (3,200) square feet of area with forty (40) foot minimum width for double-wides.
    2. Have access from an interior driveway only.
    3. Have a crushed rock or hard surface area upon which the mobile home will be located.
E. All drives within the park shall be paved and appropriate ingress and egress from each public street bordering the mobile home park shall be provided in accordance with the direction of the City Engineer consistent with standard traffic engineering practice.
F. There shall be no less than twelve (12) feet clearance between manufactured homes or any part thereof, and no less than five (5) feet between manufactured homes and any building within the park or from the required fence, wall, or hedge.
G. There shall be a sight obscuring fence, wall, or hedge on all sides of the park, in conformance with Chapter 14.240 SMC.
H. Access roadways, vehicle thoroughfares, and recreational areas shall be provided with adequate area lighting.
I. Electrical distribution and telephone service systems to each space or lot shall be underground, except for outlets and risers at each space or lot.
J. Every mobile home site shall have provisions for electrical, plumbing, and sanitary sewer installation in accordance with all applicable City and state regulations. No mobile home which does not have sanitary facilities shall be allowed in the park.
K. All mobile home parks shall meet the health department regulations of the City, county and state.
L. All mobile homes must be skirted with opaque paneling of wood, metal, plastic, or some other solid and sturdy material around the circumference of the mobile home so that the undercarriage and wheels are covered from view.
M. All internal driveways, excluding parking, shall be paved and have a minimum width of twenty (20) feet, except for one-way roads which shall have a minimum width of fifteen (15) feet.
N. Cul-de-sac turnarounds shall have a minimum pavement width of twenty (20) feet and a minimum turning area diameter of seventy (70) feet.
O. In addition to the two-stall per mobile home pad required in SMC 14.235.170, off-street parking shall be provided at the ratio of one parking space for each four (4) mobile home pads and shall be distributed for convenient access to all pads.
P. A bulk storage and parking area for boats, campers, travel trailers, etc., shall be provided within the mobile home park. A minimum of three hundred (300) square feet of space, exclusive of driveways, shall be provided for every ten (10) mobile home pads. Bulk storage and parking areas shall be separated from all other parking facilities and shall be provided with some means of security. The requirements of this subsection may be waived by the City Planner, if the mobile home park developer/owner agrees to prohibit the storage of such items within the park.
Q. All mobile home parks shall provide adequate fire protection as required by the Fire Marshall in accordance with the Uniform Fire Code.
R. A common recreational facility is suggested for mobile home parks in excess of fifty (50) units but is not required. If a recreational facility is provided, it should be centrally located along with the required open space.
S. The mobile home park shall comply with all other requirements of the Multi-family 18 units per acre land use designation as described in this title.
T. A complete and detailed site plan shall be submitted to the Hearing Examiner for approval together with a separate grade and drainage plan, which shall be reviewed by the City Engineer and City Planner for recommendations to the Hearing Examiner. The site plan shall show the location and dimensions of all contemplated buildings, structures, open space, driveways and roads, recreational areas and other pertinent features which may be necessary to show compliance with the regulations of this section.
U. The developer and/or owner of the mobile home park shall be responsible for ensuring that every mobile home is installed in compliance with the provisions of this section. All improvements and connections shall be made at the time of installation and prior to occupancy.

14.210.230 Business Park and Airport Industry.
A. Chapters 14.205 and 14.207 SMC govern permitted land uses in the business park and airport industry designations.
B. Minimum Area. A minimum of five acres will normally be required for a business park development; however, existing smaller parcels that cannot be aggregated together to establish a five-acre project will be allowed, subject to appropriate review and conditions.
C. Setbacks. Structures shall be a minimum distance of 50 feet from any property line abutting a residential land use designation. Where not abutting a residential designation, the minimum setback shall be zero, subject to compliance with the landscape screening requirements in Chapter 14.240 SMC.
D. Landscaping and Open Space. 
    1. The site shall consist of not less than 20 percent landscaping and/or open space, which open space may consist of undisturbed vegetation or water and will include the five percent area of required landscaping. In addition, any parking lot of over 20 cars must provide a minimum of one contiguous 100-square-foot landscaped island within the parking area for each 10 spaces. Up to 50 percent of the landscaping and open space requirement for a business park development may be provided by permanent dedication of a conservation easement to the City, a land trust, or another entity acceptable to the City of Snohomish, which easement shall restrict property to remain in open space in perpetuity within the same business park designation as the development in question.
    2. At least five percent of the site must be in formal developed landscaping no less than 2,000 square feet in area and oriented towards the main entrance and public right-of-way.
    3. Landscaping Adjacent to Streets. All uses which adjoin a street will also provide a landscape corridor of trees, planted no more than 50 feet on center. Landscape plant materials used in low impact development facilities may also be considered. Such landscaping shall not obscure the sight distance for traffic and pedestrians at the intersection of streets or driveways.
E. Access. 
    1. Access Limitation. Business Parks shall have access to at least one major arterial. Access to the adjacent arterial and other streets will be provided in accordance with City traffic plans and will be constructed per Public Works Design and Construction Standards.
    2. Access Assurance to Adjacent Properties. At the time of permit review the City may require as a condition of approval either:
        a. That a frontage road or marginal access street be constructed to provide access to the arterial for adjacent properties.
        b. That the applicant grants to adjacent properties the right to use the applicant’s arterial access.
F. Height Limitation. Building heights shall not exceed 45 feet. One additional foot of building height may be added for each additional foot of setback on all sides provided that the total building height shall not exceed 60 feet. (Ord. 2296, 2016; Ord. 2315, 2016)

14.210.235 Public Park.
A. At the time that a change or intensification of land use, or new construction or development is proposed, the City Planner shall evaluate the conditions associated with the proposed development, the existing property, and the surrounding property and pursuant to SMC 14.05.050 issue written findings regarding the applicable land development regulations. The City Planner’s determination and decision regarding applicable development regulations shall be appealable as prescribed by Chapter 14.20 SMC.
B. In determining the development regulations applicable to property designated Public Park, the City Planner shall consider factors such as:
    1. Existing and proposed land uses, facilities, and improvements.
    2. Development regulations applicable to nearby properties.
    3. Limitations or controls upon construction, land use, environmental protection, transportation systems, etc., warranted to minimize the potential for unmitigated adverse impacts. and establish written dimensional standards applicable to the subject property. (Ord. 2214, 2011)

14.210.240 Design Requirements for Mixed Use and Planned Residential Developments (PRDs).
A. Chapter 14.20 SMC governs the process for obtaining an approved site development plan when required.
B. Design requirements for PRDs are shown in SMC 14.210.330 Table 1 and in Chapter 14.220 SMC.
C. Design requirements for site development plans in the Mixed Use designation are shown in SMC 14.210.330 Table 1. (Ord. 2111, 2006)

14.210.250 Accessory Buildings and Miscellaneous Structures in All Land Use Designations.
Accessory buildings and miscellaneous structures which are clearly incidental and compatible with the permitted uses allowed in each land use designation shall be allowed in all land use designations, subject to the approval of the City Planner. Long-term storage of commercial vehicles and materials in excess of thirty (30) days shall be prohibited in all residential designations. Accessory buildings and miscellaneous structures shall not be located closer than five (5) feet to any lot line, except the front lot line from which the normal setback shall be observed, and shall not exceed the height and open space restrictions of the permitted uses within the respective land use designation. Accessory uses and miscellaneous structures attached to the main structure are considered a part of that structure and must meet the setbacks for that designation.

14.210.260 Conversions.
Conversions of existing residential structures to provide additional dwelling units shall comply with the requirements of this section.
A. No conversions shall be permitted in the Single-Family land use designation other than to provide living quarters for servants, temporary guests, and relatives by blood or marriage, and accessory dwelling units as allowed by this title.
B. Conversion in all other land use designations where residential units are allowed shall comply with the following:
    1. All requirements under the respective land use designation shall be adhered to.
    2. Dwelling units resulting from conversions shall include a kitchen and separate bathroom.
    3. Off-street parking shall be provided as specified under Chapter 14.235 SMC.

14.210.270 Swimming Pools.
A. Excavated or surface type swimming pools may be installed for private or communal residential use within all residential designations.
B. A six-foot (6’) high fence of chain link, wood, or other secure material with locking gate shall be constructed around all swimming pools to control access by unauthorized or unattended persons.

14.210.280 Street Frontage – Easements.
Every lot in a residential or urban horticulture land use designation shall either adjoin a public street or have access to a public street by a private corridor. Such corridors shall be permanently committed as access for this lot by recorded document. Private corridors shall have a minimum width of twenty (20) feet, when serving property with a maximum development potential of four (4) standard lots and/or four (4) residential units, as defined by the minimum lot size and density of the respective land use designation. Property with a development potential in excess of four lots and/or four residential units shall require a minimum private corridor width of forty (40) feet.

14.210.290 Screening of Exterior Mechanical Equipment for Commercial and Multi-Family Developments.
Either visual or sound screening may be required to reduce the effects of exterior mechanical systems on the adjacent rights-of-way and properties.

14.210.300 Infrastructure Improvements Required as a Condition of Building Permit.
As a condition of issuing a building permit for substantial improvements on the site, the City may require improvements or repairs to: the adjacent curb, gutters, sidewalks, water, wastewater and stormwater utilities, and stormwater facilities as required pursuant to Ch. 15.16 SMC. (Ord. 2173, 2009)

14.210.310 Location of New Utilities.
Utilities associated with new construction located in all land use designations shall be constructed underground. Utilities associated with remodel or construction of additions to existing structures located in all land use designations should be constructed underground whenever practical.

14.210.320 Keeping of Animals.
Dimensional standards related to the keeping of animals and structures for the keeping of animals are as specified by this Chapter and Chapter 7.04 SMC. (Ord. 2193, 2010)

14.210.330 Dimensional Requirements.
+-----------------------------+------------+----------+----------+----------+----------+-----------+
|                             | Commercial | Historic | Business | Industry | Airport  | Mixed Use |
|                             |     CO     | District |   Park   |   IND    | Industry |    MU     |
|                             |            | Business |    BP    |          |    AI    |           |
|                             |            |    HB    |          |          |          |           |
+-----------------------------+------------+----------+----------+----------+----------+-----------+
| Minimum Lot Size,           | 5,000      | none     | 20,000   | none     | 25,000   | 5,000     |
| in sq. ft.                  |            |          |          |          |          |           |
+-----------------------------+------------+----------+----------+----------+----------+-----------+
| Lot Width, in feet          | 50         | none     | none     | none     | none     | 50        |
+-----------------------------+------------+----------+----------+----------+----------+-----------+
| Permitted maximum           | 18         | 18       | 18       | na       | 1 per 10 | 18        |
| density, du/ac              |            |          |          |          | acres    |           |
+-----------------------------+------------+----------+----------+----------+----------+-----------+
| Front Yard Setback,         |            |          |          |          |          |           |
| in feet                     |            |          |          |          |          |           |
+-----------------------------+------------+----------+----------+----------+----------+-----------+
| a. From street              | 0          | 0        | 02       | 0        | 35       | 0         |
+-----------------------------+------------+----------+----------+----------+----------+-----------+
| b. From property            | 0          | 0        | 02       | 0        | 0        | 0         |
| line                        |            |          |          |          |          |           |
+-----------------------------+------------+----------+----------+----------+----------+-----------+
| Side Yard Setback2,         | 0          | 0        | 0        | 0        | 0        | 0         |
| 3, in feet                  |            |          |          |          |          |           |
+-----------------------------+------------+----------+----------+----------+----------+-----------+
| Side Yard abuts residential |            |          | 50       |          |          |           |
| designation                 |            |          |          |          |          |           |
+-----------------------------+------------+----------+----------+----------+----------+-----------+
| Rear Yard Setback,          | 0          | 0        | 02       | 0        | 0        | 0         |
| in feet                     |            |          |          |          |          |           |
+-----------------------------+------------+----------+----------+----------+----------+-----------+
| Rear Yard abuts residential |            |          | 50       |          |          |           |
| designation2                |            |          |          |          |          |           |
+-----------------------------+------------+----------+----------+----------+----------+-----------+
| Rear access from            | na         | 15       |          |          |          |           |
| an alley                    |            |          |          |          |          |           |
+-----------------------------+------------+----------+----------+----------+----------+-----------+
| Open space (vegetated)4     | 15% 4      |          | 20%      | 15%      | 20%      | 15%       |
+-----------------------------+------------+----------+----------+----------+----------+-----------+
| a. Percent landscaped       | 5%         | 0%       | 5%       | 5%       | 5%       | 5%        |
| (excl. screening)           |            |          |          |          |          |           |
+-----------------------------+------------+----------+----------+----------+----------+-----------+
| Height limitation5          | 35         | 40       | 45       | 40       | 40       | 35        |
| in feet6                    |            |          |          |          |          |           |
+-----------------------------+------------+----------+----------+----------+----------+-----------+
1An alternative maximum density may be permitted by Chapter 14.285 SMC.
2Subject to compliance with landscape screening requirements of Chapter 14.240 SMC.
3Side yards abutting streets shall conform to one-half (1/2) the front yard setbacks.
4Twenty percent (20%) vegetated open space required for multi-family developments.
5Measured per SMC 14.210.170.
6Height limitation of fifty-five (55) feet for public schools and other public educational facilities such as aquatic centers, stadiums and gymnasiums.
+-----------------------+-------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------+--------+-------------+--------+
|                       | Open  |    Urban     |   Single    | Low Density | Medium Density |    High     | Public |
|                       | Space | Horticulture |   Family    | Residential |  Residential   |   Density   |  Park  |
|                       |       |              | Residential |             |                | Residential |        |
+-----------------------+-------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------+--------+-------------+--------+
| "                     |  OS   |      UH      |     SF      |     LD      |  MD   |   MD   |     HD      |   PP   |
|                       |       |              |             |             |       |  MHP   |             |        |
+-----------------------+-------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------+--------+-------------+--------+
| Minimum Lot Size,     | none  | 10 acres     | 7,200       | 7,200       | 6,000 | 1 acre | 5,000       | none   |
| in sq. ft.            |       |              |             |             |       |        |             |        |
+-----------------------+-------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------+--------+-------------+--------+
| Lot Width, in feet    | none  | none         | 60          | 60          | 50    | 50     | 50          | none   |
+-----------------------+-------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------+--------+-------------+--------+
| Permitted density,    | na    | 1 per        | 6           | 12          | 18    | 10     | 24          | na     |
| du/ac1                |       | 10 acres     |             |             |       |        |             |        |
+-----------------------+-------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------+--------+-------------+--------+
| Front Yard Setback,   |       |              | 2           | 2           |       |        |             |        |
| in feet               |       |              |             |             |       |        |             |        |
+-----------------------+-------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------+--------+-------------+--------+
| a. From arterial      | 20    | 20           | 20          | 20          | 20    |        | 20          | 10     |
+-----------------------+-------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------+--------+-------------+--------+
| b. From all other     | 20    | 20           | 20          | 20          | 20    |        | 20          | 7      |
| streets               |       |              |             |             |       |        |             |        |
+-----------------------+-------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------+--------+-------------+--------+
| c. From prop. line    | 10    | 10           | 20          | 10          | 10    |        | 10          | 7      |
| (no street)           |       |              |             |             |       |        |             |        |
+-----------------------+-------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------+--------+-------------+--------+
| Side Yard Setback3,   | 0     | 10           | 5           | 6           | 8     |        | 10          | 7      |
| in feet               |       |              |             |             |       |        |             |        |
+-----------------------+-------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------+--------+-------------+--------+
| a. From residential   | 0     | 10           |             |             |       |        |             | 7      |
+-----------------------+-------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------+--------+-------------+--------+
| Rear Yard Setback,    | 0     | 10           | 204         | 20          | 15    |        | 10          | 7      |
| in feet               |       |              |             |             |       |        |             |        |
+-----------------------+-------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------+--------+-------------+--------+
| Lot coverage          | 20%   | 20%          |             | 80%         | 80%   |        | 80%         | 7      |
+-----------------------+-------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------+--------+-------------+--------+
| Open space            | 80%   | 70%          |             | 20%         | 20%   |        | 20%         | 7      |
+-----------------------+-------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------+--------+-------------+--------+
| a. Percent landscaped | na    | na           |             | 5%          | 5%    |        | 5%          | 7      |
+-----------------------+-------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------+--------+-------------+--------+
| Height limitation5    | 35    | 40           | 35          | 35          | 35    |        | 40          | 35     |
| in feet6              |       |              |             |             |       |        |             |        |
+-----------------------+-------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------+--------+-------------+--------+
1An alternative maximum density may be permitted by Chapter 14.285 SMC.
2Different front setback regulations apply if a PRD. See Chapter 14.220 SMC.
3Side yards abutting streets shall conform to 1/2 the front yard setbacks.
4If the property has an alley, vehicle access is required to be from the alley. Garage setback facing the alley SMC 14.210.130.
5Measured per SMC 14.210.170.
6Height limitation of fifty-five (55) feet for public schools and other educational facilities such as aquatic centers, stadiums and gymnasiums.
7Dimensional requirements as provided by SMC 14.210.235.
(Ord. 2143, 2008; Ord. 2187, 2010; Ord. 2214, 2011; Ord. 2296, 2016)

14.210.340 Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance or its application to any person or circumstance be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid for any reason, or should any portion of this ordinance be preempted by state or federal law or regulation, such a decision or preemption shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of the remaining portions of this ordinance or its application to any other persons or circumstances. (Ord. 2093, 2005)

Chapter 14.212 PILCHUCK DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS

Sections:
Article I.  DEVELOPMENT CODE APPLICABILITY
    14.212.110   Purpose and Intent of Pilchuck District Land Use Regulations
    14.212.120   Administration and Interpretation
    14.212.130   Applicability
    14.212.140   Development Review and Approval
    14.212.150   Pilchuck District SEPA Planned Action
    14.212.160   Transportation Impacts and Concurrency
    14.212.170   Deviation from Code Requirements and Determination of Equivalence
Article II. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND ZONES
    14.212.200   General Requirements for Development
    14.212.210   Regulating Plan Adopted
    14.212.220   Zones
Article III. STREETS AND SUBDIVISIONS
    14.212.300   Street Types and Design
    14.212.310   Subdivision, Lots, and Blocks
    14.212.320   Public Frontage Construction
Article IV. BUILDING AND SITE USE
    14.212.400   Purpose
    14.212.410   Allowed Uses
Article V.  SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
    14.212.500   Site Development
    14.212.510   Nonconforming Structures
    14.212.520   Structures with Potential Historic Value
    14.212.530   Building Height Provisions
    14.212.540   Residential Densities
    14.212.550   Building Disposition and Configuration
Article VI. PARKING REGULATIONS
    14.212.600   Purpose
    14.212.610   Parking Access, Screening, Lighting, and Location
    14.212.620   Off-Street Parking Calculations
    14.212.630   Bicycle Parking Standards
Article VII. LANDSCAPE REGULATIONS
    14.212.700   Landscape and Open Space Standards
Article VIII. DESIGN STANDARDS
    14.212.800   Purpose
    14.212.810   Context
    14.212.820   Applicability
    14.212.830   Site Design – General
    14.212.840   Building Design – General
    14.212.850   Standards Specific to the Neighborhood Single Family Zone
    14.212.860   Standards Specific to the Neighborhood Townhouse Zone
    14.212.870   Standards Specific to the Neighborhood Center Zone
    14.212.880   Standards Specific to the Neighborhood Civic Zone
Article IX. SIGN STANDARDS [Reserved]
Article X.  DESCRIPTION OF TERMS
    14.212.1010  Private Frontage Types
    14.212.1020  Definitions.

Article I. DEVELOPMENT CODE APPLICABILITY

14.212.110 Purpose and Intent of Pilchuck District Land Use Regulations.
In addition to the general purposes put forth by SMC 14.05.020, the purposes of this chapter include: conservation of land, energy, and natural resources; promotion of investment in property and improvements; reduction in vehicular traffic; implementation of Smart Growth urban planning and design principles; efficient use of public funds and infrastructure; promotion of active lifestyles; implementation of strategic plan objectives and strategies; and enhanced certainty regarding future land use and development.
This chapter promulgates an urban form-based code rather than the more traditional land use based code. Instead of emphasizing segregation of land uses, this form-based approach is primarily intended to address the size, type, and orientation of new development so that it is visually and functionally compatible and complementary. The standards applicable to each zone address a different building form consistent with the preferred types of land uses. Standards for urban form address the street, site, and building design with the intent to achieve a consistent and integrated streetscape that functions as an active and interesting public realm.

14.212.120 Administration and Interpretation.
Land use reviews that occur under this chapter are intended to be administrative decisions to the extent possible to minimize the financial and temporal costs to applicants while providing for appropriate opportunities for public review and comment on development applications.
This chapter shall be administered and interpreted consistent with the provisions of Chapter 14.05 SMC. In the event that a provision of this chapter allows the Review Authority to exercise discretion in the application of a specific standard or requirement, but does not identify specific criteria for a decision, the following criteria shall be used in exercising discretion:
A. The proposed project complies with this chapter and all other applicable provisions of Title 14 SMC;
B. The decision is consistent with the intent of the Pilchuck District land use designation and all applicable Comprehensive Plan goals and policies; and
C. The exercise of discretion by the Review Authority will act to ensure the compatibility of the proposed project with its site and context.

14.212.130 Applicability.
This chapter carries out the policies of the Pilchuck District Subarea Plan and other applicable City of Snohomish Comprehensive Plan goals and policies by classifying and regulating the use of land and structures in Pilchuck District land use designation as established on the City’s Land Use Designation Map.
A. Minimum requirements. The provisions of this chapter shall be minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. When this chapter provides for discretion on the part of a Review Authority, that discretion may be exercised to impose more stringent requirements than those set forth in this chapter, as may be determined by the Review Authority to be necessary to promote appropriate land use and development, environmental resource protection, and the other purposes of Title 14 SMC.
B. Conflicts. All applicable regulations required by the Snohomish Municipal Code shall apply, including but not limited to provisions for utilities, access, and critical areas. Except in cases where land use and development are limited by code provisions for protection of critical areas and regulated shorelines, the provisions of this chapter shall control. Where in conflict, numerical standards in the tables and figures shall take precedence over graphic representations.
C. Other requirements may apply. Nothing in this chapter eliminates the need for obtaining any other permits required by the City, or any permit, approval, or license required by the City or other agency.

14.212.140 Development Review and Approval.
A. Approval of a site development plan shall be required for all new development and redevelopment that alters the site or existing building footprint except for the development or redevelopment of a single-family residence. Applications for site development plan approval and the review thereof shall conform to the provisions of this title.
B. Unless waived by the Planning Director, applicants for a site development plan shall participate in a pre-application process or conference with City staff prior to formal application.
C. Permit applicants may request and the Planning Director may approve site development plans in an incremental or phased manner so that fundamental aspects or features of a planned development are determined and resolved before construction plans are prepared. Permit review fees shall be assessed for each phase of review. (Ord. 2347, 2018)

14.212.150 Pilchuck District SEPA Planned Action.
A. The City has adopted a “Planned Action” in Ordinance 2210.
B. Where a development proposal meets the requirements of Ordinance 2210 and qualifies as a Planned Action, the responsible official shall not be required to issue a threshold determination or EIS.
C. Nothing in this section limits the City from using this chapter or other applicable law to place conditions on a Planned Action project through the normal project review and permitting process.
D. Public notice for projects that qualify as Planned Actions shall be provided if and as required for the underlying permit. If notice is otherwise required for the underlying permit, the notice shall state that the project has qualified as a Planned Action. If notice is not otherwise required for the underlying permit, no special notice is required. (Ord. 2217, 2011)

14.212.160 Transportation Impacts and Concurrency.
A. The environmental impact statement (EIS) prepared for the Pilchuck District Subarea Plan evaluated the cumulative transportation impacts of new development within the Pilchuck District. Measures that typically provide mitigation for project-specific transportation impacts include payment of traffic impact fees, construction or provision of off-street parking, and construction of street frontage improvements.
B. Applications for new development shall conform to the concurrency provisions of SMC 14.20.090.

14.212.170 Deviation from Code Requirements and Determination of Equivalence.
A. Deviation from the requirements of this chapter may be approved by variance as provided by Chapter 14.70 SMC, and by determination of equivalence according to the criteria in this section.
B. A permit applicant may request in writing that the City Planner determine that a proposed deviation from the strict provisions of this chapter is equal in kind, extent, purpose, and impact as compliance with the applicable development regulation. A separate written request and determination shall be made for each such determination of equivalence. The City Planner’s decision upon a requested determination of equivalence shall be made in writing as a Type 1 permit.
C. The City Planner’s decision to approve a requested determination of equivalence shall be appealable to the Hearing Examiner as provided by Chapters 14.20 and 14.90 SMC.
D. The City Planner’s decision to deny a requested determination of equivalence shall not be subject to appeal. Upon the denial of a requested determination of equivalence, the applicant may submit an application for a variance to the subject development regulation as provided by Chapter 14.70 SMC.
E. The City Planner may approve a requested determination of equivalence when all of the following criteria are satisfied:
    1. The request constitutes an equivalent and alternative method of achieving the purpose and intent of the subject development regulation.
    2. The extent to which the proposed land development implements the purpose and intent of this chapter is not compromised or diminished.
    3. No adverse environmental or land use impact would result.
    4. The approved deviation is the minimum necessary to achieve the requested relief.
F. In approving a requested determination of equivalence, the City Planner may impose conditions of approval as necessary to ensure that the decisional criteria above are satisfied. The decision to impose conditions shall be appealable to the Hearing Examiner as provided by Chapters 14.20 and 14.90 SMC.

Article II. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND ZONES

14.212.200 General Requirements for Development.
Except as provided for nonconforming uses in SMC 14.212.410(G) and nonconforming structures in section SMC 14.212.510, each land use and/or structure shall be established, constructed, reconstructed, altered, moved, or replaced in compliance with the following requirements.
A. Allowable uses. As described in SMC 14.212.410, land uses shall be consistent with Table IV-1.
B. Permit and approval requirements. Any site development plan permit or other approval required under Article I shall be obtained before the issuance of any required grading, building, or other construction permit and before the proposed use is constructed, otherwise established, put into operation, or expanded.
C. Development standards, conditions of approval. Each land use and structure shall comply with the development standards of this chapter, other applicable standards in the SMC, and any applicable conditions imposed by a previously granted land use permit.

14.212.210 Regulating Plan Adopted.
The Regulating Plan for the Pilchuck District is hereby adopted by reference as an implementing measure of the Pilchuck District land use designation. Amendments to the Regulating Plan shall be processed as Comprehensive Plan amendments under Chapter 14.15 SMC.
[IMAGE: <14.212.210_001.jpg>]
(Ord. 2347, 2018)

14.212.220 Zones.
The Regulating Plan defines (4) four zones and one (1) building height overlay. Each zone is subject to a range of permitted uses and building standards as shown on the tables and illustrations in this chapter.
A. Pilchuck Single-Family. The intent of the Pilchuck Single-Family zone is to allow development that is complementary to the character of the existing small-lot single-family enclaves. New development should be consistent with surrounding development in its scale and placement.
B. Townhouse. The intent of the Townhouse zone is to allow development compatible with the scale and character of the adjacent small-lot single-family development while encouraging additional housing units and allowing street level commercial uses. The small-scale multifamily development and small-scale low-impact street-level commercial uses should employ single-family architectural techniques as to size, proportion, and scale in order to ensure their impacts are comparable to the impacts of the existing small-lot single-family houses.
C. Center. The intent of the Center zone is to enhance the vitality and pedestrian-orientation of the Pilchuck District by creating opportunities for a variety of both business and residential land uses. The standards for land use and building form applicable to this zone are intended to create continuity and compatibility between adjacent developments and to emphasize the relationship of development sites to the public sidewalk. Except for sites adjacent to Second Street, land uses shall be visually and functionally compatible with residential uses. A building height of three (3) stories is permitted by right with one (1) additional story permitted subject to purchase of transferred development rights (TDR), except in the Center with Height Overlay, where two (2) additional stories, for a total of five (5) stories, are permitted with TDR.
D. Civic. The intent of the Civic zone is to address the special requirements of properties owned and managed by public agencies where the public land use would require different standards from typical private development in the Pilchuck District. Typical public land uses are open space and recreational but may include other municipal and community uses. (Ord. 2347, 2018)

Article III. STREETS AND SUBDIVISIONS

14.212.300 Street Types and Design.
A. Street types. Street types identified in this chapter designate the various configurations of streets in the Pilchuck District. These street types are in addition to the street types described in the City’s adopted Engineering Standards applicable to other portions of the City. Pilchuck District street types and designs vary according to the available right-of-way, the adjacent urban use and form, and the functional requirements of the roadway. In all cases, roadways are intended to provide for both motorized and non-motorized transportation modes with slower design speeds to ensure the safety of pedestrians, bicyclists, and motorists. Street standards for Neighborhood, Access, and Community Corridor types include on-street parking, ample sidewalks, pedestrian lighting, and street trees. Intersection design for these classifications should include frequent bulb-outs to promote the safety and convenience of pedestrians and to emphasize slow traffic speeds. The woonerf or pedestrian street type is intended to allow vehicle access as secondary to pedestrian and bicycle access. Due to its intended function, woonerfs do not require separated sidewalks. Woonerf design, including form, relationship of elements, features, and materials should be individually adapted to each circumstance based on the needs of adjacent development, emergency access, anticipated secondary functions of the right-of-way, and community input.
Design standards and classifications for individual roadway segments within the Pilchuck District are shown on Tables III-1 and III-2.
+-----------------------+----------+----------+--------+-------------+----------+---------+---------+--------+----------+
|      Street Type      |  R-O-W   | Pavement | Travel |    Turn     | Parking  | Parking | Planter |  Tree  | Sidewalk |
|                       |  width   |  width   | lanes  | lane/median |   type   |  lane   |  strip  | grates |  width   |
|                       |          |          |        |             |          |  width  |         |        |          |
+-----------------------+----------+----------+--------+-------------+----------+---------+---------+--------+----------+
| Type A – Community    | 80'-100' | 54'      | 11'    | 12'         | Parallel | 10'     | N       | Y      | 13'      |
| Corridor              |          |          |        |             |          |         |         |        |          |
+-----------------------+----------+----------+--------+-------------+----------+---------+---------+--------+----------+
| Type B – Access       | 80'      | 50'      | 10'    | N           | Parallel | 10' /   | N       | Y      | 15'      |
| Street                |          |          |        |             | / Angle  | 20'     |         |        |          |
+-----------------------+----------+----------+--------+-------------+----------+---------+---------+--------+----------+
| Type C – Access       | 60'      | 40'      | 10'    | N           | Parallel | 10'     | N       | Y      | 10'      |
| Street                |          |          |        |             |          |         |         |        |          |
+-----------------------+----------+----------+--------+-------------+----------+---------+---------+--------+----------+
| Type D – Neighborhood | 80'      | 42'      | 10'    | N           | Parallel | 11'     | 8'      | N      | 11'      |
+-----------------------+----------+----------+--------+-------------+----------+---------+---------+--------+----------+
| Type E – Neighborhood | 60'      | 34'      | 10'    | N           | Parallel | 7'      | 5'      | N      | 8'       |
+-----------------------+----------+----------+--------+-------------+----------+---------+---------+--------+----------+
| Type F – Woonerf      | Various  |          |        |             |          |         |         | Y      |          |
| (Pedestrian           |          |          |        |             |          |         |         |        |          |
| street)               |          |          |        |             |          |         |         |        |          |
+-----------------------+----------+----------+--------+-------------+----------+---------+---------+--------+----------+
+---------------+------------------------+--------+---------------------------------------------+
|    Street     |        Segment         | Street |                  Guidance                   |
|               |                        |  Type  |                                             |
+---------------+------------------------+--------+---------------------------------------------+
| Bowen St      | Second St – Lincoln    | C      | Planned bicycle route from the Centennial   |
|               | Ave                    |        | Trail Lincoln Avenue                        |
+---------------+------------------------+--------+---------------------------------------------+
| Cedar Ave     | Rainier St – Second    | C      |                                             |
|               | St                     |        |                                             |
+---------------+------------------------+--------+---------------------------------------------+
| Cedar Ave     | Second St –Third       | B      |                                             |
|               | St                     |        |                                             |
+---------------+------------------------+--------+---------------------------------------------+
| Cedar Ave     | Third St – Fourth      | D      |                                             |
|               | St                     |        |                                             |
+---------------+------------------------+--------+---------------------------------------------+
| Cypress Ave   | Wood St – Second       | C      | Planned bicycle route from Wood Street      |
|               | St                     |        | to Pilchuck Park                            |
+---------------+------------------------+--------+---------------------------------------------+
| Cypress Ave   | Third St – Fourth      | C/F    | Street type to be determined through        |
|               | St                     |        | site planning for adjacent properties       |
+---------------+------------------------+--------+---------------------------------------------+
| Cypress Ave   | North of Fourth        | E      |                                             |
|               | St                     |        |                                             |
+---------------+------------------------+--------+---------------------------------------------+
| Fifth St      | West of Maple Ave      | E      |                                             |
+---------------+------------------------+--------+---------------------------------------------+
| Fifth St      | Maple Ave – Centennial | C      |                                             |
|               | Trail                  |        |                                             |
+---------------+------------------------+--------+---------------------------------------------+
| Fifth St      | Lincoln Ave – Pine     | F      |                                             |
|               | Ave                    |        |                                             |
+---------------+------------------------+--------+---------------------------------------------+
| Fourth St     | Cedar Ave – Cypress    | D      | Planned bicycle route from Cedar Avenue     |
|               | Ave                    |        | to Pine Avenue                              |
+---------------+------------------------+--------+---------------------------------------------+
| Fourth St     | Cypress Ave – Pilchuck | F      |                                             |
|               | River                  |        |                                             |
+---------------+------------------------+--------+---------------------------------------------+
| Lincoln Ave   | Wood St – Second       | C      | Truck route; planned bicycle route from     |
|               | St                     |        | Wood Street to Bowen Street                 |
+---------------+------------------------+--------+---------------------------------------------+
| Lincoln Ave   | Third St – Fifth       | F      |                                             |
|               | St                     |        |                                             |
+---------------+------------------------+--------+---------------------------------------------+
| Maple Ave     | Rainier St – Second    | C      |                                             |
|               | St                     |        |                                             |
+---------------+------------------------+--------+---------------------------------------------+
| Maple Ave     | Second St – Fourth     | B      |                                             |
|               | St                     |        |                                             |
+---------------+------------------------+--------+---------------------------------------------+
| Maple Ave     | Fourth St – Lincoln    | C      |                                             |
|               | Ave                    |        |                                             |
+---------------+------------------------+--------+---------------------------------------------+
| Pine Avenue   | Wood Ave – Sixth       | C      | Truck route                                 |
|               | St                     |        |                                             |
+---------------+------------------------+--------+---------------------------------------------+
| Rainier St    | Second St – Willow     | C      |                                             |
|               | Ave                    |        |                                             |
+---------------+------------------------+--------+---------------------------------------------+
| Second Street | Union Ave – Pilchuck   | A      | May be modified to address transit, truck   |
|               | River                  |        | traffic, and 100' right-of-way; planned     |
|               |                        |        | bicycle route from Lincoln Avenue to        |
|               |                        |        | the Pilchuck River                          |
+---------------+------------------------+--------+---------------------------------------------+
| Sixth St      | Maple Ave – Pine       | C      | Planned bicycle route                       |
|               | Ave                    |        |                                             |
+---------------+------------------------+--------+---------------------------------------------+
| Third St      | Cedar Ave – Centennial | D      |                                             |
|               | Trail                  |        |                                             |
+---------------+------------------------+--------+---------------------------------------------+
| Third St      | Centennial Trail –     | E      | Type F if property adjacent to south        |
|               | Pine Ave               |        | is public park/open space                   |
+---------------+------------------------+--------+---------------------------------------------+
| Third St      | Pine Ave – Pilchuck    | B      | Type D if adjacent development is primarily |
|               | River                  |        | residential                                 |
+---------------+------------------------+--------+---------------------------------------------+
| Willow Ave    | Rainier St – Lincoln   | C      |                                             |
|               | Ave                    |        |                                             |
+---------------+------------------------+--------+---------------------------------------------+
| Wood St       | Lincoln Ave – Cypress  | C      | Type E if adjacent development is primarily |
|               | Ave                    |        | residential; planned bicycle route          |
+---------------+------------------------+--------+---------------------------------------------+
B. Street Design. 
    1. General provisions applicable to all street types.
        a. Designing landscaped areas within the street right-of-way to be functional stormwater treatment and infiltration or conveyance is encouraged.
        b. Right-of-way ends at the Pilchuck River may be designed as pedestrian gathering and recreation spaces.
        c. Street intersections at the Centennial Trail should include features indicating the potential presence of trail-users.
        d. Pedestrian crossing improvements, including bulb-outs and special pavements, shall be evaluated at the time improvements to specific intersections are proposed.
    2. Neighborhood Streets. 
        a. Purpose. Where adjacent development is primarily residential, provide attractive streets with ample sidewalks for pedestrian comfort and interaction. Sidewalks should be separated from travel lanes by on-street parking and a treed planting strip. Travel lanes should be marked at the minimum width necessary for safe passage to encourage slow speeds. Where adequate area for bicycles is not available outside of travel lanes, the lanes should be marked with sharrow symbols to remind motorists of the presence of bicycles. Private frontages along Neighborhood Streets shall be designed to include moderate setbacks providing spaces for porches, gardens, and lawns for both privacy and connection to the public way.
        b. Components. 
            i. On-street parking shall be oriented parallel to the curb.
            ii. Spreading, deciduous street trees shall be located in the planting strip at a maximum interval of 40 feet on-center. Appropriate street trees are listed in Chapter 14.240 SMC. The location of street trees may be modified to preserve sight lines and to avoid conflicts with street lights.
            iii. Low-lying ground covers may be located within planting strips. Shrubs may be located in planter strips where conflict with vehicle doors is minimized.
            iv. Pedestrian and street lighting shall be incorporated at sufficient intervals for pedestrian, bicyclist, and driver safety. Decorative light fixtures no more than 14 feet above finished grade are preferred for pedestrian lighting. Light fixtures shall be shielded to avoid light spill into dwellings.
            v. The standard roadway sections for Neighborhood Streets are shown on Figures III-1 and III-2.
            [IMAGE: <14.212.300_001.png>]
            [IMAGE: <14.212.300_002.png>]
    3. Access Streets. 
        a. Purpose. Create an active “Main Street” pedestrian environment for a mixed residential and commercial context. Provide wide sidewalks with pedestrian amenities to serve as safe and sociable entry areas for residential uses and flexible outdoor space for adjacent commercial uses. Travel lanes should be marked at the minimum width necessary for safe passage to encourage slow speeds and to create a refuge space for bicyclists. Private frontages along Access Streets should be minimal.
        b. Components. 
            i. On-street parking shall be parallel to the curb except that angled parking shall be provided on one side where rights-of-way are 80 feet wide.
            ii. Spreading, deciduous street trees shall be located in sidewalk tree grates at a maximum interval of 50 feet on-center. Appropriate street trees are listed in Chapter 14.240 SMC. Street trees shall be located to minimize obstruction of street views of storefronts and building signage, to avoid conflicts with street lights, and to allow emergency access to upper floors with aerial ladders.
            iii. Sidewalks shall integrate with commercial private frontages to create a seamless transition between public and private spaces. Alternative sidewalk surfacing may be permitted where the alternative surfacing extends over the majority of the block adjacent to the Access Street. Alternative sidewalk surfacing shall meet all applicable safety and accessibility standards and shall be the responsibility of the adjacent property owner to maintain and restore.
            iv. Pedestrian lighting shall be provided on or along building faces. The light sources should be located no higher than 14 feet above finished grade.
            v. The standard roadway sections for Access Streets are shown on Figures III-3 and III-4.
            [IMAGE: <14.212.300_003.png>]
            [IMAGE: <14.212.300_004.png>]
    4. Community Corridor (Second Street). 
        a. Purpose. Create an active “Main Street” pedestrian environment for predominantly commercial streets. Provide wide sidewalks with pedestrian amenities for comfortable strolling, shopping, and outdoor seating and marketing displays where such uses will accommodate pedestrian access. Streets and sidewalks should be designed to incorporate transit stops, where appropriate. Travel lanes should be of adequate width to efficiently accommodate significant volumes of traffic including large trucks and transit, while providing refuge areas for bicycles. The Community Corridor includes a center turn lane punctuated with a planted median, where feasible.
        b. Components. 
            i. On-street parking shall be parallel to the curb in parking lanes of sufficient width to allow safe access to and from parked vehicles.
            ii. Spreading, deciduous street trees shall be located in sidewalk tree grates at a maximum interval of 50 feet on-center. Appropriate street trees are listed in Chapter 14.240 SMC. Street trees shall be located to minimize obstruction of street views of storefronts and building signage, to avoid conflicts with street lights, and to allow emergency access to upper floors.
            iii. Sidewalks shall integrate with commercial private frontages to create a seamless transition between public and private spaces. Alternative sidewalk surfacing may be permitted where the alternative surfacing extends over the majority of the block adjacent to the Access Street. Alternative sidewalk surfacing shall meet all applicable safety and accessibility standards and shall be the responsibility of the adjacent property owner to maintain and restore.
            iv. Pedestrian lighting shall be provided on or along building faces. The light sources should be located no higher than 14 feet above finished grade.
            v. Street lights should be centered between street trees to avoid conflicts with tree canopies.
            vi. Significant bulb-outs and wide crosswalks with contrasting surface materials are encouraged at pedestrian intersections to create a safe and comfortable pedestrian experience.
            vii. Historic appearance standards for street lights and traffic signals are encouraged.
            viii. The standard roadway section for a Community Corridor is shown on Figure III-5.
            [IMAGE: <14.212.300_005.png>]
    5. Woonerfs (pedestrian streets). 
        a. Purpose. Create flexible public spaces where vehicles, bicycles, and pedestrians safely share the right-of-way. Woonerfs should function as extensions of the adjacent properties to encourage active and passive community use, while accommodating traffic movements. Woonerfs will be designed on a case-by case basis to respond to the needs of adjacent land use and to allow for flexibility in use and programming.
        b. Components. 
            i. Woonerf materials should be an alternative to asphalt pavement, where possible, include very limited or no traffic signs, no standard lane demarcations, no curbs except as necessary for stormwater management, and no sidewalks.
            ii. Opportunities for on-street parking should be considered in the design of woonerfs where parking will not functionally or aesthetically dominate the space.
            iii. A 20-foot wide emergency access way shall be incorporated within which no parking and no fixed or temporary facilities shall be located.
            iv. Landscaping should be included in the design of a woonerf, including trees and planters where they will not create safety hazards or conflict with emergency access to adjacent development.
            v. Lighting should be evaluated and incorporated with woonerf improvements at sufficient intervals for pedestrian, bicyclist, and driver safety. Light fixtures shall be shielded to avoid light spill into dwellings.
            vi. Woonerfs may vary from 40 feet to 80 feet in width, depending on the available right-of-way.
            vii. Conceptual roadway sections for 60-foot and 80-foot woonerfs are shown on Figures III-6 and III-7.
            [IMAGE: <14.212.300_006.png>]
            [IMAGE: <14.212.300_007.png>]

14.212.310 Subdivision, Lots, and Blocks.
A. Subdivisions. Subdivisions and lot line adjustments shall be processed according to the provisions of Chapter 14.215 SMC.
    1. Except buildings constructed as common wall dwellings intended for separate ownership, buildings shall not cross legal lot lines.
    2. Subdivision of common wall or zero-lot line development such as townhouses shall provide a five-foot wide building maintenance easement for walls, eaves, chimneys, and other architectural features that rest directly on the lot line. The maintenance easement shall be shown on the face of the plat or short plat or recorded in a separate document as approved by the City Planner.
    3. No subdivision or lot line adjustment shall be approved unless all resulting lots have a minimum 20-foot frontage on a public street. Non-building tracts, such as open space and utility tracts, do not require frontage on a public street.
    4. No subdivision or lot line adjustment shall be approved unless all resulting lots have a minimum size of 2,200 square feet, except that the Single Family zone shall have a minimum lot size of 3,500 square feet. Non-building tracts, such as open space and utility tracts, shall not require a minimum lot size.
    5. Newly platted lots shall have a minimum dimension of 20 feet, as measured by a circle located entirely within the lot lines. Non-building tracts, such as open space and utility tracts, do not require a minimum dimension.
B. Blocks. No public right-of-way shall be vacated that would result in a block length greater than 500 feet, except where a public pedestrian access easement of a minimum 20-foot width is provided that would create a maximum pedestrian block length of 500 feet along any public street. Mid-block, public pedestrian access across blocks is encouraged as part of property development proposals.

14.212.320 Public Frontage Construction.
A. Improvement of the adjacent public frontage is required as provided by this section for new development within the Pilchuck District.
B. Unless one or more of the exceptions specified by this section apply, public frontage improvements shall be provided for the area between the centerline of the adjacent right-of-way and the margin, edge, or extent of the right-of-way contiguous to the site boundary.
C. The City Engineer may approve modifications to the street design sections in this chapter provided it can be shown that the proposed alternative street design provides functional equivalence to the standard street section and satisfies or enhances the streetscape environment.
D. Public frontage construction exceptions:
    1. Where the value of the proposed development is less than 75 percent of the assessed value of existing improvements on the site according to the records of the Snohomish County Assessor or where the existing floor area of a structure will not increase more than 20 percent, no public frontage construction or improvements are required.
    2. For new development within the Neighborhood Single Family and Neighborhood Townhouse zones:
        a. For the construction of one detached single-family dwelling, a five-foot wide concrete sidewalk shall be constructed along all frontages if no sidewalk exists or if the existing sidewalk does not meet adopted engineering standards.
        b. For sites that include a corner lot and have less than 200 linear feet of frontage, and for sites that include no corner lot and have less than 100 linear feet of frontage, a five-foot wide concrete sidewalk shall be constructed along all frontages if no sidewalk exists or if the existing sidewalk does not meet adopted engineering standards.
    3. For new development within the Neighborhood Center and Neighborhood Civic zones:
        a. Except as provided in (b), for sites that include a corner lot and have less than 200 linear feet of frontage, and for sites that include no corner lot and have less than 100 linear feet of frontage, frontage improvements shall be constructed from the existing curb to the frontage line. Dimensional requirements for sidewalks and other improvements may be modified based upon the available right-of-way between the existing curb and the frontage line.
        b. Frontage construction exceptions shall not apply to development of buildings in excess of three stories.

Article IV. BUILDING AND SITE USE

14.212.400 Purpose.
The building and site use regulations are intended to implement the Pilchuck District policies of the Comprehensive Plan for compatibility between land uses, certainty for property owners, and a dynamic, pedestrian-oriented public realm. As provided in SMC 14.212.110, this chapter regulates land development and use through form-based standards.

14.212.410 Allowed Uses.
A. Uses Listed. Table IV-1 designates permitted and provisional land uses in the Pilchuck District zones.
B. Permitted Uses. Uses listed as permitted are defined as those uses permitted by right.
C. Provisional Uses. Uses listed as provisional are defined as those uses that require special consideration due either to their potential impacts on the neighborhood and land uses in the vicinity and/or to the typical physical organization, design, or function of the use. A listed provisional use may be permitted if the proposed use, with or without special conditions, is determined to be consistent with the criteria below.
D. Prohibited Uses. Uses listed in Table IV-1 but not identified as permitted or provisional shall be prohibited.
E. Unlisted Uses. Any proposed use not listed in Table IV-1 shall be classified by the Planning Director as permitted, provisional, or prohibited based on the listed use to which the proposed use is most similar or on the anticipated characteristics and impacts of the proposed use. If the Planning Director determines that the proposed use is not similar to any use in the table and not compatible with the intent of the zone, the proposed use shall not be permitted. The determination of the Planning Director shall be appealable to the Hearing Examiner in accordance with SMC 14.20.170.
F. Applications for provisional or unlisted uses shall be evaluated by the Planning Director, or designee, for conformance with the general criteria listed below. Provisional or unlisted uses shall only be approved if all relevant criteria are met. If necessary for the application to meet the criteria, the Planning Director may impose special conditions of approval. The Planning Director shall issue a written decision of evaluation, including findings of fact and conclusions, and conditions of approval as deemed necessary for compliance with the criteria.
    1. The proposed use shall conform with the Pilchuck District goals and policies.
    2. The proposed use shall promote, where feasible, activities that foster pedestrian interest and activity in the streetscape, especially on the ground floor/street level. Provisional uses with specific criteria described in reference notes to Table IV-1, Permitted Land Uses, are not required to meet this criterion.
    3. The proposed use shall not generate noise, dust, smoke, odors, or create other significant adverse impacts that would detract from the enjoyment and repose of typical residential uses in the vicinity.
    4. The proposed use shall not require operational activities 2:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. that would significantly detract from the enjoyment and repose of typical residential uses in the vicinity.
    5. The proposed use shall primarily occur within an enclosed building, except for temporary open air markets/vendor carts/stands, accessory sales displays intended for a pedestrian clientele, and outdoor seating areas associated with restaurants.
    6. Proposed provisional uses shall also conform to the specific criteria described in the reference notes to Table IV-1, Permitted Land Uses.
G. Existing Legal Nonconforming Uses. Legally established uses existing on March 15, 2011, that are not listed as permitted uses on Table IV-1, shall be considered legal nonconforming uses on the site or parcel(s) where established. Legal nonconforming uses shall be classified according to Chapter 14.80 SMC.
    1. Any legal nonconforming use that has ceased operation of such use for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months, or through a change of use to a legal conforming use, shall be considered abandoned and shall lose all vested rights to continue or restart the use.
    2. An existing legal nonconforming use may be replaced by a new legal nonconforming use if the Planning Director determines:
        a. The new use falls under the same general land use category – commercial, industrial, multifamily residential, single-family residential – as the existing legal nonconforming use; and
        b. The new use has the same or less aesthetic impacts as the existing legal nonconforming use. “Same aesthetic impacts” means the appearance of the site from the public realm is largely unchanged especially as it relates to outside storage.
            i. If the existing legal nonconforming use did not have outside storage the new use shall not have any outside storage.
            ii. If the existing legal nonconforming use had outside storage but the new use does not continue to have outside storage within six (6) months of starting operations then the right to have outside storage shall be considered abandoned.
            iii. If the existing legal nonconforming use has outside storage then the new use may have outside storage provided the materials stored outside and that are visible from the street do not exceed the existing volume and dimensions of the current legal nonconforming uses’ outside storage; and
        c. The new use has the same or less level of activity as the existing legal nonconforming use. Activity level shall be a subjective determination of the Planning Director of the composite activity related to traffic generation, number of employees, number of customers, and hours of operation; and
        d. The new use will not require the construction of any new detached structures on the site or parcel(s).
    3. Other than the exception described in subsection (G)(2) of this section, any new use on a site or parcel(s) shall be consistent with Table IV-1.
    4. Where multiple legal nonconforming uses exist on a site, the legal continuation of each individual use shall be considered separately from all others.
H. Temporary Uses. Temporary uses listed on Table IV-1 or determined consistent by the Planning Director under subsection E of this section may be approved for a maximum of sixty (60) consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any year. Temporary structures associated with approved temporary uses are not required to conform to the building standards in this chapter.
I. Accessory uses, where permitted, shall be subordinate to the primary use(s) on the site.
J. Accessory dwelling units shall only be allowed in conjunction with one (1) single-family home on one (1) lot. All requirements in SMC 14.207.075(2) shall apply to accessory dwellings.
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
|                                            |    Center    | Pilchuck Single-Family |  Townhouse   |    Civic    |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| Residential Uses                                                                                                |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| Single-family                              | --           | Permitted              | Permitted    | --          |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| Townhouse                                  | Permitted    | --                     | Permitted    | --          |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| Bungalow court                             | Permitted    | --                     | Permitted    | --          |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| Stacked-flat multifamily                   | Permitted    | --                     | --           | --          |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| Adult family home                          | --           | Permitted              | Permitted    | --          |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| Senior citizen assisted living             | Permitted    | --                     | --           | --          |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| Retail                                                                                                          |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| Retail stores                              | Permitted    | --                     | --           | --          |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| Outdoor boat/vehicle sales                 | --           | --                     | --           | --          |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| Temporary open air markets/vendor          | Provisional  | --                     | --           | Provisional |
| carts or stands                            |              |                        |              |             |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| Restaurants                                | Permitted    | --                     | --           | Permitted   |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| Bars, taverns, night clubs                 | Provisional  | --                     | --           | --          |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| Office/Service Uses                                                                                             |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| Craft wineries, distilleries,              | Provisional  | --                     | --           | --          |
| and breweries with on-site                 |              |                        |              |             |
| sales and public tasting area              |              |                        |              |             |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| Professional/administrative/medical/social | Permitted    | --                     | Provisional1 | --          |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| Veterinary (indoor only)                   | Permitted    | --                     | --           | --          |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| Commercial daycare3                        | Permitted    | --                     | Provisional1 | Provisional |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| Family daycare3                            | --           | Permitted              | Permitted    | --          |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| Business services (e.g., reprographics,    | Permitted    | --                     | Provisional1 | --          |
| bank)                                      |              |                        |              |             |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| Personal services (e.g., hair              | Permitted    | --                     | Provisional1 | --          |
| salon; drycleaner; commercial              |              |                        |              |             |
| daycare)                                   |              |                        |              |             |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| Other Commercial/Industrial                                                                                     |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| Light manufacturing                        | Provisional2 | --                     | --           | --          |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| Vehicle service/repair                     | Provisional2 | --                     | --           | --          |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| Vehicle storage (except as accessory)      | --           | --                     | --           | --          |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| Warehousing/storage (except                | --           | --                     | --           | --          |
| accessory)                                 |              |                        |              |             |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| Manufacturing (except accessory)           | --           | --                     | --           | --          |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| Entertainment and Recreation                                                                                    |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| Theaters – movie and performing            | Permitted    | --                     | --           | --          |
| arts                                       |              |                        |              |             |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| Recreational center/sports club            | Permitted    | --                     | --           | --          |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| Bowling/billiards/amusement                | Permitted    | --                     | --           | --          |
| arcades                                    |              |                        |              |             |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| Adult use                                  | --           | --                     | --           | --          |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| Lodging                                                                                                         |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| Hotel with or without convention           | Permitted    | --                     | --           | --          |
| center                                     |              |                        |              |             |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| Bed and breakfast                          | Permitted    | --                     | Permitted    | --          |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| Accessory to Allowed Uses (on same site)                                                                        |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| Manufacturing products for sale            | Permitted    | --                     | --           | --          |
| on site                                    |              |                        |              |             |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| Home occupation, live-work                 | Permitted    | Permitted              | Permitted    | --          |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| Accessory dwellings (see SMC               | --           | Permitted              | Permitted    | --          |
| 14.212.410(J))                             |              |                        |              |             |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| Storage/warehousing (indoor                | Permitted    | --                     | --           | --          |
| only/30% of first floor max.)              |              |                        |              |             |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| Family daycare3                            | Permitted    | Permitted              | Permitted    | --          |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| Other uses as determined accessory         | Permitted    | Permitted              | Permitted    | Permitted   |
| and consistent with the intent             |              |                        |              |             |
| of the zone                                |              |                        |              |             |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| Civic and Cultural                                                                                              |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| Municipal offices                          | Permitted    | --                     | --           | Permitted   |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| Parks and recreation                       | Permitted    | Permitted              | Permitted    | Permitted   |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| Community center                           | Permitted    | --                     | --           | Permitted   |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| Educational facilities                     | Permitted    | --                     | Provisional  | Permitted   |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| Libraries, museums                         | Permitted    | --                     | --           | Permitted   |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| Fire and police stations                   | Permitted    | --                     | --           | Permitted   |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| Religious assembly                         | Permitted    | --                     | Provisional  | --          |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| General assembly (e.g., private            | Permitted    | --                     | --           | Permitted   |
| clubs, rental spaces)                      |              |                        |              |             |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
| Parking garages                            | Permitted    | --                     | --           | Permitted   |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------+------------------------+--------------+-------------+
1Allowed as a provisional use if all of the following criteria are met:
a. The use shall only be allowed on the ground/street level.
b. The use shall be located in the portion of the building closest to and fronting the public sidewalk.
c. The use shall only be open Mondays through Saturdays, 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
d. No more than one (1) office, commercial, business services, or personal services provisional use shall be allowed per site or building, whichever is less.
e. The use shall not occupy more than two thousand (2,000) gross square feet of floor area.
f. Signage shall be regulated pursuant to SMC 14.245.115, Signs in Residential Land Use Designations.
2Allowed as a provisional use if all of the following criteria are met:
a. Business activity shall only occur within an existing or new fully enclosed building. If a new building is constructed, the building shall meet the design standards for the Pilchuck District. If the business activity is taking place in an existing building, the building does not have to meet the design standards for the Pilchuck District.
b. Outside storage shall be prohibited.
3All daycare uses shall be licensed by the Washington State Department of Early Learning pursuant to Chapter 170-295 WAC.
(Ord. 2347, 2018)

Article V. SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS

14.212.500 Site Development.
Subdivisions, new land uses and structures, and alterations to existing land uses and structures, shall be designed, constructed, and/or established in compliance with the requirements in Tables V-1, V-2, V-3, and V-4, in addition to the applicable development and design standards in Articles VI, VII, and VIII.
A. Anchor use exceptions. Alternative regulations listed in Table V-5 may be applied to anchor uses exceeding 30,000 square feet as exceptions to the regulations as indicated in the Building Standards. Primary frontage shall be on Second Street, Pine Avenue, Maple Avenue, or Lincoln Avenue south of Second Street.
B. Civic use exceptions. Regulations for public agency development in the Civic Zone included on a public facility master plan adopted by the City Council may be modified according to Table V-6. Criteria for approval of a civic master plan shall include consistency with the intent and purpose of the Civic Zone and the Pilchuck District designation.
C. Bungalow Court exception. Exceptions to the standards may be approved in conjunction with a master plan for a compact development containing relocated single-family structures.

14.212.510 Nonconforming Structures.
Structures legally existing as of the effective date of these regulations but that do not conform to the provisions of this chapter shall be considered legal non-conforming structures. Such structures may be modified and enlarged, provided that modifications or enlargement increase consistency with the site development standards for the zone in which the structure is located. At such time as a structure is substantially destroyed such that restoration costs exceed 75 percent of the assessed value of record when the damage occurred, reconstruction shall be consistent with the requirements of this chapter.

14.212.520 Structures with Potential Historic Value.
Until a historic preservation ordinance is adopted, structures fifty years or older proposed for modification or removal shall be evaluated for eligibility for the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) or the Washington State Heritage Register (WSHR). Modifications to structures determined eligible for the NRHP or WSHR shall be subject to SMC 14.225.080 and SMC 14.225.030(A)(1). Removal of structures determined eligible for the NRHP or WSHR shall be subject to SMC 14.225.080.

14.212.530 Building Height Provisions.
A. Where permitted, any interior floor area above three stories in height shall require documentation of purchase of transferred development rights in accordance with adopted procedures.
B. Building heights and stepbacks shall conform to Tables V-1 through V-6.
C. Stories shall not exceed 14 feet in height from finished floor to finished ceiling, except for the first floor commercial function, which shall be a maximum of 25 feet. A single floor exceeding 14 feet, or 25 feet at the ground level, shall be counted as two stories. Mezzanines extending beyond the 33 percent of the floor area shall be counted as an additional story.
D. Adjacent to a frontage, the first level residential or lodging function shall be raised a minimum of 18 inches above average sidewalk grade.
E. In a parking structure or garage, each above-ground level shall count as a single story regardless of its relationship to the habitable stories, except that podium parking levels less than 6 feet above the height of the adjacent sidewalk shall not be considered a story for the purpose of determining maximum building height.
F. Attic spaces fully contained within a pitched roof, raised basements up to five feet above adjacent sidewalk grade, belfries, clock towers, chimney flues, water tanks, or elevator bulkheads, cupolas, domes, skylights, parapet walls, cornices, and mechanical equipment or associated screening shall not be counted as stories. Attic spaces shall not exceed 14 feet of vertical clear area.

14.212.540 Residential Densities.
Residential densities are not specified as a separate development standard. Permitted densities shall be determined according to compliance with all applicable development standards.

14.212.550 Building Disposition and Configuration.
A. Buildings shall be oriented to adjacent streets according to Tables V-1 through V-6.
    1. Where required, façades and primary entrances shall be parallel to and visible from the adjacent street or its tangent except as allowed under sections 2 and 3 below.
    2. Primary entrances may face street corners where corner entry private frontages are permitted.
    3. A primary entrance accessed through a Forecourt private frontage is not required to face a public street provided that it is visible from the public street.
B. Buildings on corner lots shall have a principal frontage and a secondary frontage. The principal frontage shall be consistent with the site address and the location of primary pedestrian site access. Lot configuration shall be based on the principal frontage.
C. Where a building façade does not extend along any portion of a frontage line in the Neighborhood Center zone, an architectural wall between 3.5 and 4.5 feet in height shall extend from the façade along the remainder of the street frontage. The wall shall be architecturally consistent with the principal building and shall have horizontal openings no larger than necessary to allow vehicle and/or pedestrian access.
D. Setbacks for principal buildings and outbuildings shall be as shown in Tables V-1 through V-6. Setbacks may be adjusted according to SMC 14.212.140.
    1. Bay windows and open porches with no enclosed floor area may encroach into the front setback up to 50 percent the setback depth.
E. One principal building at the frontage and one outbuilding to the rear of the principal building may be built on each lot. Only one single-family dwelling is permitted on one lot except pursuant to the bungalow court exception in SMC 14.212.500.
F. The private frontages for each zone shall conform to the standards in Tables V-1 through V-6.
G. Awnings and canopies may encroach into the public frontage within two feet of the curb. Where a canopy encroaches into the public frontage, the lowest portion of the canopy shall be eight feet above the sidewalk. Note: if blade signs are anticipated, awnings and canopies should be designed to allow an eight-foot clearance between the bottom of the sign and the sidewalk.
H. Loading docks and service areas shall be permitted on private frontages only by approval of a deviation pursuant to SMC 14.212.170. For buildings with a commercial floor area of 25,000 square feet or greater, loading spaces shall be provided that fully contain delivery vehicles on the site and outside any alley, street, or sidewalk. Buildings less than 25,000 square feet of commercial floor area are not required to provide a loading space.
+-----+----------------------+--------------------+---+-------------------------------+
| 1 BUILDING FUNCTION        | Per Table IV-1     |   | Building Height               |
|                            |                    |   | [IMAGE: <14.212.550_001.png>] |
+-----+----------------------+--------------------+---+-------------------------------+
| 2 BUILDING HEIGHT                                   | "                             |
+-----+----------------------+--------------------+---+-------------------------------+
| A   | Principal building   | 2 stories max      |   | "                             |
+-----+----------------------+--------------------+---+-------------------------------+
| A   | Outbuilding          | 2 stories max.     |   | "                             |
+-----+----------------------+--------------------+---+-------------------------------+
| B   | First floor          | 18 in. min.        |   | "                             |
|     |                      | above sidewalk     |   |                               |
+-----+----------------------+--------------------+---+-------------------------------+
| C   | Ground floor ceiling | 9 ft. clear        |   | "                             |
|     |                      | min                |   |                               |
+-----+----------------------+--------------------+---+-------------------------------+
| D   | Upper floor ceiling  | 8 ft. clear        |   | "                             |
|     |                      | min.               |   |                               |
+-----+----------------------+--------------------+---+-------------------------------+
| 3 BUILDING ORIENTATION TO STREET                    | "                             |
+-----+----------------------+--------------------+---+-------------------------------+
|     | Principal building   | Required           |   | "                             |
+-----+----------------------+--------------------+---+-------------------------------+
|     | Outbuilding          | Not required       |   | "                             |
+-----+----------------------+--------------------+---+-------------------------------+
|     | Exceptions: None     |                    |   | "                             |
+-----+----------------------+--------------------+---+-------------------------------+
| 4 SETBACKS–PRINCIPAL BUILDING                       | "                             |
+-----+----------------------+--------------------+---+-------------------------------+
| E   | Front Setback        | 15 ft min.         |   | "                             |
|     | -                    |                    |   |                               |
+-----+----------------------+--------------------+---+-------------------------------+
|     | Primary frontage     | 20 ft max.         |   | "                             |
+-----+----------------------+--------------------+---+-------------------------------+
| F   | Front Setback        | 10 ft min.         |   | "                             |
|     | -                    |                    |   |                               |
+-----+----------------------+--------------------+---+-------------------------------+
|     | Secondary frontage   |                    |   | "                             |
+-----+----------------------+--------------------+---+-------------------------------+
| G   | Side Setback         | 5 ft min. (8       |   | "                             |
|     |                      | ft. min. for       |   |                               |
|     |                      | alley)             |   |                               |
+-----+----------------------+--------------------+---+-------------------------------+
| H   | Rear Setback         | 20 ft min.         |   | "                             |
+-----+----------------------+--------------------+---+-------------------------------+
| 5 SETBACKS–OUTBUILDING                              | Setbacks – Principal Building |
|                                                     | [IMAGE: <14.212.550_002.png>] |
+-----+----------------------+--------------------+---+-------------------------------+
| I   | Front Setback        | 20 ft min. plus    |   | "                             |
|     |                      | principal building |   |                               |
|     |                      | setback            |   |                               |
+-----+----------------------+--------------------+---+-------------------------------+
|     | Primary frontage     |                    |   | "                             |
+-----+----------------------+--------------------+---+-------------------------------+
| J/K | Side setback)        | 5 ft min. (10      |   | "                             |
|     |                      | ft if second       |   |                               |
|     |                      | frontage)          |   |                               |
+-----+----------------------+--------------------+---+-------------------------------+
| L   | Rear Setback         | 5 ft min. (8       |   | "                             |
|     |                      | ft. min. for       |   |                               |
|     |                      | alley)             |   |                               |
+-----+----------------------+--------------------+---+-------------------------------+
| 6 PRIVATE FRONTAGES (see SMC 14.212.1010)       |   | "                             |
+-----+----------------------+--------------------+---+-------------------------------+
|     | Common yard          | Permitted          |   | "                             |
+-----+----------------------+--------------------+---+-------------------------------+
|     | Porch                | Permitted          |   | "                             |
+-----+----------------------+--------------------+---+-------------------------------+
|     | Terrace or lightwell | Not permitted      |   | "                             |
+-----+----------------------+--------------------+---+-------------------------------+
|     | Stoop                | Not permitted      |   | "                             |
+-----+----------------------+--------------------+---+-------------------------------+
|     | Corner entry         | Not permitted      |   | "                             |
+-----+----------------------+--------------------+---+-------------------------------+
|     | Forecourt            | Not permitted      |   | "                             |
+-----+----------------------+--------------------+---+-------------------------------+
|     | Shopfront & canopy   | Not permitted      |   | "                             |
+-----+----------------------+--------------------+---+-------------------------------+
|     | Grand entry          | Not permitted      |   | "                             |
+-----+----------------------+--------------------+---+-------------------------------+
| 7 FRONTAGE COVERAGE        | N/A                |   | Setbacks – Outbuilding        |
|                            |                    |   | [IMAGE: <14.212.550_003.png>] |
+-----+----------------------+--------------------+---+-------------------------------+
| 8 BUILDING LENGTH          | 40 ft. max.        | " | "                             |
| (Primary frontage)         |                    |   |                               |
+-----+----------------------+--------------------+---+-------------------------------+
| 9 IMPERVIOUS SURFACE       | N/A                | " | "                             |
| COVERAGE                   |                    |   |                               |
+-----+----------------------+--------------------+---+-------------------------------+
| 10 PARKING (see Article VI)                     | " | "                             |
+-----+----------------------+--------------------+---+-------------------------------+
+-----+-------------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------------+
| 1 BUILDING FUNCTION           | Per Table IV-1        | Building Height               |
|                               |                       | [IMAGE: <14.212.550_001.png>] |
+-----+-------------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------------+
| 2 BUILDING HEIGHT             |                       | "                             |
+-----+-------------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------------+
| A   | Principal building      | 2 stories max.        | "                             |
+-----+-------------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------------+
|     | Outbuilding             | 2 stories max.        | "                             |
+-----+-------------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------------+
| B   | First floor             | 18 in. min. above     | "                             |
|     |                         | sidewalk              |                               |
+-----+-------------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------------+
| C   | Ground floor ceiling    | 9 ft. clear min       | "                             |
+-----+-------------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------------+
| D   | Upper floor ceiling     | 8 ft. clear min       | "                             |
+-----+-------------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------------+
| 3 BUILDING ORIENTATION        |                       | "                             |
| TO STREET                     |                       |                               |
+-----+-------------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------------+
|     | Principal building      | Required              | "                             |
+-----+-------------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------------+
|     | Outbuilding             | Not required          | "                             |
+-----+-------------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------------+
|     | Exceptions: Pedestrian  |                       | "                             |
|     | courtyard configuration |                       |                               |
|     | permitted;              |                       |                               |
+-----+-------------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------------+
| 4 SETBACKS–PRINCIPAL BUILDING                         | "                             |
+-----+-------------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------------+
| E   | Front Setback           |                       | "                             |
+-----+-------------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------------+
|     | Primary frontage        | 15 ft min.            | "                             |
+-----+-------------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------------+
|     |                         | 20ft max.             | "                             |
+-----+-------------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------------+
| F   | Front Setback Secondary | 10 ft min.            | "                             |
|     | frontage                |                       |                               |
+-----+-------------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------------+
| G   | Side Setback            | 5 ft min. unless      | "                             |
|     |                         | common wall           |                               |
|     |                         | on property           |                               |
|     |                         | line                  |                               |
+-----+-------------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------------+
| H   | Rear Setback            | 20 ft min.            | "                             |
+-----+-------------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------------+
| 5 SETBACKS–OUTBUILDING                                | Setbacks – Principal Building |
|                                                       | [IMAGE: <14.212.550_002.png>] |
+-----+-------------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------------+
| I   | Front Setback           |                       | "                             |
+-----+-------------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------------+
|     | Primary frontage        | 20 ft min. plus       | "                             |
|     | (I)                     | principal building    |                               |
|     |                         | setback.              |                               |
+-----+-------------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------------+
| J/K | Side setback            | 5 ft min. (10         | "                             |
|     |                         | ft min. for           |                               |
|     |                         | second frontage;      |                               |
|     |                         | 8 ft min for          |                               |
|     |                         | alley) unless         |                               |
|     |                         | common wall           |                               |
|     |                         | garage in conjunction |                               |
|     |                         | with townhouse        |                               |
|     |                         | development           |                               |
+-----+-------------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------------+
|     | Rear Setback (L)        | 5 ft min. (8          | "                             |
|     |                         | ft. min. for          |                               |
|     |                         | alley)                |                               |
+-----+-------------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------------+
| 6 PRIVATE FRONTAGES (see SMC 14.212.1010)             | "                             |
+-----+-------------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------------+
|     | Common yard             | Permitted             | "                             |
+-----+-------------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------------+
|     | Porch                   | Permitted             | "                             |
+-----+-------------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------------+
|     | Terrace or lightwell    | Not permitted         | "                             |
+-----+-------------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------------+
|     | Stoop                   | Not permitted         | Setbacks – Outbuilding        |
|     |                         |                       | [IMAGE: <14.212.550_003.png>] |
+-----+-------------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------------+
|     | Corner entry            | Not permitted         | "                             |
+-----+-------------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------------+
|     | Forecourt               | Not permitted         | "                             |
+-----+-------------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------------+
|     | Shopfront & canopy      | Not permitted         | "                             |
+-----+-------------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------------+
|     | Grand entry             | Not permitted         | "                             |
+-----+-------------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------------+
| 7 FRONTAGE COVERAGE           | N/A                   | "                             |
+-----+-------------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------------+
| 8 BUILDING LENGTH             |                       | "                             |
+-----+-------------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------------+
|     | (Primary frontage)      | 85 ft. max.           | "                             |
+-----+-------------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------------+
|     |                         | Townhouse – 40        | "                             |
|     |                         | ft. min.              |                               |
+-----+-------------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------------+
| 9 IMPERVIOUS SURFACE COVERAGE | 75% max.              | "                             |
+-----+-------------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------------+
| 10 PARKING (see Article VI)                           | "                             |
+-----+-------------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------------+
+--------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 1 BUILDING FUNCTION           | Per Table IV-1     | Building Height and Upper Story Setback |
|                               |                    | [IMAGE: <14.212.550_004.png>]           |
+--------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 2 BUILDING HEIGHT                                  | "                                       |
+--------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| A      | Minimum height –     |                    | "                                       |
+--------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
|        | Principal building   | 2 stories (second  | "                                       |
|        |                      | story at 75%       |                                         |
|        |                      | of footprint)      |                                         |
+--------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| B      | Maximum height:      |                    | "                                       |
+--------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
|        | By right             | 3 stories          | "                                       |
+--------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
|        | With TDR             | 4 stories          | "                                       |
+--------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
|        | With TDR in Height   | 5 stories          | "                                       |
|        | Overlay              |                    |                                         |
+--------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| C      | Ground floor ceiling | 12 ft min. clear   | "                                       |
+--------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| D      | Upper floor ceiling  | 8 ft min. clear    | "                                       |
+--------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
|        | Exceptions: see Anchor Use Exceptions     | "                                       |
|        | Table V-5                                 |                                         |
+--------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 3 BUILDING ORIENTATION TO STREET                   | "                                       |
+--------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
|        | Principal building   | Required           | "                                       |
+--------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
|        | Outbuilding          | Required if corner | "                                       |
|        |                      | lot                |                                         |
+--------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 4 SETBACKS–PRINCIPAL BUILDING                      | "                                       |
+--------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| E      | Front setback -      | 0 ft min.          | "                                       |
+--------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
|        | Primary frontage     | 10 ft max.         | "                                       |
+--------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| F      | Front setback -      | 0 ft min.          | "                                       |
|        | Secondary frontage   | 10 ft max.         |                                         |
+--------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| G      | Side setback         | 0 ft min.          | "                                       |
+--------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| H      | Rear setback         | 0 ft min. (8       | "                                       |
|        |                      | ft. min. for       |                                         |
|        |                      | alley)             |                                         |
+--------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| I      | Special setbacks: Floors above            | "                                       |
|        | third floor set back 8 ft min.            |                                         |
|        | setback from the primary ground           |                                         |
|        | floor façade plane on any frontage        |                                         |
+--------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 5 SETBACKS–OUTBUILDING                             | Setbacks – Principal Building           |
|                                                    | [IMAGE: <14.212.550_005.png>]           |
+--------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| J      | Front setback -      | 20 ft min. plus    | "                                       |
|        | Primary frontage     | building setback.  |                                         |
+--------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| K      | Front setback -      | Same as principal  | "                                       |
|        | Secondary frontage   | building or        |                                         |
|        |                      | greater            |                                         |
+--------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| L      | Side setback         | 0 ft min.          | "                                       |
+--------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| M      | Rear setback         | 0 ft min. (5       | "                                       |
|        |                      | ft. min. for       |                                         |
|        |                      | alley)             |                                         |
+--------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 6 PRIVATE FRONTAGES (see SMC 14.212.1010)          | "                                       |
+--------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
|        | Common yard          | Not permitted      | "                                       |
+--------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
|        | Porch                | Not permitted      | "                                       |
+--------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
|        | Terrace or lightwell | Permitted          | "                                       |
+--------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
|        | Stoop                | Permitted          | "                                       |
+--------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
|        | Corner entry         | Permitted          | Setbacks – Outbuilding                  |
|        |                      |                    | [IMAGE: <14.212.550_006.png>]           |
+--------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
|        | Forecourt            | Permitted          | "                                       |
+--------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
|        | Shopfront & canopy   | Permitted          | "                                       |
+--------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
|        | Grand entry          | Permitted          | "                                       |
+--------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 7 FRONTAGE COVERAGE           | 80% min.           | "                                       |
+--------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
|        | Exceptions: Forecourt width shall         | "                                       |
|        | not be deducted from frontage             |                                         |
|        | coverage for Forecourt private            |                                         |
|        | frontages                                 |                                         |
+--------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 8 BUILDING LENGTH (Primary    | 150 ft. max        | "                                       |
| frontage)                     |                    |                                         |
+--------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
|        | Exceptions: see Anchor Use Exceptions     | "                                       |
|        | Table V-5                                 |                                         |
+--------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 9 IMPERVIOUS SURFACE COVERAGE | 90% max.           | "                                       |
+--------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 10 PARKING (see Article VI)                        | "                                       |
+--------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
+--------+----------------------+------------------+-------------------------------+
| 1 BUILDING FUNCTION           | Per Table IV-1   | Building Height               |
|                               |                  | [IMAGE: <14.212.550_007.png>] |
+--------+----------------------+------------------+-------------------------------+
| 2 BUILDING HEIGHT                                | "                             |
+--------+----------------------+------------------+-------------------------------+
| A      | Principal building   | 3 stories max.   | "                             |
|        | (A)                  |                  |                               |
+--------+----------------------+------------------+-------------------------------+
| B      | Ground floor ceiling | 12 ft min. clear | "                             |
|        | (C)                  |                  |                               |
+--------+----------------------+------------------+-------------------------------+
| C      | Upper floor ceiling  | 8 ft min. clear  | "                             |
|        | (D)                  |                  |                               |
+--------+----------------------+------------------+-------------------------------+
|        | Exceptions: see Civic Use Exceptions    | "                             |
|        | Table V-6                               |                               |
+--------+----------------------+------------------+-------------------------------+
| 3 BUILDING ORIENTATION TO STREET                 | "                             |
+--------+----------------------+------------------+-------------------------------+
|        | Principal building   | Required         | "                             |
+--------+----------------------+------------------+-------------------------------+
|        | Exceptions: see Civic Use Exceptions    | "                             |
|        | Table V-6                               |                               |
+--------+----------------------+------------------+-------------------------------+
| 4 SETBACKS                                       | "                             |
+--------+----------------------+------------------+-------------------------------+
| D      | Front setback -      | 5 ft min.        | "                             |
|        | Primary frontage     |                  |                               |
+--------+----------------------+------------------+-------------------------------+
| E      | Front setback -      | 5 ft min.        | "                             |
|        | Secondary frontage   |                  |                               |
+--------+----------------------+------------------+-------------------------------+
| F      | Side Setback         | 0 ft min.        | "                             |
+--------+----------------------+------------------+-------------------------------+
| G      | Rear Setback         | 0 ft min. (8     | "                             |
|        |                      | ft. min. for     |                               |
|        |                      | alley)           |                               |
+--------+----------------------+------------------+-------------------------------+
|        | Exceptions: see Civic Use Exceptions    | "                             |
|        | Table V-6                               |                               |
+--------+----------------------+------------------+-------------------------------+
| 5 PRIVATE FRONTAGES (see SMC 14.212.1010)        | "                             |
+--------+----------------------+------------------+-------------------------------+
|        | Common yard          | Not permitted    | "                             |
+--------+----------------------+------------------+-------------------------------+
|        | Porch                | Not permitted    | "                             |
+--------+----------------------+------------------+-------------------------------+
|        | Terrace or Lightwell | Not permitted    | "                             |
+--------+----------------------+------------------+-------------------------------+
|        | Stoop                | Not permitted    | "                             |
+--------+----------------------+------------------+-------------------------------+
|        | Corner entry         | Permitted        | Setbacks                      |
|        |                      |                  | [IMAGE: <14.212.550_008.png>] |
+--------+----------------------+------------------+-------------------------------+
|        | Forecourt            | Permitted        | "                             |
+--------+----------------------+------------------+-------------------------------+
|        | Shopfront & canopy   | Permitted        | "                             |
+--------+----------------------+------------------+-------------------------------+
|        | Grand entry          | Permitted        | "                             |
+--------+----------------------+------------------+-------------------------------+
| 6 FRONTAGE COVERAGE           | 80% min.         | "                             |
+--------+----------------------+------------------+-------------------------------+
| 7 BUILDING LENGTH (Primary    | 150 ft. max      | "                             |
| frontage)                     |                  |                               |
+--------+----------------------+------------------+-------------------------------+
| 8 IMPERVIOUS SURFACE COVERAGE | 90% max.         | "                             |
+--------+----------------------+------------------+-------------------------------+
| 10 PARKING (see Article VI)                      | "                             |
+--------+----------------------+------------------+-------------------------------+
+--------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| Minimum building height                    | 1 story and 20 ft. |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| Maximum building length (Primary frontage) | 200 ft.            |
+--------------------------------------------+--------------------+
+------------------------------------+------------------------------------------+
| Maximum building height            | 5 stories (with special setback in Table |
|                                    | V-3)                                     |
+------------------------------------+------------------------------------------+
| Ground floor ceiling               | 9 ft. min. clear                         |
+------------------------------------+------------------------------------------+
| Orientation to street              | Determined according to function         |
+------------------------------------+------------------------------------------+
| Front setback - Primary frontage   | Determined according to function         |
+------------------------------------+------------------------------------------+
| Front setback - Secondary frontage | Determined according to function         |
+------------------------------------+------------------------------------------+
| Private frontages                  | Determined according to function         |
+------------------------------------+------------------------------------------+
| Frontage coverage                  | Determined according to function         |
+------------------------------------+------------------------------------------+
| Building length                    | Determined according to function         |
+------------------------------------+------------------------------------------+

Article VI. PARKING REGULATIONS

14.212.600 Purpose.
Parking regulations in this chapter are intended to provide an adequate parking supply while ensuring that parking facilities do not: a) become a dominant visual element of the Pilchuck District or otherwise detract from the intended urban form; or b) unduly consume land that may be employed for more active use.

14.212.610 Parking Access, Screening, Lighting, and Location.
A. Except as provided below, all off-street parking shall comply with the parking standards in Chapter 14.235 SMC.
B. Parking shall be accessed by rear alleys wherever existing or new alleys are available.
C. Where no alley is available, access should be from a side street, wherever side streets are available, and access points should be consolidated to the extent feasible.
D. Where access to parking facilities is provided from side or front streets, the maximum number of curb cuts associated with a single development shall be one two-lane curb cut or two one-lane curb cuts. The width of the vehicle access across the frontage shall be as narrow as practicable. Where vehicle access is provided from a street, pedestrian access outside of vehicle lanes shall be provided. Only one access point shall be permitted for a lot with a detached single-family dwelling.
E. All accessible parking required pursuant to the Americans with Disabilities Act and Chapter 19.27 RCW shall be located on-site.
F. Provisions specific to Neighborhood Single Family and Neighborhood Townhouse zones:
    1. Where access is approved other than from an alley, driveways at frontages shall be no wider than 10 feet at the sidewalk and garage doors shall be located either less than 10 feet or more than 19 feet from a frontage line to avoid vehicle parking across sidewalks.
    2. All parking garages and other parking areas shall be set back a minimum of 5 feet behind the front primary façade plane of the principal building.
    3. For single-family dwellings, tandem parking may be counted toward minimum parking standards.
G. Provisions specific to the Neighborhood Center zone:
    1. Parking shall be located behind or beneath the principal building unless it is demonstrated that site conditions preclude any location other than to the side of the building. In no case shall at-grade parking occur between the building and the public sidewalk along the principal frontage.
    2. Vehicular entrances to parking lots, garages, and other parking structures shall be no wider than 24 feet if two-way and 12 feet if one-way at the frontage.
    3. Parking lots, garages, and parking structures shall provide direct pedestrian access to a frontage line (i.e., not exclusively into a building) except underground levels which may provide exclusive pedestrian access through a building.
    4. Open parking lots that contain greater than 20 vehicles shall provide pedestrian pathways. Pathways shall be constructed of concrete or unit pavers and shall have a minimum 4-foot width of clear travel path exclusive of vehicle overhangs. The route and number of pathways required shall be determined based on the site plan and the direction of pedestrian travel, provided that a minimum of one pathway shall conveniently connect the primary concentration of spaces and the building(s) served by the parking lot.
    5. Parking garages on an Access Street or Community Corridor frontage shall have liner buildings lining the first story, except that podium parking levels that extend a maximum of 6 feet above the sidewalk may be screened with either landscaping or architectural hardscape, or a combination of the two.
    6. For buildings greater than 3 stories in height, a minimum of 50 percent of required parking spaces shall be located within structured parking.
    7. Driveways shall be set back a minimum of 5 feet from adjoining properties, unless a shared access easement crosses the common property line, and set back a minimum of 3 feet from any building.
    8. Open parking areas shall be screened from the principal frontage by a building or a decorative wall between 3.5 and 4.5 feet in height.
    9. Where non-continuous with parking areas on adjacent properties, open parking areas shall be screened with a decorative wall, fence, or continuous, solid, evergreen hedge no more than 4.5 feet high along the common property line. Hedges shall be planted in beds with a minimum plantable dimension of 2 feet.
    10. All parking areas shall be illuminated throughout the coverage area according to industry standards and CPTED guidelines. Light fixtures shall not exceed 20 feet in height and shall be shielded to prevent light spill onto adjacent properties or into second-floor windows.

14.212.620 Off-Street Parking Calculations.
Off-street parking for residential uses shall be provided at the rates shown in Chapter 14.235 SMC with the following modifications and exemption.
A. For non-residential uses, one off-street parking space shall be provided for each 400 square feet of gross floor area, except as provided in part B, below.
B. In any building, 1,500 square feet or 30 percent, whichever is less, of ground-floor retail, office, and service uses adjacent to and accessed directly from a public street shall be exempt from the off-street parking standards.
C. Joint use parking facilities may be permitted in accordance with SMC 14.235.070 and SMC 14.235.080, except that parking facilities serving non-residential uses shall be located within 800 feet of the parking generator. The City Planner at his or her sole discretion may determine that the proposed shared parking use has special characteristics that need to be taken into account and in such cases, shall require a parking study to be submitted for review and shall make a determination of the appropriate reduction allowed for shared parking.

14.212.630 Bicycle Parking Standards.
A. All new townhomes and stacked flat multi-family development shall provide a minimum of one securable bicycle storage space per dwelling. Storage spaces shall be within a building or otherwise enclosed. The bicycle space shall be exclusive of heated living area and required vehicle parking area, shall be located on the ground floor or below, and shall be reasonably accessible.
B. A minimum of one bicycle rack or lockable bicycle storage unit is required for any non-residential building.
C. Bicycle parking shall be designed in conjunction with pedestrian facilities and site furnishings. All bicycle parking and storage shall be located in safe, visible areas that do not impede pedestrian or vehicle traffic flow, and shall be well lit for nighttime use and convenient to building entries.

Article VII. LANDSCAPE REGULATIONS

14.212.700 Landscape and Open Space Standards.
Unlike the landscape regulations applicable to other parts of the City, the Pilchuck District has no requirements for buffering between adjacent land uses and developments, except to screen specific facilities such as utility and service areas and parking lots. Adjacent buildings and land uses within the Pilchuck District are intended to be visually and functionally compatible to create continuity rather than segregation along streets. The landscaping requirements in this chapter are intended, instead, to visually soften and punctuate the build environment, to provide shade, and to create comfortable places to live, work, shop, and recreate by incorporating built and natural forms.
A. Areas in excess of the impervious surface limits shown in Tables V-1 through V-4 shall be landscaped. This shall represent the minimum percentage of site area in landscaping and additional area may be required to meet other regulations or conditions of approval for a development proposal. Landscaping should be appropriate to urban areas, and may include decorative hardscape such as brick or paver walkways and plazas provided that permeable materials are used, screening and shading of parking areas, and landscaping of setback areas. In general, all areas that are not used for building, parking, or access, or other ancillary functions shall be landscaped.
B. To lessen the visual impact of outdoor parking areas and to provide shade, parking lots with 10 or more parking stalls shall provide interior landscaping. Interior landscaping shall consist of landscape islands, each of sufficient dimensions to accommodate a circle 5 feet wide exclusive of curbs. Landscape islands shall be separated by no more than 7 consecutive parking stalls. Each landscape island shall contain a minimum of 1 deciduous tree of a species characterized by a spreading canopy and ground cover at sufficient density to provide 75 percent coverage within 2 years. A minimum of one tree per 10 spaces shall be provided in landscape islands and/or perimeter beds. Trees shall be a minimum of 2.5 inch caliper measured 4 feet above grade at planting. Trees and shrubs shall provide adequate allowance for vehicle doors to protect vegetation and shall be protected by continuous or intermittent curbing. The overall parking lot landscape design shall disperse tree locations as evenly as practical. A determination of equivalence may be requested for alternative parking lot landscaping that meets the intent of this section.
C. Street trees are required consistent with the standards in Article III. The location and type of existing street trees on the block shall be evaluated at the time of development application to determine whether the existing type should be continued and whether the interval specified in Article III will require the placement of one or more trees as part of the proposed development. Street trees shall be a minimum of 2.5 inches in diameter measured 4 feet above surrounding grade at planting. For street trees to be installed within paved areas, the use of structural soil planting beds, continuous soil trenches, or root path trenches may be required in order to maximize the ability of the tree to thrive and perform well in the urban environment. A tree box may be required for street drainage.
D. Provisions specific to the Neighborhood Single Family and Neighborhood Townhouse zones:
    1. No paving shall be permitted within the front setback except for pedestrian access routes unless the Review Authority determines that no alternative site access is practical.
    2. For townhouse development, a minimum of one tree shall be planted within the private frontage for each 30 linear feet of site frontage. Trees shall be a variety appropriate to the space and conditions available.
    3. Fences within a private frontage shall be no taller than four feet at the highest point and shall be open rather than solid to allow light and visual access through the fence. Walls within a private frontage shall be no taller than three feet at the highest point, with an additional one foot of ornamental ironwork permitted.
E. Provisions specific to Neighborhood Center and Civic zones:
    1. Any pavement between the building and the sidewalk shall appear as an extension of the sidewalk.
    2. An area equal to 50 percent of the required pervious area or three percent of the net residential square footage (whichever is larger) shall be developed as shared open space. Shared open spaces may be designed for either active or passive activities. They should include places to sit, areas of both shade and sun, and may include a feature such as a fountain or art piece. Where the open space is adjacent to a public walkway, street, or plaza, provision should be made for direct access from the shared open space to the public open space, and may include provision to secure the shared open space from public entry at appropriate times. Shared open spaces may be located on a level that is above ground level and is not part of the surface landscaped area, but in this case it will not be counted as meeting the landscaping requirement. Shared open spaces may be limited to use by residents of the building in which they are located. Shared open space shall not be directly adjacent to a parking area unless adequately screened with landscaping and accessible without walking through the parking lot.
    3. The use of security fences should be minimized and limited to special locations where additional security is necessary. Such security fences shall not exceed 6 feet in height and should be designed to maintain a visually open character to the extent possible. This may be accomplished by using metal picket or open grille fencing or by mounting metal picket or open grille fencing on top of a low masonry wall.
    4. In no case shall chain link fencing, with or without coating or slats, razor ribbon, or barbed wire be allowed.

Article VIII. DESIGN STANDARDS

14.212.800 Purpose.
These design standards are intended to achieve a variety of goals, including:
•Reinforcing the architectural character of the community;
•Fostering visual compatibility between adjacent uses and throughout the Pilchuck District;
•Establishing relationships of buildings to the public street and sidewalk that create continuous, active, interesting, and intimate streetscapes;
•Ensuring that the visual bulk of new buildings maintains a pedestrian scale to preserve a small-town feel;
•Minimizing the prominence of parking within the urban landscape;
•Creating certainty for property owners and developers; and
•Promoting a strong sense of identity for the Pilchuck District neighborhood as a distinctive area of Snohomish.

14.212.810 Context.
Economic and physical development of the Pilchuck District is envisioned to reflect and enhance the Snohomish community, which has been in existence for over 150 years. The current Pilchuck District reflects development over most of this period. This long history has resulted in wide range of architectural styles, building types, scales, uses, and adaptive reuses representing the eras in which they were developed or modified. The variety of urban forms and architectural expressions help to establish the overall visual character of Snohomish. By virtue of the many design influences and practical accommodations, this character is eclectic while retaining a sense of history and small-town scale. The intent of these standards is to maintain and continue these qualities in new development.
While encouraging continuity and compatibility with the historic architectural traditions of the community, these standards are not intended to replicate Snohomish’s Historic District or to encourage development that conveys a false sense of history. Sites and buildings should reflect the era of their development while also acknowledging the historic context afforded by the Snohomish community. New development should include some design elements, features, and/or materials that recognize Snohomish’s heritage while also adhering to contemporary design and construction methods.
Additionally, these standards implement the Comprehensive Plan policies that define the vision for the Pilchuck District as a neighborhood. These policies emphasize elements in the public and private frontages that foster a dynamic, interesting, and comfortable pedestrian landscape and a distinctive “sense of place” within the larger Snohomish community.
The regulatory context provides four separate zones within the Pilchuck District: Neighborhood Single Family, Neighborhood Townhouse, Neighborhood Center, and Neighborhood Civic. The character of each zone will vary with the type and intensity of land use identified. Zones designated for single-family and townhouse land uses are intended to retain a strongly residential appearance and scale consistent with the function. Elsewhere in the Pilchuck District, multi-story buildings containing dwellings, commercial, and civic uses will be integrated to create a generally continuous and somewhat more compact row of buildings along the sidewalk. The intent of these standards is to foster compatibility and continuity between adjacent uses and along streets to create a context where residents, businesses, and employees will co-exist and thrive.

14.212.820 Applicability.
The provisions of these design standards apply to the Pilchuck District land use designation on the Land Use Designation Map. These standards shall apply to all development and redevelopment within the Pilchuck District. The degree to which each standard applies to a development/redevelopment project shall be evaluated on a case-by-case basis in an effort to achieve an overall design that meets the purpose and intent of these standards and all applicable policies and regulations.
The design elements are intended to foster a cohesive pattern of development that supports pedestrian activity and more intensive residential and commercial development in the Pilchuck District. Illustrations of ways in which the intent of the standards can be achieved are provided in a reference document. These images are meant only to be examples of the standards with which they are associated and may not be consistent with all standards. Further, they are not the only acceptable means of achieving the intent of the design standards. Applicants are encouraged to consider designs, styles, and techniques not pictured in the examples that comparably fulfill the intent of the design standards and further the goals of the Pilchuck District. Creativity within the parameters of the standards is encouraged.
A determination of equivalence may be requested for deviations from specific standards in accordance with SMC 14.212.170.

14.212.830 Site Design – General.
Intent: To encourage site design that creates an attractive and harmonious view from the public frontage.
A. Pedestrian walkways from the public sidewalk to the primary door shall be clear, direct, and in all cases, separate from vehicle access.
B. As applicable, the location and design of pedestrian and bicycle facilities, utility and mechanical equipment, and service areas for loading, outdoor storage, and solid waste shall be considered in overall site design and clearly addressed in the application.
C. Storage of materials, except displays of merchandise catering to a pedestrian clientele, shall be within enclosed buildings.
D. Proposed methods to minimize the appearance of at-grade parking areas from the street and adjacent properties shall be clearly addressed in the application.
E. Garden and screening walls, where used, shall exhibit detailing and artistry that may include top railings, caps, finials, etc.
F. Unless no alternative is available, above-ground utility meters shall not be located on a street-facing building façade. Where no reasonable alternative exists, meters adjacent to or on a building façade and visible from a street or adjacent property shall be adequately screened with an architectural wall incorporated into the building design. Above-ground utility facilities, e.g., electrical cabinets, located between the sidewalk and a building shall be screened with landscaping.
G. Outdoor trash and recycling areas shall be located at the rear of the site, when possible, away from pedestrian areas and screened on all sides. Screening enclosures shall match the materials and design elements of the primary structure.

14.212.840 Building Design – General.
Intent: To encourage design proposals that are consistent with accepted design principles, incorporate durable building materials, and integrate stylistically coherent architectural detailing.
A. Development shall incorporate elements that reflect the character of the Snohomish community. Justification of the consistency of proposed architectural style, elements, proportions, relationships, or materials with the local context may be required if antecedents within the community are not clear.
B. Buildings shall be “four-sided,” meaning that all façades including side and rear facades should be considered visible (unless facing “blind” onto an adjacent party wall) and should be designed as an architectural façade composition.
C. Architectural styles and stylistic references should be consistent and not combined on one building.
D. Façade massing elements shall be located and arranged according to the building’s architectural style and the function of interior spaces, and should respond to its site.
E. Architectural detailing shall be incorporated on all buildings consistent with the style and scale of the principal building and with the character of the community. Detail elements appropriate to the Snohomish community may include:
+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| • Knee brace                              | • Parapet with cornice                  |
+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| • Wide fascia and trim                    | • Belt course                           |
+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| • Rafter tail                             | • Vertical window                       |
+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| • Cupola                                  | • Dormer                                |
+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| • Window mullions (except false mullions) | • Substantial eave and gable projection |
+-------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
F. Exterior surface materials shall be consistent with the traditional architectural materials and should contribute to the appearance of a 100-year functional building life. Appropriate materials include:
    •Wood or long-lasting wood appearance materials, including cement fiber board but not vinyl or similar materials. Wood shakes and shingles, either square or decorative, shall be used only on single-family and townhouse buildings and their outbuildings.
    •Masonry, including brick and stone, but not faux stone. CMU is generally not appropriate, except that split-face CMU may be permitted in combination with other materials, e.g., as a base course;
    •Metal panels when reflective of historic industrial buildings (not appropriate for single-family and townhouse development);
    •Stucco may be used as a contrasting material to another primary surface material but shall not be the predominant surface material. Where used, joint patterns should reflect the overall composition of the building.
    •Poured-in-place concrete may be permitted on a limited basis where textured form liners, pigments, stains, and/or special aggregates are used to create visually interesting surfaces. To the degree possible, formwork should shape architectural profiles of walls that create bases, cornices, pilasters, panel frames, and other elements contributing to façade composition and human scale.
G. Except ground-floor storefronts, windows shall reflect historic proportions and trim size and details. Window proportions shall be either square or vertically oriented, with a minimum of 2:1 vertical to horizontal proportion typical. Greater vertical to horizontal proportions are encouraged. Windows inset from the exterior plane are strongly encouraged for all residential development and required for the Neighborhood Center zone. Sills shall be provided on all windows except storefronts. Permanent materials such as wood, precast concrete, and similar shall be used for sills and window and door trims.
H. Unifying architectural approaches shall be used to lay out a window pattern across a façade, such as aligning windows by using common sill or header lines, and/or aligned vertical centerlines of windows and doors between upper and lower floors. The design logic of the window composition within the context of the overall building design must be evident.
I. Sliding doors shall not be located on a street-facing façade.
J. Weather protection at all building entries is strongly encouraged and required for street-facing entries.

14.212.850 Standards Specific to the Neighborhood Single Family Zone.
Intent: To maintain and enhance the small-lot, single-family character of the existing neighborhood through features that modulate scale and incorporate traditional proportions and materials.
A. Primary roof surfaces and gables shall have a minimum pitch of 8:12, except porch roofs, which may be less.
B. All façades visible from a public street shall be articulated at maximum intervals of 22 feet horizontally or 12 feet vertically. Articulation of surfaces shall be achieved through a change of surface plane, materials, detailing such as belly bands, projections such as bay windows, or alignment of other prominent features.
C. Roofed porches, where provided, shall have a minimum dimension of 6 feet.
D. Outbuildings shall visually relate to the primary structure through the use of common materials, features, and proportions.

14.212.860 Standards Specific to the Neighborhood Townhouse Zone.
Intent: To promote development of attached dwellings that is visually compatible with single-family development in proportions and features.
A. Single-family buildings in the Neighborhood Townhouse zone shall be subject to the standards applicable to the Neighborhood Single Family zone.
B. Non-residential primary structures shall be subject to all applicable standards in this section. Where functional requirements of the use are in conflict with these standards, the Review Authority is authorized to allow flexibility in the application of the standards, provided that the scale and appearance of proposed site and building improvements are consistent with the intent of the zone and visually compatible with adjacent properties.
C. Townhouse dwellings shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide at the front façade.
D. Townhouses shall employ one of the following methods of horizontal modulation of street-facing facades to differentiate dwellings:
    1. Setback variation between dwelling units. No more than two adjacent dwellings shall have the same setback without a setback variation of at least 1 foot.
    2. Horizontal modulation within each dwelling unit. The modulation shall be a minimum of 1 foot in depth and 4 feet in width, the sum of these dimensions shall be no less than 8 feet.
E. Street-facing rooflines shall vary between adjacent dwelling units.
F. Adjacent dwelling units shall be visually differentiated through the use of distinctive features and materials, although the individual designs should reflect the unity of the overall building design. Unifying compositional elements may include a common window header or sill.
G. All façades visible from a public street shall be articulated at maximum intervals of 22 feet horizontally and 12 feet vertically. Articulation of surfaces may occur through a change of wall plane or materials, incorporation of detailing such as belly bands, or projections such as bay windows, porches, and balconies.
H. Roofed porches, where provided, shall have a minimum dimension of 6 feet. This standard does not apply to minor entry landings.
I. Primary roof surfaces and gables shall have a minimum pitch of 8:12, except porch roofs, which may be less.
J. Outbuildings shall incorporate the materials, features, and proportions of the primary building.
K. Walkways from the public sidewalk shall not be shared by more than 2 adjacent units. Elevated entries to adjacent units, such as porches or landings, should not directly adjoin.
L. Light fixtures shall be provided for all entries.
M. Landscaping between the public sidewalk and the front entry shall provide views between 3 and 8 feet above grade consistent with Community Policing Through Environmental Design (CPTED) principles.
N. Buildings shall be designed to create a private outdoor space with a minimum area of 100 square feet and a minimum dimension of 10 feet for the residents of each unit.
O. Ground-floors shall have a minimum of 150 square feet of living area per unit oriented to the street, exclusive of storage, shop, utility areas, stairs, and garages.

14.212.870 Standards Specific to the Neighborhood Center Zone.
Intent: To promote opportunities for a variety of creative residential and employment designs at varying scales that individually reinforce the community character and collectively contribute to a continuous streetscape and a vital and interesting pedestrian experience.
A. Townhouse development in the Neighborhood Center zone shall be subject to the design standards for the Neighborhood Townhouse zone as applicable to the range of permitted private frontages in SMC 14.212.550.
B. Private frontage areas should be designed for pedestrian interest and activity.
    1. If maintained at-grade with the sidewalk, such areas should appear as extensions of the adjacent sidewalk, although alternative paving materials, such as stamped concrete, bricks, pavers, or tile may be used. This area may be landscaped, provided that substantial pedestrian area is provided adjacent to all entries. If not landscaped, the frontage area may be used for retail display or seating area. Features that encourage use and enjoyment of the space should be incorporated.
    2. If the above-ground portion of a podium parking structure extends to or into a private frontage, the exterior podium wall shall not provide sidewalk views of vehicles, metal screening (unless highly decorative and providing significant screening), or blank concrete walls. Above-grade podium walls shall be enhanced with landscaping, architectural hardscape, or a combination, e.g., terraced planters, to provide an attractive view.
C. Building Massing and Articulation. Intent: Avoid monolithic street wall façades, provide pedestrian interest, and focus attention at the street level while offering architectural interest and continuity on the upper floors.
    1. Buildings shall emphasize pedestrian scale with features that identify a break between the ground-floor and upper floors and focus attention on the street level. These features may include:
        •A projecting horizontal element such as a cornice, a belt course, or a string course;
        •A distinct change of materials and texture;
        •Continuous clerestory windows;
        •An entry alcove(s) (for commercial ground-floor uses) of at least 60 percent of the building width;
        •A change of façade plane.
    A ground-level arcade is not typical for Snohomish and may be considered on a case by case basis. If used, arcade columns shall not be over 2 feet in diameter and should include architectural detailing.
    2. Architectural identification of the primary building entrance should not extend above the first floor.
    3. Architectural relief features, in addition to windows, shall indicate breaks between floors. These features should effectively break the appearance of vertical massing. Appropriate features may include a projection such as a belt course, a pattern of balconies, or other elements to achieve the intended result.
    4. Articulation of street-facing facades shall be provided, at a minimum, for every 50 feet of building perimeter to minimize the appearance of horizontal massing. Façade articulation shall be achieved through pilasters, vertical recesses, change in wall plane, a distinct change of materials, or similar measures that achieve the intended result.
    5. Horizontal ornament such as canopies, belt courses, string courses, or cornice lines should be carried across adjacent façades to unify various building masses and convey the sense of continuity between adjacent buildings.
    6. Where permitted, parking structure walls facing public streets shall provide screening and interest at the street level. This may include green screens, artwork, or architectural features to resemble an occupied building. Non-access building openings at the street level, such as for ventilation, shall have a vertical dimension at least two times the horizontal dimension. At-grade landscaping shall not be accepted as a substitute for creative articulation of wall surfaces.
    7. Building levels in excess of 3 stories require a minimum setback of 8 feet behind the primary ground-floor façade plane on any frontage. A projecting cornice or similar projecting element shall be provided at the plane break above the third floor to emphasize the change in wall plane. The exterior area above the third floor may be designed as outdoor living space.
D. Windows and Entrances. Intent: To activate and lighten façades and express the interior of buildings on the exterior through the integration of windows and doors in an overall building composition. To reinforce the historic character of Snohomish through traditional window formats.
    1. Curtain-wall window walls shall not be used except when used as ground-floor glazing or as “penthouse” glazing at the top floor of a 4-story or higher building.
    2. Where dimensional material, such as brick, is used on the exterior building surface, windows shall be inset a minimum of 3 inches from the wall surface to add relief to the walls and as a reference to local architectural tradition. Where inset windows are not practicable, trim surrounding the window shall project from the façade plane a minimum of 1 inch and shall include a head trim or similar element with a greater projection to create a shadow line.
    3. Each floor of a street-facing façade shall have glazing on a minimum of 20 percent of the wall area, except that ground-floor commercial spaces shall have a minimum glazed area equal to 50 percent of the ground-floor, street-facing façade and except parking structure façades, where permitted.
    4. For ground-floor retail spaces, the lower edge of storefront windows shall be no higher than 24 inches above the sidewalk to allow room for a minimal bulkhead or kickplate. Glazing should generally extend to the ceiling of the ground floor.
    5. Storefronts shall not have vinyl window frames. If aluminum is used, it shall be painted or otherwise colored a dark shade.
    6. Commercial entrances are encouraged to include a wide alcove with the building entry at the center.
    7. Ground-floor residential uses are encouraged to elevate windows above the view of pedestrians on the sidewalk to create privacy for occupants.
    8. Building entry points for all upper story spaces shall be located on the principal or secondary frontage. For mixed-use buildings, entrances to residential, office, or other upper story uses shall be clearly distinguishable in form and location from retail entrances.
    9. All primary entry doors shall have extensive glazing, with a minimum of one foot between the glass and the bottom of the door. Wood or painted metal doors with traditional hardware are encouraged.
    10. Clear glass should be used. If tinted glazing is used, light tints and blue, green, or gray hues should be used. Reflective glazing and/or reflective adhesive films should not be used. Non-reflective materials should be used for solar or heat control.
E. Canopies or awnings that provide weather protection along all frontages are encouraged where consistent with the building’s architectural style. Weather protection is required at all frontage building entries. Quarter-round awnings are strongly discouraged. Internally illuminated awnings are prohibited unless opaque. Where provided, awnings and canopies shall extend a minimum of 5 feet from the façade of the building and shall be a minimum of 8 feet above ground.
F. Balconies. Intent: To ensure that balconies enhance but do not dominate building façades.
    1. Balconies shall not be the predominant feature of a façade and shall be incorporated into and consistent with the overall building design.
    2. Balconies shall be either less than 3 feet in depth (decorative) or greater than 5 feet (usable) and shall not project more than 3 feet from any adjacent wall plane or be located at building corners where they will dominate the façade.
    3. Balcony railings shall be open rather than boxy and opaque. Railings and balusters shall be consistent with the architectural style of the building. If extending past the face of the building, railings and balusters shall be ornamental metal.
    4. The use of roof-tops and upper-story horizontal building modulations as outdoor enjoyment areas is encouraged.
G. Lighting. Intent: To provide safety and atmosphere through the use of exterior lighting while minimizing impacts on other land uses.
    1. All building entries shall provide illumination for safety and for nighttime identification of the entry.
    2. Where lighting is intended to wash across a building façade, it shall be shielded to limit illumination to the ground-floor.
    3. All ground-floor facades shall include pedestrian-level lighting along sidewalks.
    4. Light fixtures shall be consistent with the architectural style of the building. Recessed can lights should be avoided and non-recessed can light fixtures should not be used.
    5. All exterior light fixtures shall be glare-free and shielded from the sky, adjacent properties, and critical areas and their buffers.
H. Roofs. Intent: To ensure that rooflines and their architectural details create distinctive silhouettes and finished “tops” to building designs that reflect the community’s architectural traditions.
    1. Flat roofs (sloped to drain) with parapets shall be used on all buildings over 3 stories. A fire-rescue refuge area shall be included in the upper-story rooftop of all buildings over 3 stories.
    2. Roof-top mechanical equipment shall not be visible from the street or from another building of the same height. On buildings with flat roofs, roof-top equipment shall be screened by a continuous parapet. On buildings with pitched roofs, roof-top mechanical equipment shall be screened in wells within the roof structure.
    3. All parapets shall be architecturally finished on both sides and colored a neutral hue consistent with the building color.
    4. Each parapet shall incorporate a cornice, which shall project a minimum of 24 inches from the parapet.
    5. Pitched roofs shall have a minimum 8:12 pitch with a minimum eave projection of 24 inches. Eaves shall incorporate rafter ends at a dimension and frequency consistent with historic examples from the community.

14.212.880 Standards Specific to the Neighborhood Civic Zone.
Intent: To ensure that development of civic and other community uses are consistent with and further the overall vision for the Pilchuck District.
A. Development in the Civic zone shall be subject to the design standards of the Neighborhood Center zone, with the exception of single-story structures adjacent to and serving the Centennial Trail, which shall be the design standards for the Neighborhood Single Family zone.

Article IX. SIGN STANDARDS [Reserved]

Article X. DESCRIPTION OF TERMS

14.212.1010 Private Frontage Types.
Private frontage types described below represent the various options for building forms and associated improvements at the principal frontage. The applicability of private frontage types to specific zones is shown in Tables V-1, V-2, V-3, V-4, and V-6.
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| (1) Common yard: A common         | (2) Porch: A planted frontage  | (3) Terrace or Lightwell:      |
| yard is a frontage wherein        | wherein the façade is set      | A frontage wherein the         |
| the façade is set back            | back from the frontage         | facade is setback from         |
| from the principal frontage       | line with an attached porch    | the frontage line by an        |
| line to provide a separation      | permitted to encroach into     | elevated terrace or sunken     |
| from the public right-of-way      | the front setback area         | lightwell. This type buffers   |
| for privacy and private           | when expressed as a separate   | residential uses from sidewalk |
| open space use by the residents.  | mass appended to the primary   | activity. A terrace frontage   |
| The front yard created            | building plane. A porch        | may incorporate a podium       |
| remains generally visually        | is a roofed space, open        | parking structure when         |
| continuous with adjacent          | along two or more sides,       | the setback area is landscaped |
| yards, broken only by landscaping | and adjunct to a residential   | to fully screen the parking    |
| and minimal fences. Common        | building, commonly serving     | structure.                     |
| yard frontages are characterized  | to shelter an entrance         |                                |
| by landscaping.                   | and provide a private outdoor  |                                |
|                                   | space.                         |                                |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
|                                   |                                |                                |
| [IMAGE: <14.212.1010_001.png>]    | [IMAGE: <14.212.1010_002.png>] | [IMAGE: <14.212.1010_003.png>] |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
+--------------------------------+-----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| (4) Stoop: A frontage          | 5) Corner Entry: A frontage       | 6) Forecourt: A frontage wherein |
| wherein the façade             | creating a distinctive building   | a portion of the façade is       |
| is aligned close to            | entrance to emphasize the         | close to the frontage line       |
| the frontage line with         | corner of a building. The         | and the central portion is       |
| the first story elevated       | frontage should create an         | set back, creating a lingering   |
| from the sidewalk sufficiently | open pedestrian area extending    | space extending from the         |
| to provide some privacy        | from the public sidewalk          | public sidewalk. The forecourt   |
| for residents. The             | to the entrance. Architectural    | may be used in conjunction       |
| entrance is usually            | elements should place significant | with other frontage types.       |
| an exterior stair and          | emphasize on the corner of        | The forecourt opening shall      |
| landing. This type             | the building. These elements      | be a maximum of 30 feet wide.    |
| is recommended for             | may include façade projections    | It may feature a decorative      |
| ground floor residential       | or recessions, balconies,         | wall or fence on the sidewalk    |
| uses. Stoops may feature       | roof articulation, and changing   | side that creates a gateway      |
| a weather protection           | repetitive façade elements        | to the forecourt, but should     |
| at the top of the stair        | such as window type but in        | appear as public space. A        |
| and may encroach in            | all cases should promote          | forecourt can be appropriate     |
| the front setback area         | a prominent entrance.             | for ground floor or upper        |
| but not into the right-of-way. |                                   | floor residential uses when      |
|                                |                                   | combined with stoops, or         |
|                                |                                   | can be combined with storefront  |
|                                |                                   | frontage types. When combined    |
|                                |                                   | with retail, restaurant,         |
|                                |                                   | and service uses, all three      |
|                                |                                   | sides of the courtyard shall     |
|                                |                                   | feature shopfront entrances      |
|                                |                                   | and display windows and the      |
|                                |                                   | forecourt must be treated        |
|                                |                                   | as an extension of the sidewalk  |
|                                |                                   | space.                           |
+--------------------------------+-----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
|                                |                                   |                                  |
| [IMAGE: <14.212.1010_004.png>] | [IMAGE: <14.212.1010_005.png>]    | [IMAGE: <14.212.1010_006.png>]   |
+--------------------------------+-----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
+--------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| (7) Shopfront and Canopy: A frontage wherein     | (8) Grand Entry: A frontage wherein        |
| the façade is aligned close to the frontage      | the façade is aligned close to the         |
| line with the building entrance near sidewalk    | frontage line with an entrance raised      |
| grade. This type is conventional commercial      | above the sidewalk and set back from       |
| configuration that allows display of merchandise | the façade to create a formal entry        |
| and direct access from the public sidewalk.      | feature. This frontage type is appropriate |
| Each shopfront shall contain at least one        | for access to a centralized lobby.         |
| building entrance with a canopy that may         | The setback may be paved or landscaped     |
| overhang the sidewalk. Each shall have           | or a combination of the two.               |
| substantial, clear-glass display windows         |                                            |
| framed within storefront pilasters and           |                                            |
| base. The interior of the building shall         |                                            |
| be designed to provide either a clear view       |                                            |
| of activities within the building or a           |                                            |
| minimum 3-foot depth of display area. Any        |                                            |
| areas between the building and the sidewalk      |                                            |
| shall be treated as an extension of the          |                                            |
| sidewalk. The shopfront frontage type is         |                                            |
| specifically intended to provide block           |                                            |
| frontages with a multiplicity of doors           |                                            |
| and display windows.                             |                                            |
+--------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
|                                                  |                                            |
| [IMAGE: <14.212.1010_007.png>]                   | [IMAGE: <14.212.1010_008.png>]             |
+--------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+

14.212.1020 Definitions.
This section provides definitions for terms used in this chapter. If defined separately in the Snohomish Municipal Code, the definition provided in this section shall be used in the context of this chapter. If a term used in this chapter is not defined in this section, the Review Authority shall determine the correct definition. Terms shown in bold font are defined within this section.
Anchor use: a single commercial use occupying a minimum ground-floor area of 30,000 square feet that generates significant pedestrian traffic and increases the traffic of shoppers at or near its location.
Attic: the interior part of a building above the structure’s plate line.
Belt course: a contrasting horizontal layer of stones, bricks, tile, etc. in a wall.
Bulb-out: (also curb extension) a traffic-calming and pedestrian-safety device that narrows the street by widening the curb and sidewalk, typically at intersections.
Bungalow court: a configuration of four or more detached single-family residences arranged around and facing a common, shared pedestrian courtyard open to the street, with pedestrian access to the building entrances from the courtyard and street. Parking is aggregated on one portion of the site rather than occurring at each unit, with no vehicular access within the courtyard. In the context of this chapter, the term is applicable only to relocated single-family structures.
Building height: the vertical extent of a building, measured in stories.
By right: a term characterizing a proposal or component of a proposal that, when in compliance with all requirements of this chapter and other applicable portions of the Snohomish Municipal Code, requires no special considerations or conditions for consistency with the intent of this chapter and applicable policies. (see provisional)
Civic: the term characterizing not-for-profit organizations and uses dedicated to arts, culture, education, recreation, government, transit, and municipal parking.
Façade: the exterior wall of a building.
Forecourt private frontage: a private frontage type wherein a portion of the façade is close to the frontage line and the central portion is set back. (see SMC 14.212.1010)
Front setback: the area between the frontage line and the maximum setback line.
Frontage: the area between a building façade and the centerline of the adjacent street, inclusive of its built and planted components. Frontage is divided into the private frontage and the public frontage. (see Figure X-1)Figure X-1. Frontages
[IMAGE: <14.212.1020_001.png>]
Frontage coverage: the minimum percentage of the length of the principal frontage occupied by the primary façade(s) within the front setback. (see Figure X-2)Figure X-2. Frontage Coverage Calculation
[IMAGE: <14.212.1020_002.png>]
Frontage line: a property line that coincides with the edge or margin of the street (not alley) public right-of-way.
Frontage, private: (see private frontage)
Frontage, public: (see public frontage)
Ground floor: the story of a building on which the primary entrance is located.
Height Overlay: a portion of the Neighborhood Center zone for which additional building height is permitted through Transfer of Development Rights, as shown on the Regulating Plan.
Impervious surface coverage: the percentage of total area of a parcel, including setback areas, that is covered by an impervious surface. For the purposes of this chapter, impervious surfaces are hard surfaces that do not allow for water infiltration or have a runoff coefficient of 0.90 or more. Examples of impervious surfaces include roofs, standard asphalt or concrete pavement, and gravel driving surfaces.
Lightwell: a private frontage type that includes a below-grade entrance or recess designed to allow light into basements. (see SMC 14.212.1010)
Liner building: a building specifically designed to mask a parking structure from a frontage.
Open porch: a roofed space, open along two or more sides, and adjunct to a residential building, commonly serving to shelter an entrance and provide a private outdoor space.
Open parking: a parking area not fully enclosed within a building and visible from adjacent streets or properties.
Outbuilding: an accessory structure on the same lot as, and usually located toward the rear of, a principal building.
Parking structure: a structure or portion of a structure, enclosed on all frontages except for limited access/egress points and light/ventilation windows, designed for vehicle parking. Parking structures may be at, below, or above the adjacent sidewalk grade.
Pedestrian street: (see woonerf)
Podium parking structure: a portion of a building intended for vehicle storage built below the main building mass and partially submerged below the elevation of the adjacent sidewalk.
Primary entrance: the main/principal point of pedestrian access into a building, located parallel to and visible from the adjacent street or its tangent.
Primary façade: the exterior wall of a building that faces the principal frontage.
Principal building: the primary habitable structure on a lot. (see outbuilding)
Principal frontage: on corner or through lots, the private frontage designated to bear the address and principal entrance to the building. See secondary frontage.
Private frontage:: 
    1. the privately held area between the frontage line and the maximum setback line, if applicable, or the façade of the principal building; and
    2. portions of all primary facades up to the top of the first or second floor, including building entrances, located along and oriented to a street.
Physical elements of the private frontage include, but are not limited to, a building’s primary entrance treatments and setback areas. (see SMC 14.212.1010)
Provisional use: a term that characterizes a land use requiring special consideration due either to its potential impacts on the neighborhood and land uses in the vicinity and/or to typical or uncertain aspects of its physical organization, design, or function. A provisional use may be approved if the proposed use, with or without special conditions, is determined to be consistent with the intent of this chapter.
Public frontage: the area of the street right-of-way extending from the edge of the vehicle lanes of the adjacent roadway(s) to the frontage line. Physical elements of the public frontage include, but are not limited to, the curb, sidewalk, planter strip, street trees, and streetlights.
Regulating Plan: the zoning map for the Pilchuck District land use designation, adopted as part of this chapter.
Review Authority: the individual or official City body identified in this development code as having responsibility and authority to review and approve or disapprove the permit applications described in Article I of this chapter. The Review Authority will typically be the City Planner but may be the Hearing Examiner.
Side street: for corner lots, the street adjacent to the secondary frontage.
Secondary frontage: on corner lots, the private frontage that is not the principal frontage.
Special pavements: a general term for alternatives to standard concrete or asphalt pavement. The term may include, but is not limited to, bricks, cobbles, precast pavers, aggregates, and patterned concrete. The term typically does not include asphalt, whether stamped or colored.
String course: a narrow horizontal band of masonry or similar building material extending across the façade that creates a visual distinction between the façade areas above and below. A string course may be flush or projecting, and may be flat surfaced, molded, textured, or carved.
Story: a habitable level within a building, excluding an attic or raised basement, subject to ceiling height limitations in Article V of this chapter.
Structured parking: (see parking structure)
Townhouse: (also rowhouse) any residential dwelling sharing a vertical wall with a dwelling on the same or a separate lot. No portion of any townhouse is above or below another townhouse.
Transfer of development rights (TDR): the mechanism by which the entitlement to develop property may be sold from a designated sending site and purchased for use at an eligible receiving site where it can be exchanged for the license to place an increment of development on the receiving site in excess of the level of development allowed by-right.
Upper floor/story: any story above the ground floor.
Woonerf: a segment of right-of-way with limited demarcation of travel lanes where vehicles share the road equally with bicyclists and pedestrians.
Zone: in the context of this chapter, the term refers to one of the regulatory districts within the Pilchuck District land use designation, as shown on the Regulating Plan. (Ord. 2209, 2011; Ord. 2347, 2018)

Chapter 14.215 SUBDIVISIONS

Sections:
14.215.010   Purpose and Scope
14.215.020   Preliminary Plat Approval Criteria
14.215.025   Preliminary Plat Approval
14.215.030   Revisions of Preliminary Plats
14.215.035   Construction Drawings
14.215.040   Preconstruction Meeting
14.215.050   Construction Compliance
14.215.060   Assurance That Any Remaining Improvements Will Be Installed
14.215.070   As-Built Drawings
14.215.080   Maintenance Bond
14.215.085   Extension of Time for Preliminary Plats
14.215.090   Final Plats
14.215.100   Final Plat Criteria
14.215.105   Phased Development
14.215.110   Vacations and Alterations of Plats
14.215.120   Short Plat
14.215.125   Fee Simple Unit Lot Subdivisions
14.215.130   Boundary Line Adjustments

14.215.010 Purpose and Scope.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the subdivision of land and adjustment of property lines to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare in accordance with the standards established by the state. The subdivision of land is processed as a plat or short plat, depending on the number of developable lots proposed. Revisions, vacations, alterations, and extensions to previously approved subdivisions or plats, if requested, are processed separately. (Ord. 2353, 2018)

14.215.020 Preliminary Plat Approval Criteria.
A. Preliminary plats are Type 4 permits under Chapter 14.20 SMC. The preliminary plat application information shall include, at a minimum, the following:
    1. A title certificate;
    2. The required fees related to the review of the preliminary plat;
    3. If the property is within the NE Sewer Area, an affirmation of the obligation of the property owners binding the properties to the payment of all present or future charges for the Cemetery Creek Special Project, and a preliminary description of developer proposed sewer extensions and capacity improvements; and
    4. Submittal materials listed in SMC 14.20.060(C).
B. The approval criteria for approval of preliminary plats shall be as follows:
    1. The criteria stated in RCW 58.17.110.
    2. If the property is in the NE Sewer Area, a showing that the criteria in SMC 15.04.047 will be satisfied.
    3. Consistency with the Comprehensive Plan.
    4. Consistency with this Development Code and the adopted City of Snohomish Engineering Standards Manual.
    5. Consistency with the concurrency requirement of SMC 14.20.090.
    6. Provision of off-site improvements or dedications of land to the public which are needed to mitigate the development’s impacts and which are proportional to those impacts.
    7. Compliance with the requirements of SMC Title 15, entitled “Sewer, Water, and Stormwater,” including but not limited to the provisions stated in:
        a. SMC 15.04.047, NE Sewer Area, if relevant; and
        b. SMC 15.04.140, Connection to Sewer System Required; and
        c. Chapter 15.16 SMC, Stormwater Management. (Ord. 2173, 2009; Ord. 2184, 2010; Ord. 2252, 2013; Ord. 2338, 2017; Ord. 2353, 2018)

14.215.025 Preliminary Plat Approval.
A. Preliminary plat approval shall be effective for a period of sixty (60) months. Additional time for application for final plat approval may be granted as provided by SMC 14.215.085.
B. Preliminary approval shall be considered the basis upon which the applicant may proceed toward development of the subdivision and preparation of the final plat subject to all the conditions of the preliminary approval.
C. When a plat is developed in divisions or phases and complete applications for final plats for all divisions or phases are not submitted within the time limits provided in this section, preliminary subdivision approval for all incomplete divisions or phases shall become void.
D. When a preliminary plat, or division or phase thereof, becomes void due to expiration of approval, a new, complete application for preliminary plat approval shall be required. Such application shall conform to regulations applicable at the time of submittal. (Ord. 2184, 2010; Ord. 2353, 2018)

14.215.030 Revisions of Preliminary Plats.
Applications to revise plats that have received preliminary approval shall comply with the following:
A. Revisions that result in any substantial changes as determined by the City Planner shall be treated as a new application for purposes of vesting and shall be reviewed in the same manner as the original submittal. For the purpose of this section, substantial change includes the creation of additional lots, the elimination of open space or changes to conditions of approval on an approved preliminary plat.
B. Approval of the following modifications by the Planning Director shall not be considered substantial changes:
    1. Engineering design, unless the proposed design alters or eliminates features specifically required as a condition of preliminary plat approval;
    2. Changes in lot dimensions that are consistent with Chapter 14.210 SMC;
    3. A decrease in the number of lots to be created. (Ord. 2353, 2018)

14.215.035 Construction Drawings.
The applicant shall submit construction drawings for all required site improvements together with fees sufficient to cover all City costs in reviewing and processing the drawings. Such applications for site construction shall be processed as Type 2 permits under Chapter 14.20 SMC. The City Engineer shall determine whether the drawings conform to the design and development standards of the City. If they do not comply, the City Engineer shall return the drawings to the applicant with a letter of correction. If the drawings meet City standards, the City Engineer shall approve the drawings, issue construction approval, and collect the required fee deposit to cover construction inspection. (Ord. 2353, 2018)

14.215.040 Preconstruction Meeting.
City staff and other appropriate parties shall meet with the contractor responsible for the plat construction to review the approved preliminary plat requirements, construction drawings, construction methods, and any other relevant issues deemed necessary by City staff prior to the beginning of construction. (Ord. 2353, 2018)

14.215.050 Construction Compliance.
The City Engineer or designee shall inspect the required improvements. Except as provided in SMC 14.215.060, the City Planner shall not accept final plat application until said improvements are completed in accordance with the approved preliminary plat, the approved construction drawings, and the standards and requirements of this Development Code. (Ord. 2353, 2018)

14.215.060 Assurance That Any Remaining Improvements Will Be Installed.
Construction of improvements shall normally be complete prior to approving the final plat. However, the City may approve the final plat with certain incomplete improvements if:
A. Said improvements are more practically done later, such as the final lift of asphalt surfaces which might otherwise be marred by heavy equipment, or recreational equipment which might be vandalized if installed before the subdivision is populated, or street trees and other landscape and mitigation plantings which are better installed in a different season;
B. The applicant deposits a performance bond or cash surety, with the City as beneficiary, in an amount not less than one hundred fifty (150) percent of the City Engineer’s cost estimate for the remaining improvements; and
C. Said bond or surety specifies a period within which to complete the improvements, which period shall not exceed two (2) years from the date of final plat approval. (Ord. 2353, 2018)

14.215.070 As-Built Drawings.
The applicant shall submit as-built drawings to the City Engineer. An application for final plat shall not be accepted until the City Engineer reviews and approves said as-built drawings by means of signature on a reproducible copy furnished by the applicant. The applicant shall also provide the as-built drawings in a digital format approved by the City Engineer. (Ord. 2353, 2018)

14.215.080 Maintenance Bond.
A. The applicant shall deposit with the City a maintenance bond or similar surety that warrants the successful operation of all required plat improvements, and that warrants against defects in labor and material and any damage caused by construction activity.
B. The maintenance bond shall be valid for two (2) years from City acceptance of all required improvements, which may or may not coincide with final plat approval as provided in SMC 14.215.060.
C. The bond or other surety shall be submitted with the final plat application and shall be ten (10) percent of the City Engineer estimated value of all required plat improvements.
D. The maintenance bond or other approved surety shall be in addition to any performance bond as provided in SMC 14.215.060.
E. The City Attorney shall approve the form, sufficiency, and manner of execution of the maintenance bond.
F. Upon the termination of the warranty period, and after any necessary restoration or repair of improvements, the City shall authorize the release of the maintenance bond; provided, that the City may withhold release of the bond up to one (1) year from the date of any restoration or repairs to ensure adequacy. (Ord. 2353, 2018)

14.215.085 Extension of Time for Preliminary Plats.
As provided by this section, the City may authorize additional time for the submittal of a final plat for approval. Extensions may be granted in periods not to exceed one (1) year.
A. A request for an extension of time shall be submitted in writing to the Planning Director and shall:
    1. Be submitted not less than sixty (60) days, nor more than one hundred fifty (150) days, prior to the expiration of the preliminary plat approval.
    2. Identify the preliminary plat by name, City permit number and date of decision.
    3. Specify the cause of, and need for, an extension of time beyond that provided by SMC 14.215.025.
B. Upon review and consideration of the request, the Planning Director may at his/her discretion authorize an initial, one (1) year extension for submittal of a final plat (sixty (60) months plus twelve (12) months for a total of seventy-two (72) months).
C. Upon review and consideration of the request, the Planning Director may at his/her discretion authorize a second, one (1) year extension for submittal of a final plat (seventy-two (72) months plus twelve (12) months for a total of eighty-four (84) months). (Ord. 2184, 2010; Ord. 2353, 2018)

14.215.090 Final Plats.
Final plats are Type 2 permits under Chapter 14.20 SMC. The application shall include, at a minimum, the following submissions:
A. Plat map certified by a registered land surveyor, including everything required by RCW 58.17.160 and including signage blocks as required by the City;
B. Title certificate confirming that title vests in the stated owners and that any dedications, easements, or deeds being granted to the City are free of encumbrances;
C. Legal descriptions of the lands divided as they appear on the plat;
D. Closure calculation records for all lots, tracts, and boundaries within the plat;
E. A statement that a subdivision has been made with the free consent of the owners;
F. A dedication to the public of all streets and other public areas;
G. A performance bond, if appropriate, per SMC 14.215.060 and a maintenance bond per SMC 14.215.080; and
H. A fee deposit to cover costs of processing the final plat. (Ord. 2353, 2018)

14.215.100 Final Plat Criteria.
The criteria for approval of a final plat shall be:
A. Accuracy and mathematical closure of all lots and boundaries;
B. Conformance with the preliminary plat conditions of approval;
C. Conformance with City ordinances and public works standards; and
D. Conformance with State law.
The signature on the face of the final plat and final short plat by the City Engineer and the Planning Director shall indicate City approval of the plat. (Ord. 2353, 2018)

14.215.105 Phased Development.
Portions of an approved preliminary plat may be processed separately by the Department for the purpose of recording divisions. All divisions shall be approved within the prescribed time limits for the preliminary plat, and all conditions of approval for each particular division must be met. (Ord. 2353, 2018)

14.215.110 Vacations and Alterations of Plats.
Vacating a plat shall be accomplished in accordance with RCW 58.17.212. Alteration of a plat shall be accomplished in accordance with RCW 58.17.215. (Ord. 2353, 2018)

14.215.120 Short Plat.
A. Preliminary short plats are Type 3 permits under Chapter 14.20 SMC. Applications for preliminary short plats shall include, at a minimum, the following submittal requirements:
    1. Title certificate;
    2. The required fees related to the review of the preliminary short plat;
    3. If the property is within the NE Sewer Area, an affirmation of the obligation of the property owners binding the properties to the payment of all present or future charges for the Cemetery Creek Special Project, and a preliminary description of developer proposed sewer extensions and capacity improvements;
    4. Submittal materials listed in SMC 14.20.060(C).
B. The criteria for approval of preliminary short plats shall be:
    1. Consistency with the criteria stated in RCW 58.17.110.
    2. If the property is in the NE Sewer Area, a showing that the criteria in SMC 15.04.047 will be satisfied.
    3. Consistency with the Comprehensive Plan.
    4. Consistency with this Development Code and the adopted City of Snohomish Engineering Standards Manual.
    5. Consistency with the concurrency requirement of SMC 14.20.090.
    6. Provisions of off-site improvements or dedications of land to the public which are needed to mitigate the development’s impacts and are proportional to those impacts.
    7. Compliance with the requirements of SMC Title 15, entitled “Sewer, Water, and Stormwater,” including but not limited to the provisions stated in:
        a. SMC 15.04.047, NE Sewer Area, if relevant; and
        b. SMC 15.04.140, Connection to Sewer System Required.
    8. Short plats shall not result in more than four (4) developable lots within the subdivision.
C. Land within a short plat shall not be subdivided within five (5) years of final short plat approval.
D. Final Short Plat Criteria. The criteria for approval of a final plat shall be:
    1. Accuracy and mathematical closure of all lots and boundaries;
    2. Conformance with the preliminary plat conditions of approval;
    3. Conformance with City ordinances and public works standards; and
    4. Conformance with State law.
The signature on the face of the final short plat by the City Engineer and the City Planner shall serve as approval of the short plat. (Ord. 2252, 2013; Ord. 2353, 2018)

14.215.125 Fee Simple Unit Lot Subdivisions.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to allow subdivision of certain housing types listed as allowed uses in Chapter 14.207 SMC where subdivision is not otherwise possible due to conflicts between characteristics of the development type and applicable dimensional standards in Chapter 14.210 SMC. In such cases, the unit lot subdivision process provides opportunities for fee simple ownership of land as an alternative to condominium ownership. Unit lot subdivision applies the dimensional standards in Chapter 14.210 SMC to the overall site, the “parent lot,” while allowing flexibility in the dimensional standards for the subordinate “unit lots.” This section is not intended to permit uses or densities that are not otherwise allowed in the land use designations in which a unit lot subdivision is proposed.
B. Applicability. Except for any site containing a detached accessory dwelling unit pursuant to SMC 14.207.075(2), lots developed or proposed to be developed with attached single-family buildings, detached single-family buildings permitted according to SMC 14.210.215, and manufactured home parks permitted according to SMC 14.210.220 may be subdivided into individual unit lots pursuant to this section. For previously developed lots, eligibility for unit lot subdivision shall be subject to compliance with all standards applicable to the parent lot and proposed unit lots. Inconsistency of existing development with the provisions of this section shall not constitute justification for a variance under Chapter 14.70 SMC.
C. Deviation from Dimensional Standards. The overall development on the parent lot proposed for subdivision shall maintain consistency with the development standards applicable to the land use designation and the land use type at the time the application is vested, as specified by the applicable code provisions and this section. Subsequent additions or modification to the structure(s) shall not create any nonconformity of the parent lot. Deviation from setback, lot width, and lot area standards in Chapter 14.210 SMC may be approved for individual unit lots through a unit lot subdivision, subject to any limitations in this section. Structures on unit lots and structures divided by unit lots that conform to a recorded unit lot subdivision shall not be considered nonconforming under Chapter 14.80 SMC.
D. Subdivision of Cottage Housing and Detached Condominium Development. Development proposed pursuant to SMC 14.210.215 shall be eligible for unit lot subdivision. Setbacks from the perimeter property lines of the parent lot shall conform to the setbacks for the single-family land use designation. Unit lots shall comply with all other provisions of SMC 14.210.215, except that lot lines shall be used in place of internal boundaries of exclusive use.
E. Mobile Home Parks. Mobile home parks shall be eligible for unit lot subdivision where consistent with the criteria and standards in SMC 14.210.220, except that the unit lot subdivision and administrative development plan shall serve in lieu of the recorded development plan.
F. Approval Process. Unit lot subdivisions of four (4) or fewer lots shall be processed in the same manner as short plats pursuant to the associated permit type in Chapter 14.20 SMC. Unit lot subdivisions of five (5) or more lots shall be processed as plats pursuant to the associated permit types in Chapter 14.20 SMC.
G. Approval Criteria. In addition to any other standards and approval criteria applicable to a unit lot subdivision proposal, including but not limited to criteria in Chapters 14.65, 14.210, and 14.215 SMC, proposals shall be subject to the following:
    1. Each unit lot shall have individual sewer service, water service, and a power meter specific to that unit.
    2. Private usable open space of at least four hundred (400) square feet, exclusive of required parking, shall be provided for each dwelling unit on the same unit lot as the dwelling unit it serves. Such areas shall have a minimum dimension of fifteen (15) feet and shall be usable.
    3. Parking shall be calculated and designed for each lot in compliance with Chapter 14.235 SMC, although parking required for a dwelling may be provided on a different lot or tract within the parent lot as long as the right to use that parking is formalized by an easement declared on the plat. Where parking for detached single-family buildings is provided on a different lot or tract, parking allowances for detached single-family residences in Chapter 14.235 SMC, including tandem parking and backing into a street, shall not apply.
    4. Access and utility easements, joint use and maintenance agreements, and covenants, conditions, and restrictions identifying the rights and responsibilities of property owners and/or the homeowners association shall be executed for use and maintenance of common garage, parking, and vehicle access areas; drainage facilities, underground utilities; common open space (such as common courtyard open space); exterior building facades and roofs; and other similar features, and shall be recorded with the Snohomish County Auditor.
    5. Subdivision of common wall or zero (0) lot line development such as townhouses shall provide a five (5) foot wide building maintenance easement for external walls, eaves, chimneys, and other architectural features that rest directly on the lot line. The maintenance easement shall be shown on the face of the plat.
    6. The final plat shall note all conditions of approval, that unit lots are not buildable lots independent of the overall development, and that additional development of the individual unit lots, including but not limited to reconstruction, remodel, maintenance, and addition, shall comply with conditions of approval and may be limited as a result of the application of development standards to the parent lot or other applicable regulations.
    7. The application for unit lot subdivisions shall include a detailed, scaled site plan with building footprints. Adequate information shall be provided to determine compliance with all applicable criteria. (Ord. 2240, 2012; Ord. 2353, 2018)

14.215.130 Boundary Line Adjustments.
A. This section sets forth procedures and criteria for the review and approval of minor adjustments to boundary lines of existing legal lots in order to rectify defects in legal descriptions, to allow the enlargement or merging of lots to improve or qualify as a building site, to achieve increased setbacks from property lines or sensitive areas, to correct situations wherein an established use is located across a lot line, or for other similar purposes.
B. Applications for boundary line adjustments shall be reviewed for consistency with the City of Snohomish Land Use Development Code, including shoreline management regulations, and critical area regulations, applicable Snohomish Health District regulations and the City’s fire and building code regulations.
C. The City shall not approve any proposed boundary line adjustment that would:
    1. Result in the creation of an additional lot;
    2. Cause any lot to contain insufficient area, dimensions, or building setbacks per this Development Code or increase an existing nonconformity;
    3. Result in a lot that does not qualify as a building site pursuant to this title;
    4. Be inconsistent with any restrictions or conditions of approval for a recorded plat or short plat, including requirements for open space; or
    5. Involve lots which do not have a common boundary.
D. An application for a boundary line adjustment shall expire one (1) year after a complete application has been filed with the City. An extension up to an additional year may be granted by the Planning Director upon a showing by the applicant of reasonable cause. (Ord. 2082, 2005; Ord. 2353, 2018)

Chapter 14.220 PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS

Sections:
14.220.010   Purpose
14.220.020   Applicability
14.220.030   Permitted Uses
14.220.040   Application and Review Procedures
14.220.050   Internal Streets and Sidewalks
14.220.060   Parking and Driveways
14.220.070   Public Utilities
14.220.080   Buffering and Screening Between Housing Types
14.220.090   Compatibility with Adjacent Land Uses
14.220.100   Special Design and Bulk and Dimensional Requirements
14.220.105   Open Space and Recreation Area Requirements
14.220.110   Preservation of Existing Features
14.220.120   Maintenance of Open Space and Common Facilities

14.220.010 Purpose.
The general purpose of this chapter is to promote creativity in site layout and design. More specific purposes of this chapter are to:
A. Allow development of land subject to critical areas while at the same time preserving the natural characteristics of a site, including topography, native vegetation, streams, wetlands, views, and other natural amenities of value to the community.
B. Create and/or preserve useful open space for recreation and aesthetic enjoyment of residents.
C. Permit developers to use innovative methods and approaches not available under conventional Land Use Designation methods; provided, that methods and approaches are consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, do not adversely impact neighboring uses more than development occurring under conventional methods, and do not significantly interfere with the enjoyment of other land in the vicinity.
D. Provide for choices in the layout of streets, utility networks, and other public improvements through superior site design and the use of clustering.
E. Encourage infill within areas of the City which have existing development.

14.220.020 Applicability.
A. This chapter shall apply to single-family detached and attached residential developments which are proposed on property on Single-Family (SF) and Multi-Family (MF-12) land use designation areas that are subject to critical areas whose presence will result in a reduction in the developable density by normal subdivision action by at least one dwelling unit within the proposed development project boundary. This chapter may be applied to existing subdivisions on which no development has yet occurred. This chapter shall not be applied to single-family residential lots incapable of further subdivision due to lot size or as a means to avoid other procedures more appropriately reviewed as applications for variances. Planned residential developments may consist of individual lots or may have common building sites.
B. The planned residential development process (PRD) shall be available as a mutually exclusive alternative to traditional development under subdivision standards provided in this title under Chapter 14.215 SMC.
C. Approval of a PRD shall be subject to the process for a preliminary plat in accordance with Chapter 14.215 SMC.
D. The application shall include information as to the design of the residential units to be included within the PRD. The level of detail required for approval shall not extend to specific floor plans but shall depict the conceptual building elevations, general size of units, their general appearance and their relationship to one another in sufficient detail to guide future building permit review and approval by City staff. It is expected that any PRD development of six or more residential units will include sufficient design elements to promote architectural variety within the development. (Ord. 2338, 2017)

14.220.030 Permitted Uses.
The only uses permitted within a PRD on property designated Single-Family (SF) and/or Multi-Family (MF-12) are single-family detached and attached housing. Up to three (3) units may be attached as common wall construction.

14.220.040 Application and Review Procedures.
Preliminary planned residential developments shall be processed as Type 5 permits, and final planned residential developments shall be processed as Type 4 permits under Chapter 14.20 SMC. If the proposed PRD will have separate lots, a preliminary subdivision or short subdivision application and final plat application shall be processed concurrently with the PRD.
The applicant shall complete the appropriate application forms and submit the application and fee to the Planning and Development Services Department. The City’s application forms shall be developed by the Planning Director and shall specify the submittal requirements, which requirements shall be consistent with the codes applicable to PRDs and may include but not necessarily be limited to the information specified in SMC 14.20.060. (Ord. 2338, 2017)

14.220.050 Internal Streets and Sidewalks.
A. The City Engineer shall determine whether the internal streets shall be public or private. If the streets are to be public, they shall be dedicated and constructed to adopted public street standards. If the streets are to be private, they shall be constructed to standards adopted by the City, and provisions shall be made for perpetual maintenance and repair of the same at the cost of the property owners.
B. Curbs, gutters and sidewalks shall be required in all PRDs and shall be constructed to adopted City standards.

14.220.060 Parking and Driveways.
A. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 14.235 SMC.
B. All driveways shall be constructed according to adopted City standards.

14.220.070 Public Utilities.
The dwelling units within a PRD shall be connected to City water and sewer utilities. All electrical power lines, telephone, cable television and other communication lines shall be underground and shall be approved by the agency or jurisdiction providing the service.

14.220.080 Buffering and Screening Between Housing Types.
Attached single-family dwelling structures within a PRD may be required to provide a visual segregation from single family detached dwelling units by the use of vegetation, landscaping, fencing, walls, berms, or other similar methods that create effective and aesthetically pleasing screens or buffers between such housing types.

14.220.090 Compatibility with Adjacent Land Uses.
If topographical vegetation, screening, or other barriers along the perimeter of a PRD project, which exceeds five (5) acres of total land area, do not achieve reasonable compatibility with adjacent existing uses in terms of building massing and spacing, the City may impose the following requirements:
A. A PRD located adjacent to an existing housing development may be required to locate housing of the same type adjacent to that development.
B. Structures located on the perimeter of the PRD project may be set back two (2) feet for each one (1) foot in height above twenty (20) feet. This additional setback, if imposed, shall be in excess of the basic setback requirement.

14.220.100 Special Design and Bulk and Dimensional Requirements.
Except as specifically modified in this section, the bulk and dimensional requirements of Title 14 SMC shall apply to all development within a PRD.
A. Permitted density within a PRD shall be based on the allowed density in the underlying land use as specified below:
    1. SF 6 du/gross ac.
    2. MF 12 du/gross ac.
    The maximum number of dwelling units permissible within the PRD shall be the maximum number of units permitted by the underlying land use designation as indicated above.
B. The minimum lot size within a PRD shall be four thousand (4,000) square feet.
C. The minimum lot width at the road frontage shall be forty (40) feet. To provide flexibility for innovative lot layouts and use of common space, at the City’s discretion and on a case-by-case basis the minimum lot width at the road frontage may be reduced to twenty (20) feet, provided that the minimum lot width at the building line is forty (40) feet.
D. The minimum front yard building setback (other than garage doors) shall be ten (10) feet. The minimum front or side yard garage door setback shall be twenty (20) feet. The minimum rear yard shall be twelve (12) feet. Each side yard shall be a minimum of five (5) feet if adjacent to another lot or to open space. Each side yard adjacent to a public or private street shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet. Reduced yards and setbacks may be approved at the City’s discretion on a case-by-case basis to provide flexibility for innovative housing types and use of common area. No portion of a building or appurtenance shall be constructed so as to project into any commonly-owned open space. No structure or portion thereof shall be closer than ten (10) feet to any structure on an adjacent lot.
E. The floor area ratio or gross floor area divided by the area of the lot shall not exceed 0.5.

14.220.105 Open Space and Recreation Area Requirements.
Total open space shall be provided in every PRD consistent with the following standards:
A. Within a PRD, a minimum of 20 percent of the gross site area shall be established as total open space;
B. Total open space shall be used for:
    1. Usable open space, which may include both active and passive recreation area;
    2. Critical areas and their required buffers;
    3. Site perimeter landscaping and other required landscaped areas outside of right-of-ways;
    4. Landscaped, unfenced storm water detention/retention ponds; and
    5. All other open space areas owned in common by all residents or owners in the PRD.
C. Where possible, open space tracts shall be located adjacent to permanently designated open space areas on adjacent properties;
D. Total open space shall be permanently established in clearly designated, separate tracts from residential units. Tracts shall be owned by:
    1. All lot owners and condominium owners jointly, with an equal and undivided interest; or
    2. A homeowners association.
E. Total open space shall be protected in perpetuity by a recorded covenant, in a form approved by the City;
F. The recorded covenant must restrict uses of the total open space to those specified in the approved PRD recorded site plan and must provide for the maintenance of the total open space in a manner which assures its continuing use for the intended purposes;
G. The applicant shall propose a method for establishing clearly defined permanent boundaries to separate private use areas from adjacent open space tracts within the PRD that is acceptable to the City. The type of permanent marking of the open space tracts proposed shall provide a clear and distinctive separation of properties at the open space boundary.
H. Usable open space shall be provided as a component of total open space and shall be consistent with the following standards:
    1. The total site requirement for usable open space shall be no less than 200 square feet per dwelling unit;
    2. Usable open space shall be developed for active and/or passive recreation purposes that serve the needs of the PRD residents;
    3. The following are examples of active and passive recreation activities that may be allowed in usable open space:
        a. Open play areas;
        b. Pedestrian or bicycle paths;
        c. Picnic areas with tables and benches;
        d. Gazebos, benches and other resident gathering areas;
        e. Any active recreation use listed in subsection 3 below;
        f. Nature interpretive areas; and
        g. Flower gardens when in conjunction with pedestrian paths.
    4. Usable open space shall consist of land areas that do not contain:
        a. Critical areas and their buffers; and
        b. Overhead utility easements that exist on the project site at the time of application submittal unless they are handled in the manner provided under point 5 below.
    5. Power line, utility rights-of-way and other similar easements may be incorporated into usable open space and counted towards the open space requirements of this section, provided they are developed with active recreational improvements.
    6. Usable open space shall be adequate in design and size for the intended passive and/or active recreation;
    7. No usable open space shall have any dimension less than 20 feet (except for segments containing trails, which shall not be less than 10 feet in width), unless the applicant can demonstrate and the director of the department can concur, that a lesser dimension will not inhibit the use of the open space for its designated purpose;
    8. Usable open space shall be accessed by all-weather pedestrian pathways and/or sidewalks from the lots and dwellings within the PRD;
    9. Usable open space designed for children shall not be located adjacent to any street designated as a collector/arterial unless properly designed with fencing, located away from street edges and other provisions to ensure adequate child safety. Usable open space designed for children shall be open, accessible, and visible from adjacent dwellings in order to enhance security;
    10. Usable open space shall have the appropriate location, slope, soils, and drainage to be considered for recreational development;
    11. Usable open space shall be landscaped pursuant to the provisions of SMC 14.240, and in accordance with the required landscape plan in a manner that enhances the design of the open space while not conflicting with the function of the proposed recreation use; and
    12. Any buildings, structures, and improvements to be permitted in the usable open space shall be those appropriate to the proposed uses.
    13. Active recreation uses shall be provided as follows:
        a. A minimum of 20 percent of all usable open space within PRD’s with 10 or more lots or dwelling units shall be developed for active recreation uses. The type(s) of active recreation uses provided shall, to the extent possible, correspond to anticipated needs of the potential residents of the PRD;
        b. Active recreation uses shall consist of one or more of the following:
            1. Sport court;
            2. Tot lot with play equipment (soft surface);
            3. Open play area or sports field (grass or other pervious surface);
            4. Indoor recreation center for youth, adult and/or seniors containing exercise and game rooms, sport courts and other community activities;
            5. Swimming pool;
            6. Any other active recreation use approved as part of the recorded development plan;
            7. The active recreation facility shall be located on a reasonably level site with slopes no greater than six percent unless the applicant can demonstrate that the recreation facility can function adequately on greater slopes; and
            8. Tot lot areas shall meet all safety recommend-ations and construction specifications of the manufacturer of the equipment used.

14.220.110 Preservation of Existing Features.
A. Existing trees and other natural and unique features shall be subject to the significant tree preservation requirements of SMC 14.240.030 Existing Vegetation. The location of these features must be considered when planning the open space, location of buildings, underground services, walks, paved areas, playgrounds, parking areas, and finished grade levels.
B. The City shall inquire into the means whereby trees and other natural features will be protected during construction. Excessive site clearing of topsoil, trees and natural or unique features before commencement of building operations may disqualify the project as a PRD.

14.220.120 Maintenance of Open Space and Common Facilities.
Before approval of the recorded development plan or occupancy of any dwelling units, the applicant shall submit to the City, for its approval, any covenants, deed restrictions, homeowner association by laws and documents providing for preservation and maintenance of all common open space (recreational areas owned in common by and benefiting all PRD residents), private roads and parking areas, walkways, landscaping, signs, lights, roads and community facilities at the cost of the property owners in the PRD. All common area facilities shall be continuously maintained at a minimum standard required and approved by the City at the time of initial occupancy. (Ord. 2082, 2005)

Chapter 14.222 TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS

Sections:
14.222.010   Purpose
14.222.020   Definitions.
14.222.030   Authorized and Priority Sending Areas
14.222.040   Authorized Receiving Areas
14.222.050   TDR Credit Use and Exchange Rates
14.222.060   Program Evaluation

14.222.010 Purpose.
A. This chapter is adopted pursuant to the Growth Management Act, Chapter 36.70A RCW. Transfer of Development Rights (TDR) is intended to provide a general public benefit by permanently protecting valuable community assets such as resource lands, critical areas, open space, and other lands for which preservation is preferred over development or redevelopment. TDR allows eligible land owners to achieve a reasonable economic return while protecting the resource land from development by voluntarily transferring development potential from these lands to locations better suited for urban development. TDR constitutes a voluntary, incentive-based approach to land use management.
B. The provisions of this chapter supplement existing land use regulations by allowing increased development potential in TDR receiving areas designated by ordinance.

14.222.020 Definitions.
Development right: means one of a series of rights inherent in fee simple ownership of land. It represents the potential for the improvement of a parcel of property, as measured in the number of potential residential dwellings or square footage of commercial use allowed by the property’s land use designation and site attributes.
Receiving site or area: means one or more properties designated by ordinance to which TDR credits may be transferred for the right to develop property in excess of the development potential entitled by-right.
Sending site or area: means one or more properties from which TDR credits may be transferred to use in a designated TDR receiving site as provided in SMC 14.222.030.
TDR certificate: means a recorded document issued by Snohomish County representing one TDR credit that may be submitted as part of an application for development of a receiving site to allow additional development consistent with the adopted exchange rate.
TDR credit: means a tradable commodity representing one certified development right.
TDR exchange rate: means the development increment represented by one TDR credit for a specific receiving area, as may be measured in building area, building height, lot coverage, residential density, number of residential dwellings, or other development provisions as provided by this chapter.
Transfer of development rights (TDR): means the method by which the entitlement to develop property within a designated sending area may be sold for use within an eligible receiving site or area. At a designated receiving site, TDR credits can be exchanged for the license to place an increment of development on the receiving site in excess of the extent of development otherwise allowed.

14.222.030 Authorized and Priority Sending Areas.
A. All properties for which transferrable development rights have been certified by Snohomish County are authorized TDR sending areas for the City of Snohomish TDR Program.
B. The 17 certified development rights purchased by the Cascade Land Conservancy between February 3, 2009, and June 30, 2009, from forest lands in Snohomish County shall have priority over all other TDR credits and shall be the only TDR credits accepted by the City until each TDR certificate representing such credits is extinguished or is otherwise determined by the City to be removed from the market.

14.222.040 Authorized Receiving Areas.
Receiving areas shall include only those properties designated by ordinance. The Pilchuck District land use designation is designated a TDR receiving area subject to any limitations specified in Chapter 14.212 SMC.

14.222.050 TDR Credit Use and Exchange Rates.
A. Where specifically authorized in Title 14 SMC, one or more whole TDR credits may be used to exceed the building height, density, or other development standard allowed by-right, subject to the limitations and requirements in this section and conformance to all other applicable development regulations. A TDR credit shall have no value except as specified in this title for a specific receiving site.
    1. The exchange rate of TDR credits shall be established by ordinance as amended from time to time, and the exchange rate of a TDR credit shall be based on the standards in effect at the time a land use application requiring TDR credits is determined complete as provided by SMC 14.55.012.
    2. Within the Pilchuck District land use designation:
        a. Each TDR credit associated with a development application determined complete prior to January 1, 2017, shall have an exchange rate of 18,000 square feet of gross floor area above the third story.
        b. Each TDR credit associated with a development application determined complete on or after January 1, 2017, shall have an exchange rate of 14,000 square feet of gross floor area above the third story.
B. Use of TDR credits shall be subject to the following:
    1. TDR credits shall be approved for use in designated receiving areas only.
    2. If located within a shoreline environment designation, building height shall not exceed the limitations in the Snohomish Shoreline Master Program.
    3. The development potential represented by one TDR certificate may be applied to more than one building only when all buildings are on one contiguous site and approved as part of one land use application. Otherwise, fractional TDR credits shall not be accepted as part of a building permit application.
    4. The use of TDR credits shall not entitle the bearer to establish or expand land uses other than those permitted under Title 14 SMC for the land use designation in which the site is located or to modify other development standards except as specifically provided in Title 14 SMC. Development permitted with the use of TDR credits shall be subject to all applicable codes, standards, and requirements for impact mitigation.
    5. No building permit requiring the use of TDR credits shall be issued prior to submittal of an original TDR certificate.

14.222.060 Program Evaluation.
To ensure consistency of the TDR program with current development market conditions, the City shall evaluate adopted exchange rates at intervals no greater than five years. (Ord. 2216, 2011)

Chapter 14.225 DESIGN STANDARDS IN HISTORIC DISTRICT

Sections:
14.225.010   Historic District Boundaries
14.225.020   Purpose
14.225.030   Design Standards
14.225.040   References
14.225.050   Implementation of Design Standards – Reviewing Entity
14.225.060   Exemptions
14.225.070   Submittal Requirements
14.225.080   Building Demolitions
14.225.090   Other Reviews
14.225.100   Conduct of DRB Meetings

14.225.010 Historic District Boundaries.
The Comprehensive Plan Land Use Designations Map shall establish the boundaries of the Historic District.

14.225.020 Purpose.
The purpose of the Historic District’s design standards is to:
A. Promote awareness of the City’s heritage;
B. Protect the City’s heritage by controlling alterations and demolitions;
C. Rehabilitate and reuse historic structures;
D. Encourage new construction in keeping with the City’s historic character; and
E. Attract visitors to Snohomish.

14.225.030 Design Standards.
A. The following design standards are hereby adopted in the Historic District, copies of which shall be kept available in the office of the City Planner:
    1. “The Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings,” as they now read or are hereafter amended;
    2. “Snohomish Historic District Design Standards,” as adopted by a resolution of the City Council.
B. In the event of conflict between the above standards, the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards shall control.
C. The above design standards shall be subject to interpretation in accordance with SMC 14.05.050 and obtaining variances in accordance with Chapter 14.70 SMC. (Ord. 2337, 2017)

14.225.040 References.
In administering the design standards, the City may utilize the following references:
A. A Guide to Twentieth Century House Styles, Montlake: A Primer of Residential Styles;
B. The Visual Dictionary of American Domestic Architecture, Rachel Carley, Roundtable Press, Inc., 1994;
C. Hands On! The Rehabilitation Handbook for Everett’s Historic Homes, Makers Architecture and Urban Design, 1992; and
D. Dictionary of Architecture, Henry H. Saylor, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York, 1952.

14.225.050 Implementation of Design Standards – Reviewing Entity.
A. Chapter 14.20 SMC establishes the processes wherein the City shall require conformance with the design standards.
B. In the Historic District the Design Review Board (DRB) shall review and make recommendation to the Planning Director on conformance with the design standards for all development within the Historic District; provided, that the Planning Director may request review by any member of the DRB if the application, though not exempt (see SMC 14.225.060), would result in only minor changes to the appearance of an existing building. The consulted Board member may complete and issue a recommendation to the Planning Director. (Ord. 2338, 2017)

14.225.060 Exemptions.
In the Historic District, all City approvals of property improvements, including exterior signs or fences, or demolitions (see SMC 14.225.080) shall undergo design review as set forth in Chapter 14.20 SMC, except the following which are exempt:
A. Development permits not immediately associated with building construction or landscaping, such as short plats, subdivisions, and land use designation changes unaccompanied by any actions related to site plans or building permit application;
B. Construction activities which do not require a building permit (example: the repainting of buildings); and
C. Modifications to existing structures which will not be visible from outside the structure. (Ord. 2338, 2017)

14.225.070 Submittal Requirements.
The applicant shall complete the appropriate application forms and submit the application and fee to the Planning Director. The City’s application forms shall be developed by the Planning Director and shall specify the submittal requirements, which requirements shall be consistent with the laws applicable to each specific permit and which may include but not necessarily be limited to the information specified in SMC 14.20.060. (Ord. 2338, 2017)

14.225.080 Building Demolitions.
A. In reviewing a proposed demolition in the Historic District, the DRB shall recommend approval, if it determines that preservation of the structure is physically or economically infeasible.
B. If the DRB finds preservation of the structure to be feasible, the City shall notify persons or groups interested in historic preservation, who may encourage the owner to preserve the structure or find a buyer willing to preserve the structure. If the owner is not convinced to retain the structure, or no one agrees to purchase it within ninety (90) days after the DRB’s first consideration of the proposal, the DRB’s findings shall cease to be cause for refusal to issue the demolition permit.

14.225.090 Other Reviews.
In addition to design review as stated in SMC 14.225.060, the DRB shall review and make recommendations on proposed:
A. Mobile vendor structures and trailers which will do business in the Historic District for more than thirty days, prior to the issuance of a business license;
B. Special tax valuations; and
C. Requests for additions to the list of officially designated historic structures, the decision on which shall be made by the City Council.

14.225.100 Conduct of DRB Meetings.
The DRB shall invite comments from City staff, applicants, consultants, and the public, then prepare findings as specified in Chapter 14.20 SMC. (Ord. 2082, 2005; Ord. 2338, 2017)

Chapter 14.230 DESIGN STANDARDS OUTSIDE HISTORIC DISTRICT

Sections:
14.230.010   Purpose
14.230.020   Design Standards
14.230.030   Implementation of Design Standards – Reviewing Entity
14.230.040   Exemptions
14.230.050   Submittal Requirements

14.230.010 Purpose.
The purpose of the design standards for outside the Historic District is to:
A. Build on Snohomish’s rich heritage;
B. Emphasize buildings, landscaping, and small town appeal, not parking and signs;
C. Maintain the scale and texture of development;
D. Support pedestrian movement and the use of transit and bicycles;
E. Encourage creative designs for sites and buildings;
F. Allow for infill development that is sensitive to its context;
G. Implement the Comprehensive Plan; and
H. Stimulate business and property investment.

14.230.020 Design Standards.
A. The City of Snohomish Design Standards and Guidelines (Outside the Historic District) dated April 6, 2004 are hereby adopted and shall be kept available at the office of the City Planner.
B. The above design standards shall be subject to interpretation in accordance with SMC 14.05.050 and also are subject to obtaining variances in accordance with Chapter 14.70 SMC.

14.230.030 Implementation of Design Standards – Reviewing Entity.
A. Chapter 14.20 SMC establishes the processes wherein the City shall require conformance with the design standards.
B. Outside the Historic District the Planning Director shall be the “reviewing entity,” except that the Design Review Board shall be the “reviewing entity” in the case of buildings or facilities proposed by government entities such as City, fire district, school district, or state. (Ord. 2338, 2017)

14.230.040 Exemptions.
Outside the Historic District, all City approvals of property improvements shall undergo design review as stated in Chapter 14.20 SMC, except the following which are exempt:
A. Development permits not immediately associated with building construction or landscaping, such as short plats, subdivisions, and new land use designations unaccompanied by any actions related to site plans or building permit application;
B. Construction activities which do not require a building permit (example: the repainting of buildings);
C. Modifications to existing structures which will not be visible from outside the structure;
D. Demolitions; and
E. Normal repair and maintenance. (Ord. 2338, 2017)

14.230.050 Submittal Requirements.
The applicant shall complete the appropriate application forms and submit the application and fee to the Planning and Development Services Department. The City’s application forms shall be developed by the Planning Director and shall specify the submittal requirements, which requirements shall be consistent with the laws applicable to each specific permit and may include but not necessarily be limited to the information specified in SMC 14.20.060. (Ord. 2082, 2005; Ord. 2338, 2017)

Chapter 14.235 OFF-STREET PARKING, LOADING, AND ACCESS REQUIREMENTS

Sections:
14.235.010   Required Off-Street Parking
14.235.020   Interpretation of Tables
14.235.030   Parking Requirements for Uses Not Specified
14.235.040   Parking Requirements for Existing and New Structures in the Historic Business District Land Use Designation
14.235.045   Parking Requirements for Existing and New Structures in the Pilchuck District Land Use Designation
14.235.050   Parking Requirements for Senior Citizens’ Multi-Family Units
14.235.055   Parking Requirements for Low-Income Multi-Family Units
14.235.060   Mixed Occupancies
14.235.070   Joint Uses of Parking Facilities
14.235.080   Conditions Required for Joint Use
14.235.090   Location of Parking Spaces
14.235.100   Use of Parking Spaces Accessory to Residences
14.235.110   Parking Plans Required Prior to the Issuance of a Building Permit
14.235.120   Allowance for Compact Cars
14.235.130   Minimum Requirements for Off-Street Parking
14.235.140   Off-Street Loading Space Requirements
14.235.150   Access to Parking from Alleys
14.235.160   Vehicle Capacity for Drive-Through Service Access
14.235.170   Parking Requirements for Residential Land Uses
14.235.180   Parking Requirements for General Services Land Uses
14.235.190   Parking Requirements for Government/Business Services Land Uses
14.235.200   Parking for Retail Land Uses
14.235.210   Parking for Manufacturing Land Uses
14.235.220   Parking for Regional Land Uses
14.235.230   Parking for Recreational/Cultural Land Uses
14.235.240   Parking for Resource Land Uses
14.235.250   Parking for Essential Public Facilities Land Uses
14.235.260   Minimum Standards for Conventional Off-Street Parking
14.235.270   Minimum Standards for Interlocking Off-Street Parking
14.235.280   Acceptable Parking Designs
14.235.290   Acceptable Parking Designs

14.235.010 Required Off-Street Parking.
Every building hereafter erected, and every building, or portion thereof, in which there is a change of use resulting in an increase in required parking as described by the appropriate land use classification in the Parking Requirements Tables (Sections 14.235.170 through 14.235.250), shall be provided with sufficient off-street parking spaces to accommodate the building’s use as specified in the Parking Requirements Tables and elsewhere in this chapter. The parking spaces shall be permanently maintained and made available for parking purposes.

14.235.020 Interpretation of Tables.
Off-street parking requirements are determined based on land use. There are nine tables of off-street parking requirements for generalized land use categories, as follows:
1. Residential land uses
2. General services land uses
3. Government/business services land uses
4. Retail land uses
5. Manufacturing land uses
6. Regional land uses
7. Recreational/cultural land uses
8. Resource land uses
9. Essential public facilities land uses.
Each table has two or three columns. The first column describes the land use. The second column specifies the parking requirement of the land use. The third column, if any, specifies the supplemental off-street parking requirements of the land use. Parking requirements are set forth on a per unit or per square foot basis.

14.235.030 Parking Requirements for Uses Not Specified.
Where the parking requirements for a use are not specifically defined herein, the parking requirements for such use shall be determined by the City Planner. Such determination shall establish reasonable parking for the use on a case-by-case basis after consultation with the City Engineer. The applicant may be required to provide sufficient information to demonstrate that the parking demand for a specific use will be satisfied, based upon existing uses similar to the proposed use and other relevant factors. Unless otherwise waived by the City Planner, the applicant shall have a parking study for the proposed use prepared by a consultant with professional expertise in preparing traffic and parking analysis.

14.235.040 Parking Requirements for Existing and New Structures in the Historic Business District Land Use Designation.
A. The provisions of this section shall take precedence over other provisions of Chapter 14.235 SMC.
B. Off-street parking shall be required for the construction or addition of new building floor area.
C. For new building area containing commercial, retail, and service uses, one off-street parking space shall be provided for each 400 gsf.
D. No building in existence on August 4, 1998 and situated within the Historic Business District land use designation shall be required to provide additional off-street parking as a condition of the following:
    1. Remodeling or renovation of existing floor space.
    2. Changes in use.
    3. For any deck, patio or other exterior seating or eating area constructed as a part of an existing eatery or drinking establishment.
E. No off-street parking in existence on May 27, 2010 that satisfies the off-street parking requirements of this Code shall be eliminated unless replaced/relocated as otherwise allowed. (Ord. 2188, 2010)

14.235.045 Parking Requirements for Existing and New Structures in the Pilchuck District Land Use Designation.
A. The provisions of Chapter 14.212 SMC shall take precedence over conflicting provisions of Chapter 14.235 SMC for development and land uses within the Pilchuck District land use designation.
B. All other provisions of Chapter 14.235 SMC shall apply. (Ord. 2213, 2011)

14.235.050 Parking Requirements for Senior Citizens’ Multi-Family Units.
All multi-family housing with an excess of five (5) units designed and used for “senior citizens” occupancy shall have a minimum parking space ratio of one and two-tenths (1.2) stalls per dwelling unit. For the purposes of this section, a “senior citizen” means a person over sixty-two (62) years of age. At such time as fewer than 80 percent of the units in the multi-family complex are occupied by senior citizens, or at such time as parking needs for the complex consistently exceed one stall per unit for any reason, the City Planner shall require the owner of the complex to immediately install such additional parking stalls as are necessary to comply with the minimum parking requirements of multi-family residences described in this chapter. (Ord. 2093, 2005)

14.235.055 Parking Requirements for Low-Income Multi-Family Units.
A. Parking requirements contained within this chapter may be modified for projects meeting the criteria for eligibility stated in SMC 14.285.020 and other requirements of Chapter 14.285 SMC.
    1. Low-income projects meeting the criteria in SMC 14.285.020(A) may request a decreased standard of one and one-half (1.5) off-street parking stalls per dwelling unit.
    2. Senior low-income projects meeting the criteria in SMC 14.285.020 and restricted to occupancy by residents 55 years of age and older may request a decreased standard of one (1) off-street parking stall per dwelling unit.
B. The location, use, and construction of parking areas shall comply with all appropriate requirements described in this chapter.
    1. To qualify for modified parking requirements, the project proponents shall present a study to the City showing that the parking requirements of the occupants shall not exceed the parking stalls required pursuant to this section.
    2. Review and approval of low-income parking modifications shall follow the procedures in SMC 14.285.040. (Ord. 2143, 2008; Ord. 2154, 2008)

14.235.060 Mixed Occupancies.
In the case of mixed occupancies in a building or on a lot, the total requirements for off-street parking shall be the sum of the requirements for the various uses computed separately. Off-street parking facilities for a particular use shall not be considered as providing required parking facilities for any other use except as hereinafter specified for joint use.

14.235.070 Joint Uses of Parking Facilities.
The City Planner may, upon application by the owner or lessee of any property, authorize the joint use of parking facilities by the following uses or activities under the conditions specified herein:
A. Up to 50 percent of the parking facilities required by this chapter for primarily nighttime uses, which may include theaters, bowling alleys, bars, restaurants and related uses, may be supplied by other types of buildings or uses which are primarily daytime uses such as banks, offices, retail, personal service shops, clothing, food, furniture, manufacturing or wholesale and related uses.
B. Up to 20 percent of the parking facilities required by this chapter for primarily daytime uses may be supplied by primarily nighttime uses.
C. Up to 100 percent of the parking facilities required by this section for a church or for an auditorium incidental to a public or parochial school may be supplied by the off-street parking facilities provided by uses primarily of a daytime nature.
D. Multiple family uses having at least 5 units and motels having at least 10 units shall be considered nighttime uses for the purpose of shared parking calculations; however no more than 10 percent of their required parking may be provided by daytime uses.

14.235.080 Conditions Required for Joint Use.
The building or use for which application is being made to utilize the off-street parking facilities provided by another building or use shall be located within three hundred (300) feet of such parking facilities, in addition to which:
A. The applicant shall show that there is no substantial conflict in the principal operating hours of the two buildings or uses for which joint use of off-street parking facilities is proposed.
B. In the instance of uses located on separate legal parcels, the applicant shall present a properly drawn legal easement agreement that will ensure the availability of the parking for the uses involved, which agreement has been reviewed and approved by the City Attorney. The agreement shall be signed by all parties concerned with the joint use of the off-street parking facility. The agreement shall be recorded in the County Auditor’s office by the applicants, and a copy of the recorded document shall be provided to the City Clerk and Building Official for inclusion in the building permit file for all affected uses.

14.235.090 Location of Parking Spaces.
Off-street parking spaces shall be located as specified herein. Where a distance is specified, the distance shall be the walking distance measured from the nearest point of the parking facilities to the nearest point of the building which it serves. These requirements do not apply to an area in which off-street parking is paid for by the participants of a parking improvement district.
A. Parking facilities for all single-family residences, mobile home parks, and multi-family dwellings shall be located on the same lot with the building they serve or on a lot within one hundred (100) feet from the nearest boundary and in the same ownership of the lot on which such structure is located.
B. Parking facilities for all hospitals, sanitariums, homes for the aged, asylums, orphanages, rooming houses, boarding houses, hotels, and community clubs shall be located not more than two hundred (200) feet from the building they serve.
C. For uses other than those specified above, parking facilities shall be located not over three hundred (300) feet from the building they are required to serve; provided, that for buildings situated within the Historic Business land use designation, off-street parking facilities may be provided up to one thousand (1,000) feet from the building.

14.235.100 Use of Parking Spaces Accessory to Residences.
In all residential districts, all permitted or required off-street parking spaces, open or enclosed, which are accessory to residences, shall be designed and operated primarily for the storage of the private passenger motor vehicles used by the occupants of such residences.

14.235.110 Parking Plans Required Prior to the Issuance of a Building Permit.
A plan for all parking areas involving more than three stalls shall be submitted to the Building Official at the time of application for the building permit for the structure for which the parking area is accessory. The parking area plan may be included as part of the building site plan. The plan shall clearly illustrate and include the following:
A. Location, dimensions, and area of parking lot
B. The number of parking stalls
C. Locations and dimensions of existing and proposed points of ingress and egress
D. Arrangement and dimensions of parking stalls
E. Means of delineating parking stalls
F. Traffic directional information
G. Type and location of all traffic-control devices
H. Location and dimension of walk-ways
I. Inlet and drainage system
J. Lighting
K. Landscaping
L. Screening
M. Other pertinent information.
The parking plan shall be approved by the City Planner prior to the issuance of a building permit in accordance with the requirements outlined in this section. In those instances when a parking area for three or more vehicles is being developed and no building permit is required, the developer shall make application for, and obtain a use permit from the City Planner before any preparatory work is started. A parking plan as previously described will be required before the use permit is issued.

14.235.120 Allowance for Compact Cars.
A. When parking standards require ten (10) or more parking spaces, up to 40 percent of the off-street parking spaces required by this chapter may be designated for compact cars in accordance with Table 10 and Table 11.
B. Compact car parking stalls shall be individually marked in the parking plan and shall be clearly signed for use by “compact cars only”. Parking at any angle is permitted, provided the width of the stalls and aisles is adjusted by interpolation between the specified standards.

14.235.130 Minimum Requirements for Off-Street Parking.
A. Minimum Dimensions. The size and dimensions of individual parking stalls shall be eight and one-half feet wide and 18 feet long, and shall include an additional 100 square feet of maneuvering area. Parking areas including more than four stalls of parking shall comply with the parking area dimensions as described in Figure 1 in SMC 14.235.280 and Figure 2 in SMC 14.235.290.
B. Driveway Dimensions. When off-street parking is provided, the access driveway or lane shall be paved and have a minimum width of eight feet. The City Planner shall have the discretionary authority to require driveways to have a minimum of two eight-foot moving lanes when unusual site problems, access for vehicles, or high traffic usage requires such. Driveway widths and construction standards within the public right-of-way shall be determined by the City Engineer. Shared and two-track driveway designs are allowed.
C. Required Access and Fire Lanes. The Fire Marshal shall determine when access for fire lanes shall be required. Such access and fire lanes shall be designed with not less than 25 feet in width, forming a continuous route or loop connecting at both ends with streets, or as stipulated by the Fire Marshal.
D. Required Traffic Control Devices. All traffic control devices, such as parking stripes designating car stalls and directional arrows, shall be completed and installed as shown on the approved plans. Hard-surfaced parking areas shall use paint or similar devices to delineate car stalls and directional arrows.
E. Requirements for Pedestrian Walks. Pedestrian walks shall be required in parking lots of over 10 stalls and shall be for the use of foot traffic only. They shall be delineated in a manner acceptable to the City. When wheel stops or bumper stops are provided, sidewalks may be constructed on grade with the parking lot.
F. Border Barricades. All parking areas and car sales areas that are not separated by a fence or landscaped buffer from any street or alley upon which they abut shall be provided with a suitable concrete curb not less than six inches in height, located not less than four feet from the street or alley. The curb or barrier shall be securely installed and maintained; provided, that no such curb or barrier shall be required across any driveway or entrance to such parking area.
G. Backing into Streets. Parking facilities for all uses shall be so designed that vehicles are not required to back from the parking facility into any street. Such requirement shall be mandatory for all uses except for detached single-family residential uses and vehicles entering local access or collector streets from the driveway of an individual duplex structure.
H. Ingress and Egress Provisions. The City Engineer shall have the authority to fix the location, width and manner of approach of vehicular ingress or egress from a building or parking area to a street and to alter existing ingress and egress as may be required to control street traffic in the interest of the public safety and general welfare.
I. Surfacing. All off-street parking areas and vehicle sales areas, including ingress and egress lanes, shall be paved with a hard-surfaced material that may include permeable concrete or asphalt pavement. Marked, unpaved parking areas are permitted in urban horticulture, public parks, and open space zones, when a professional parking study or other reliable data shows the area will be for parking spaces in excess of those required pursuant to this chapter.
J. Surface Water Runoff. All off-street parking areas and car sales areas shall be graded and drained in order to dispose of surface water runoff, subject to the approval of the City Engineer. All hard-surface areas shall be drained to an approved catch basin within the confines of the lot and disposed of through a drainage system as approved by the City Engineer. The use of low impact development technology in the construction of such areas is encouraged by the City, providing it produces a surface that can be safely walked upon, can be marked to define parking spaces and other necessary information, and has been determined to be as serviceable as conventional asphalt paving.
K. Illumination. All lights provided to illuminate any public parking area, any semi-public parking area, or car sales area permitted by this title shall be arranged so as to direct the light away from any dwelling unit and the public right-of-way.
L. Maintenance of Off-Street Parking Areas. Maintenance of all areas provided for off-street parking shall include removal and replacement of dead and dying trees, maintenance of landscaping grass, shrubs and trees, removal of trash and weeds, and repair of traffic-control devices, signs, light standards, fences, walls, surfacing material, curbs and railings.
M. Tandem Parking. Tandem parking is permitted only for detached single-family residences. (Ord. 2315, 2016)

14.235.140 Off-Street Loading Space Requirements.
A. Off-street loading space is required for the following uses:
    1. Manufacturing
    2. Storage
    3. Warehousing
    4. Goods display
    5. Department store
    6. Wholesale store
    7. Market
    8. Hotel
    9. Hospital
    10. Mortuary
    11. Laundry
    12. Dry cleaning
    13. Other uses involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles, material or merchandise.
B. Off street loading space must be on the same site and provide adequate space for standing, loading and unloading services in order to avoid undue interference with the public use of the streets or alleys. Each off-street loading space shall contain a minimum of two hundred fifty (250) square feet of space, which is appropriately identified and which meets with the requirements of this section. Off-street loading spaces shall have a minimum height clearance of fourteen (14) feet and shall be so situated that trucks or vans using the space shall not project into the public right-of-way. All truck loading doors on buildings shall have adjacent truck loading spaces. Such truck loading spaces may be used for vehicle parking of employees of the businesses using the spaces however such spaces will not be counted for customer parking.

14.235.150 Access to Parking from Alleys.
Wherever a property designated Single Family Residential abuts an alley, access to on-site parking shall be exclusively from the alley, unless an administrative determination is made by the City Planner that such access for an existing dwelling is not feasible due to special circumstances relating to size, shape, topography, or surroundings of the property. The administrative determination of the City Planner may be appealed by an aggrieved person to the Hearing Examiner pursuant to SMC Chapter 2.33, 14.20, and 14.95. (Ord. 2094, 2005)

14.235.160 Vehicle Capacity for Drive-Through Service Access.
Each drive-through facility shall have a minimum vehicle capacity of five (5) vehicles in the access lane. (Ord. 2082, 2005)

14.235.170 Parking Requirements for Residential Land Uses.
+-----------------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------------+
|                Land Use                 |      Parking Requirement      |    Supplemental Requirements    |
+-----------------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Dwelling Units                                                                                            |
+-----------------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Single family detached                  | 2 spaces per dwelling unit    | 1 additional space required     |
|                                         |                               | for each employee or contractor |
|                                         |                               | working within the dwelling     |
|                                         |                               | more than 20 hours per          |
|                                         |                               | week for a period exceeding     |
|                                         |                               | 60 days.                        |
+-----------------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Manufactured home                       | 2 spaces per dwelling unit    |                                 |
+-----------------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Multi-family                            | 2 spaces per dwelling unit    |                                 |
+-----------------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| 2+ bedroom dwellings                    | 2 spaces per dwelling unit    |                                 |
+-----------------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| 1 – bedroom dwelling                    | 1.5 spaces per dwelling       |                                 |
|                                         | unit                          |                                 |
+-----------------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Studio                                  | 1.2 spaces per dwelling       |                                 |
|                                         | unit                          |                                 |
+-----------------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Senior housing                          | 1.2 spaces per dwelling       |                                 |
|                                         | unit                          |                                 |
+-----------------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Mobile home park                        | 2 spaces per dwelling unit    | 3 additional spaces per         |
|                                         |                               | every 10 units                  |
+-----------------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Group Residences                                                                                          |
+-----------------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Community residential facility          | 1 space for every 2 employees |                                 |
|                                         | on maximum shift              |                                 |
+-----------------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Community residential facility-prisoner | 1 space for every 2 employees |                                 |
| release                                 | on maximum shift              |                                 |
+-----------------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Congregate care/assisted                | 1 space for every 2 beds      |                                 |
| living                                  |                               |                                 |
+-----------------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Fraternity/sorority/group               | 1 space per resident          |                                 |
| student house                           |                               |                                 |
+-----------------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Accessory Uses                                                                                            |
+-----------------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Accessory dwelling units                | 1 space per dwelling unit     |                                 |
+-----------------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Temporary Lodging                                                                                         |
+-----------------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Hotel/motel                             | 1 space per room              | additional spaces for assoc.    |
|                                         |                               | restaurants, etc.               |
+-----------------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Bed and breakfast                       | 1 space per room              |                                 |
+-----------------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------------+
(Ord. 2268, 2014)

14.235.180 Parking Requirements for General Services Land Uses.
+------------------------------+-----------------------------+--------------------------+
|           Land Use           |     Parking Requirement     |   Supplemental Parking   |
+------------------------------+-----------------------------+--------------------------+
| Personal Services                                                                     |
+------------------------------+-----------------------------+--------------------------+
| General personal services    | 1 space per 200 sf gfa      |                          |
+------------------------------+-----------------------------+--------------------------+
| Dry cleaning plants          | 1 space per 200 sf gfa      |                          |
+------------------------------+-----------------------------+--------------------------+
| Industrial launderers        | 1 space per 400 sf gfa      | plus loading for trucks? |
+------------------------------+-----------------------------+--------------------------+
| Funeral home/crematory       | 1 space per four seats      |                          |
+------------------------------+-----------------------------+--------------------------+
| Adult uses                   | 1 space per 100 sf gfa      |                          |
+------------------------------+-----------------------------+--------------------------+
| Cemetery, columbarium or     | 1 space per 200 sf gfa of   |                          |
| mausoleum                    | office space                |                          |
+------------------------------+-----------------------------+--------------------------+
| Childcare, less than 12      | 1 space per employee        |                          |
| children                     |                             |                          |
+------------------------------+-----------------------------+--------------------------+
| Childcare, more than 12      | 1 space per employee        | plus drop off space      |
| children                     |                             |                          |
+------------------------------+-----------------------------+--------------------------+
| Childcare                    | 1 space per employee        | plus drop off space      |
+------------------------------+-----------------------------+--------------------------+
| Veterinary clinic, kennel,   | 1 space per 200 sf gfa      |                          |
| cattery                      |                             |                          |
+------------------------------+-----------------------------+--------------------------+
| Automotive repair, service,  | 1 space per 200 sf gfa      |                          |
| misc repair                  |                             |                          |
+------------------------------+-----------------------------+--------------------------+
| Church, synagogue, temple,   | 1 space for every 4 seats   | plus 1 space per 200 gfa |
| mosque                       |                             | not in seating           |
+------------------------------+-----------------------------+--------------------------+
| Social services              | 1 space per 200 sf gfa      |                          |
+------------------------------+-----------------------------+--------------------------+
| Community stable             | 1 space per horse, based    |                          |
|                              | on the max capacity of      |                          |
|                              | horses                      |                          |
+------------------------------+-----------------------------+--------------------------+
| Health Services                                                                       |
+------------------------------+-----------------------------+--------------------------+
| Office/patient clinic, labs, | 1 space per 200 sf gfa      |                          |
| misc. health                 |                             |                          |
+------------------------------+-----------------------------+--------------------------+
| Nursing/convalescent home    | 1 space for every 3 beds    |                          |
+------------------------------+-----------------------------+--------------------------+
| Hospital                     | 2 spaces per bed or 1 space |                          |
|                              | per 150 sf gfa, whichever   |                          |
|                              | is greater                  |                          |
+------------------------------+-----------------------------+--------------------------+
| Education Services                                                                    |
+------------------------------+-----------------------------+--------------------------+
| Elementary or middle/junior  | 1.75 spaces per classroom   |                          |
| high                         |                             |                          |
+------------------------------+-----------------------------+--------------------------+
| Secondary/high school        | 1 space per employee plus   |                          |
|                              | 1 space per 5 students      |                          |
+------------------------------+-----------------------------+--------------------------+
| Specialized instruction      | 1 space per employee plus   |                          |
| school, Voc. school          | 1 space per 3 students      |                          |
+------------------------------+-----------------------------+--------------------------+
| School district support      | 1 space per employee on     |                          |
| facility                     | maximum shift               |                          |
+------------------------------+-----------------------------+--------------------------+
(Ord. 2268, 2014)

14.235.190 Parking Requirements for Government/Business Services Land Uses.
+-----------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
|             Land Use              |      Parking Requirement      | Supplemental Requirements |
+-----------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
| Government Services                                                                           |
+-----------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
| Public agency office              | high volume: 1 space per      | low volume: 1 space per   |
|                                   | 200 sf gfa                    | 400 sf gfa                |
+-----------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
| Public agency yard                | 1 space per every 2 employees |                           |
|                                   | on maximum shift              |                           |
+-----------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
| Public agency archives            | 1 space per 400 sf of gfa     |                           |
+-----------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
| Court, police facility,           | 1 space per 200 sf of gfa     |                           |
| fire facility                     |                               |                           |
+-----------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
| Subregional utility, minor        | 1 space per every 2 employees |                           |
| com. facility                     | on maximum shift              |                           |
+-----------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
| Business Services                                                                             |
+-----------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
| Construction and trade            | 1 space per every 2 employees |                           |
|                                   | on maximum shift              |                           |
+-----------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
| Individual transportation         | 1 per vehicle in fleet        |                           |
| and taxi                          |                               |                           |
+-----------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
| Trucking and courier service      | 1 per vehicle in fleet        |                           |
+-----------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
| Warehousing and wholesale         | 1 space per every 2 employees |                           |
| trade                             | on maximum shift              |                           |
+-----------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
| Self-service storage              | 1 space per 5,000 sf of       |                           |
|                                   | area devoted to storage       |                           |
|                                   | (inside and outside)          |                           |
+-----------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
| Farm product warehousing,         | 1 space per every 2 employees |                           |
| refrigeration & storage           | on maximum shift              |                           |
+-----------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
| Log storage, Transportation       | 1 space per every 2 employees |                           |
| service                           | on maximum shift              |                           |
+-----------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
| Freight and cargo service         | 1 space per every 2 employees |                           |
|                                   | on maximum shift              |                           |
+-----------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
| Passenger transportation          | 1 space per 200 sf of gfa     |                           |
| service                           |                               |                           |
+-----------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
| Communication offices, telegraph, | 1 space per every 2 employees |                           |
| etc.                              | on maximum shift              |                           |
+-----------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
| General business service,         | 1 space per 200 sf of gfa     |                           |
| prof. office                      |                               |                           |
+-----------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
| Outdoor ad service, misc.         | 1 space per every 2 employees |                           |
| equipment rental                  | on maximum shift              |                           |
+-----------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
| Automotive rental and leasing     | 1 space per 200 sf of gfa     |                           |
+-----------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
| Automotive parking                | Na                            |                           |
+-----------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
| Pro sport teams/promoters;        | 1 space per 400 sf of gfa     |                           |
| R&D & testing                     |                               |                           |
+-----------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
| Heavy equipment and truck         | 1 space per 200 sf of gfa     |                           |
| repair                            |                               |                           |
+-----------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
| Commercial/industry accessory     | to be determined by use       |                           |
| uses                              |                               |                           |
+-----------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
| Helipad                           | 1 space per 200 sf of gfa     |                           |
|                                   | in enclosed building          |                           |
+-----------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+

14.235.200 Parking for Retail Land Uses.
+---------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------+
|            Land Use             |    Parking Requirement    |  Supplemental Requirements  |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------+
| Retail Land Uses                                                                          |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------+
| Shopping Center                 | 1 space per 300 sf gfa    |                             |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------+
| Bldg, hardware & garden         | 1 space per 400 sf gfa    |                             |
| materials                       |                           |                             |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------+
| Forest product sales            | 1 space per 400 sf gfa    |                             |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------+
| Department and variety stores   | 1 space per 200 sf gfa    |                             |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------+
| Food stores                     | 1 space per 150 sf gfa    |                             |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------+
| Agricultural crop sales         | 1 space per 200 sf gfa    |                             |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------+
| Motor vehicle and boat dealers  | 1 space per 200 sf gfa    |                             |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------+
| Auto supply store               | 1 space per 200 sf gfa    |                             |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------+
| Gasoline service station        | 1 space per 200 sf gfa    | plus parking to accommodate |
|                                 |                           | cars at pumps               |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------+
| Apparel and accessory stores    | 1 space per 200 sf gfa    |                             |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------+
| Furniture and home furnishings  | 1 space per 200 sf gfa    |                             |
| stores                          |                           |                             |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------+
| Eating and drinking places      | if sit-down only: 1 space |                             |
|                                 | per 100 gfa               |                             |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------+
| Drug stores                     | 1 space per 200 sf gfa    |                             |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------+
| Liquor stores                   | 1 space per 200 sf gfa    |                             |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------+
| Used goods: antiques/secondhand | 1 space per 200 sf gfa    | See 14.235.040              |
| shops                           |                           |                             |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------+
| Sporting goods and related      | 1 space per 200 sf gfa    |                             |
| stores                          |                           |                             |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------+
| Book, stationery, video         | 1 space per 200 sf gfa    |                             |
| and art supply                  |                           |                             |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------+
| Jewelry stores                  | 1 space per 200 sf gfa    |                             |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------+
| Monuments, tombstones and       | 1 space per 200 sf gfa    |                             |
| gravestones                     |                           |                             |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------+
| Hobby, toy and game shops       | 1 space per 200 sf gfa    |                             |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------+
| Photographic and electronic     | 1 space per 200 sf gfa    |                             |
| shops                           |                           |                             |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------+
| Fabric shops                    | 1 space per 200 sf gfa    |                             |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------+
| Fuel dealers                    | 1 space per 200 sf gfa of |                             |
|                                 | office                    |                             |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------+
| Florist shops                   | 1 space per 200 sf gfa    |                             |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------+
| Personal medical supply         | 1 space per 200 sf gfa    |                             |
| stores                          |                           |                             |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------+
| Pet shops                       | 1 space per 200 sf gfa    |                             |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------+
| Bulk retail                     | 1 space per 150 sf gfa    |                             |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------+
| Auction houses                  | 1 space per 150 sf gfa    |                             |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------+

14.235.210 Parking for Manufacturing Land Uses.
+---------------------------+---------------------------+---------------------------+
|         Land Use          |    Parking Requirement    | Supplemental Requirements |
+---------------------------+---------------------------+---------------------------+
| Manufacturing land uses   | 1 space per employee on   | if in commercial area or  |
| (see Table 14.205.110 for | maximum shift, or 1 space | generates walk-in trade:  |
| list)                     | per 1,000 sf of gfa       | 1 space per 200 sf of gfa |
+---------------------------+---------------------------+---------------------------+

14.235.220 Parking for Regional Land Uses.
+---------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
|            Land Use             |      Parking Requirement      | Supplemental Requirements |
+---------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
| Regional Land Uses                                                                          |
+---------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
| Public agency training facility | 1 space for every 2 employees |                           |
|                                 | on maximum shift              |                           |
+---------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
| Non-hydroelectric generation    | 1 space for every 2 employees |                           |
| facility                        | on maximum shift              |                           |
+---------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
| Communication facility -        | 1 space for every 2 employees |                           |
| major                           | on maximum shift              |                           |
+---------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
| Transfer station, wastewater    | 1 space for every 2 employees |                           |
| treatment facility              | on maximum shift              |                           |
+---------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
| Municipal water production      | 1 space for every 2 employees |                           |
|                                 | on maximum shift              |                           |
+---------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
| Airport/heliport                | 1 space per 200 sf enclosed   |                           |
|                                 | gsf                           |                           |
+---------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
| Transit bus base                | 1 space for every 1 employees |                           |
|                                 | on maximum shift              |                           |
+---------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
| Transit park and ride lot       | NA                            |                           |
+---------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
| School bus base                 | 1 space for every 1 employees |                           |
|                                 | on maximum shift              |                           |
+---------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
| Stadium/arena                   | 1 space per every 4 seats     |                           |
+---------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
| College/university              | 1 space per 150 sf gsf        |                           |
+---------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
| Zoo/wildlife exhibit            | 10 per acre                   |                           |
+---------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+

14.235.230 Parking for Recreational/Cultural Land Uses.
+---------------------------+-----------------------------+--------------------------------+
|         Land Use          |     Parking Requirement     |   Supplemental Requirements    |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Parks and Recreation                                                                     |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Park                      | To be determined based on   |                                |
|                           | use                         |                                |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Trails                    | To be determined based on   |                                |
|                           | use                         |                                |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Campgrounds               | 1 space per camp site       |                                |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Community stables         | 1 space per horse if at     |                                |
|                           | maximum capacity            |                                |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Destination resorts       | 1 space per 200 gsf         |                                |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Recreational vehicle park | 1 stall per space           |                                |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Amusement/Entertainment                                                                  |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Theater                   | 1 space per every 4 seats   |                                |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Bowling center            | 1 space per maximum design  | 1 space per 200 sf of gfa      |
|                           | capacity for use            | not incl. in calculation       |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Sports club               | 1 space per 200 sf enclosed | plus 1 space for every 3       |
|                           | gfa                         | persons at maximum capacity    |
|                           |                             | use                            |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Golf facility             | 1 space per 300 sf of area  | 1 space per 200 sf of enclosed |
|                           |                             | gfa                            |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Golf driving range        | 1 space per tee             | 1 space per 200 sf of enclosed |
|                           |                             | gfa                            |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Shooting range (indoor)   | 1 space per 400 enclosed    |                                |
|                           | gsf                         |                                |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Amusement arcades         | 1 space per 200 sf gfa      |                                |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Cultural                                                                                 |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Library, Museum           | 1 space per 300 sf of gfa   |                                |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Arboretum                 | to be determined            |                                |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Conference center         | 1 space per 200 gfa         |                                |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------+--------------------------------+
(Ord. 2312, 2016)

14.235.240 Parking for Resource Land Uses.
+--------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
|            Land Use            |      Parking Requirement      | Supplemental Requirements |
+--------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
| Agriculture                                                                                |
+--------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
| Growing, harvesting crops;     | 1 space for every 2 employees |                           |
| raising livestock              | on maximum shift              |                           |
+--------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
| Forestry                                                                                   |
+--------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
| Growing and harvesting forest  | 1 space for every 2 employees |                           |
| products                       | on maximum shift              |                           |
+--------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
| Forest research                | 1 space for every 2 employees |                           |
|                                | on maximum shift              |                           |
+--------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
| Fish and Wildlife Management                                                               |
+--------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
| Hatchery/fish preserve;        | 1 space for every 2 employees |                           |
| Aquaculture                    | on maximum shift              |                           |
+--------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
| Wildlife shelters              | 1 space for every 2 employees |                           |
|                                | on maximum shift              |                           |
+--------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
| Mineral                                                                                    |
+--------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
| Mineral extraction; processing | 1 space for every 2 employees |                           |
|                                | on maximum shift              |                           |
+--------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
| Asphalt paving mixtures        | 1 space for every 2 employees |                           |
| and blocks                     | on maximum shift              |                           |
+--------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
| Resource Accessory Uses                                                                    |
+--------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
| Resource accessory uses        | 1 space for every 2 employees |                           |
|                                | on maximum shift              |                           |
+--------------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+

14.235.250 Parking for Essential Public Facilities Land Uses.
+---------------------------+-------------------------+---------------------------+
|         Land Use          |   Parking Requirement   | Supplemental Requirements |
+---------------------------+-------------------------+---------------------------+
| Essential Public Facilities                                                     |
+---------------------------+-------------------------+---------------------------+
| Work release facility     | 1 space per employee on |                           |
|                           | maximum shift           |                           |
+---------------------------+-------------------------+---------------------------+
| Earth station             | 1 space per employee on |                           |
|                           | maximum shift           |                           |
+---------------------------+-------------------------+---------------------------+
| Energy resource recovery  | 1 space per employee on |                           |
| facility                  | maximum shift           |                           |
+---------------------------+-------------------------+---------------------------+
| Communication facility -  | 1 space per employee on |                           |
| major                     | maximum shift           |                           |
+---------------------------+-------------------------+---------------------------+
| Hazardous waste storage & | 1 space per employee on |                           |
| recycling                 | maximum shift           |                           |
+---------------------------+-------------------------+---------------------------+
| Transfer station          | 1 space per employee on |                           |
|                           | maximum shift           |                           |
+---------------------------+-------------------------+---------------------------+

14.235.260 Minimum Standards for Conventional Off-Street Parking.Table 10. 
Conventional car stall and aisle specifications
+---------------+---------+-------+-------------+-------+-------+---------+-------+---------+
|               |      Angle      |     Dimensions      |     One Way     |     Two Way     |
+---------------+---------+-------+-------------+-------+-------+---------+-------+---------+
|               | Parking | Stall | Curb Length | Stall | Aisle | Parking | Aisle | Parking |
|               |  Angle  | Width |    (ft)     | Depth | Width | Section | Width | Section |
|               |   (E)   | (ft)  |             | (ft)  | (ft)  |  Width  | (ft)  |  Width  |
|               |         |       |             |       |       |  (ft)   |       |  (ft)   |
+---------------+---------+-------+-------------+-------+-------+---------+-------+---------+
|               |    A    |   B   |      C      |   D   |   E   |    F    |   E   |    F    |
+---------------+---------+-------+-------------+-------+-------+---------+-------+---------+
| Parallel      |         |       |             |       |       |         |       |         |
+---------------+---------+-------+-------------+-------+-------+---------+-------+---------+
| One Side      | 0       | 8     | 21          | 8     | 12    | 20      | 22    | 30      |
+---------------+---------+-------+-------------+-------+-------+---------+-------+---------+
| Two Sides     | 0       | 8     | 21          | 8     | 22    | 38      | 24    | 40      |
+---------------+---------+-------+-------------+-------+-------+---------+-------+---------+
| Angular       | 20      | 8.5   | 24.9        | 14.5  | 11    | 40      | 20    | 49      |
+---------------+---------+-------+-------------+-------+-------+---------+-------+---------+
|               | 30      | 8.5   | 17          | 16.9  | 11    | 44.8    | 20    | 53.8    |
+---------------+---------+-------+-------------+-------+-------+---------+-------+---------+
|               | 40      | 8.5   | 13.2        | 18.7  | 12    | 49.4    | 20    | 57.4    |
+---------------+---------+-------+-------------+-------+-------+---------+-------+---------+
|               | 45      | 8.5   | 12          | 19.4  | 13.5  | 52.3    | 20    | 58.8    |
+---------------+---------+-------+-------------+-------+-------+---------+-------+---------+
|               | 50      | 8.5   | 11.1        | 20    | 15.5  | 55.5    | 20    | 60      |
+---------------+---------+-------+-------------+-------+-------+---------+-------+---------+
|               | 60      | 8.5   | 9.8         | 20.7  | 18.5  | 59.9    | 22    | 63.4    |
+---------------+---------+-------+-------------+-------+-------+---------+-------+---------+
|               | 70      | 8.5   | 9           | 20.8  | 19.5  | 61.1    | 22    | 63.6    |
+---------------+---------+-------+-------------+-------+-------+---------+-------+---------+
|               | 80      | 8.5   | 8.6         | 20.2  | 24    | 64.4    | 24    | 64.4    |
+---------------+---------+-------+-------------+-------+-------+---------+-------+---------+
| Perpendicular | 90      | 8.5   | 8.5         | 18    | 24    | 60      | 24    | 60      |
+---------------+---------+-------+-------------+-------+-------+---------+-------+---------+
Compact car stall and aisle specifications
+---------------+---------+-------+-------------+-------+-------+---------+-------+---------+
|               |      Angle      |     Dimensions      |     One Way     |     Two Way     |
+---------------+---------+-------+-------------+-------+-------+---------+-------+---------+
|               | Parking | Stall | Curb Length | Stall | Aisle | Parking | Aisle | Parking |
|               |  Angle  | Width |    (ft)     | Depth | Width | Section | Width | Section |
|               |   (E)   | (ft)  |             | (ft)  | (ft)  |  Width  | (ft)  |  Width  |
|               |         |       |             |       |       |  (ft)   |       |  (ft)   |
+---------------+---------+-------+-------------+-------+-------+---------+-------+---------+
|               |    A    |   B   |      C      |   D   |   E   |    F    |   E   |    F    |
+---------------+---------+-------+-------------+-------+-------+---------+-------+---------+
| Refer to Figure 1                                                                         |
+---------------+---------+-------+-------------+-------+-------+---------+-------+---------+
| Parallel      | 0       | 8     | 20          | 8     | 12    | 28      | 20    | 36      |
+---------------+---------+-------+-------------+-------+-------+---------+-------+---------+
| Angular       | 45      | 8     | 11.3        | 15    | 12.5  | 42.5    | 20    | 50      |
+---------------+---------+-------+-------------+-------+-------+---------+-------+---------+
|               | 60      | 8     | 9.2         | 16.5  | 17    | 50      | 22    | 55      |
+---------------+---------+-------+-------------+-------+-------+---------+-------+---------+
| Perpendicular | 90      | 8     | 8           | 16    | 22    | 54      | 25    | 57      |
+---------------+---------+-------+-------------+-------+-------+---------+-------+---------+
(Ord. 2213, 2011)

14.235.270 Minimum Standards for Interlocking Off-Street Parking.Table 11. 
Interlocking -- conventional cars
+---------------+---------+-------+-------------+-------+-------+---------+-------+---------+
|               |      Angle      |     Dimensions      |     One Way     |     Two Way     |
+---------------+---------+-------+-------------+-------+-------+---------+-------+---------+
|               | Parking | Stall | Curb Length | Stall | Aisle | Parking | Aisle | Parking |
|               |  Angle  | Width |    (ft)     | Depth | Width | Section | Width | Section |
|               |   (E)   | (ft)  |             | (ft)  | (ft)  |  Width  | (ft)  |  Width  |
|               |         |       |             |       |       |  (ft)   |       |  (ft)   |
+---------------+---------+-------+-------------+-------+-------+---------+-------+---------+
|               |    A    |   B   |      C      |   D   |   E   |    F    |   E   |    F    |
+---------------+---------+-------+-------------+-------+-------+---------+-------+---------+
| Parallel      | 0       | 8     | 21          | 8     | 12/22 | 28/38   | 22/24 | 38/40   |
+---------------+---------+-------+-------------+-------+-------+---------+-------+---------+
| Angular       | 20      | 8.5   | 24.9        | 10.5  | 11    | 32      | 20    | 41      |
+---------------+---------+-------+-------------+-------+-------+---------+-------+---------+
|               | 30      | 8.5   | 17          | 13.2  | 11    | 37.4    | 20    | 46.4    |
+---------------+---------+-------+-------------+-------+-------+---------+-------+---------+
|               | 40      | 8.5   | 13.2        | 15.5  | 12    | 43      | 20    | 51      |
+---------------+---------+-------+-------------+-------+-------+---------+-------+---------+
|               | 45      | 8.5   | 12          | 16.4  | 13.5  | 46.3    | 20    | 52.8    |
+---------------+---------+-------+-------------+-------+-------+---------+-------+---------+
|               | 50      | 8.5   | 11.1        | 17.3  | 15.5  | 50.1    | 20    | 54.6    |
+---------------+---------+-------+-------------+-------+-------+---------+-------+---------+
|               | 60      | 8.5   | 9.8         | 18.6  | 18.5  | 55.7    | 22    | 59.2    |
+---------------+---------+-------+-------------+-------+-------+---------+-------+---------+
|               | 70      | 8.5   | 9           | 19.3  | 19.5  | 58.1    | 22    | 60.6    |
+---------------+---------+-------+-------------+-------+-------+---------+-------+---------+
|               | 80      | 8.5   | 8.6         | 19.5  | 24    | 63      | 24    | 63      |
+---------------+---------+-------+-------------+-------+-------+---------+-------+---------+
| Perpendicular | 90      | 8.5   | 8.5         | 18    | 24    | 60      | 24    | 60      |
+---------------+---------+-------+-------------+-------+-------+---------+-------+---------+Interlocking -- compact cars
+---------------+---------+-------+-------------+-------+-------+---------+-------+---------+
|               |      Angle      |     Dimensions      |     One Way     |     Two Way     |
+---------------+---------+-------+-------------+-------+-------+---------+-------+---------+
|               | Parking | Stall | Curb Length | Stall | Aisle | Parking | Aisle | Parking |
|               |  Angle  | Width |    (ft)     | Depth | Width | Section | Width | Section |
|               |   (E)   | (ft)  |             | (ft)  | (ft)  |  Width  | (ft)  |  Width  |
|               |         |       |             |       |       |  (ft)   |       |  (ft)   |
+---------------+---------+-------+-------------+-------+-------+---------+-------+---------+
|               |    A    |   B   |      C      |   D   |   E   |    F    |   E   |    F    |
+---------------+---------+-------+-------------+-------+-------+---------+-------+---------+
| Refer to Figure 2                                                                         |
+---------------+---------+-------+-------------+-------+-------+---------+-------+---------+
| Parallel      | 0       | 8     | 20          | 8     | 12    | 28      | 20    | 36      |
+---------------+---------+-------+-------------+-------+-------+---------+-------+---------+
| Angular       | 45      | 8     | 11.3        | 14.1  | 12.5  | 40.7    | 20    | 48.2    |
+---------------+---------+-------+-------------+-------+-------+---------+-------+---------+
|               | 60      | 8     | 9.2         | 15.9  | 17    | 48.8    | 22    | 53.8    |
+---------------+---------+-------+-------------+-------+-------+---------+-------+---------+
| Perpendicular | 90      | 8     | 8           | 16    | 22    | 54      | 25    | 57      |
+---------------+---------+-------+-------------+-------+-------+---------+-------+---------+
(Ord. 2213, 2011)

14.235.280 Acceptable Parking Designs.Figure 1. 
[IMAGE: <14.235.280_Fig1.png>]

14.235.290 Acceptable Parking Designs.Figure 2. 
[IMAGE: <14.235.290_Fig2.png>]

Chapter 14.237 CLEARING AND GRADING

Sections:
14.237.010   Purpose
14.237.020   Permit Required
14.237.030   Exempt Activities
14.237.040   Permit Issuance
14.237.050   General Conditions (Required of All Applicants)
14.237.060   Minimum Standards
14.237.070   Permit Restrictions
14.237.080   Inspections
14.237.090   Completion of Work
14.237.100   Permit Suspension or Revocation
14.237.110   Liability
14.237.120   Severability

14.237.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate, by permit, activities that involve construction, disturbance, and permanent and temporary modification of lands in the City of Snohomish in the interest of public health, safety, and welfare to ensure that the activities minimize impacts to the environment and storm drainage facilities. (Ord. 2315, 2016)

14.237.020 Permit Required.
A site civil permit for clearing and grading activities (hereunder referred to as “permit”) is required for the following activities:
A. Any clearing, filling, or excavation in an environmentally sensitive area or regulated buffer.
B. Fill and/or excavation totaling a minimum of 100 cubic yards. Quantities of fill and excavation are separately calculated and then added together. However, if excavated material is used as fill on the same site, the quantity is not calculated separately and then added together.
C. Over 1,000 square feet of clearing, as measured at the ground level. Clearing includes disturbance of over 1,000 square feet at grade due to felling or topping of trees. (Ord. 2315, 2016)

14.237.030 Exempt Activities.
The following activities are exempt from the requirements for a permit:
A. Agricultural management of existing farmed areas.
B. Routine landscape maintenance of existing landscaped areas totaling less than 1,000 square feet on developed lots and other activities associated with maintaining an already established landscape.
C. Work needed to correct an immediate danger to life or property in an emergency situation as declared by the Mayor or his/her designee.
D. Cemetery graves.
E. Work, when approved by the City Engineer, in an isolated self-contained area, if there is no danger or impact to public or private property. (Ord. 2315, 2016; Ord. 2341, 2017)

14.237.040 Permit Issuance.
A. Permit shall be issued by the Engineering Department upon proper application therefor and upon payment of fees to be set by separate Council resolution. Unless provided otherwise on the face of the permit, the permit shall be effective for one year, but may, with cause shown, be extended by the City Engineer for an additional one-year period.
B. Permit shall be issued only in conjunction with one or more of the following:
    1. Approved building permit;
    2. Approved administrative development plan;
    3. Utility extension;
    4. Property access road;
    5. Approved conditional use permit;
    6. Approved street, water, storm and sanitary sewer construction drawings for a preliminary plat or short plat;
    7. Approved shoreline permit;
    8. Special permission of the permit authority based on a demonstration that extenuating and/or special circumstances are present and that the project is consistent with the grading and drainage plan with landscaping, soil stabilization and surface groundcover elements including continuous maintenance;
        a. Decision Criteria. The permit authority may approve or approve with modifications an application submitted under this subsection only if:
            i. The proposal is in accord with the comprehensive plan, comprehensive drainage plan, land use development code, drainage management code and other City codes and adopted standards,
            ii. The approval of the proposal will not pose a threat to or be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare, and
            iii. The applicant has demonstrated that approval of the proposal independent of obtaining other permits is appropriate for the reasonable development or maintenance of the property and when the application specifies the size, location, and type of proposed uses for the project when it is completely developed.
        b. Time Limits May Be Imposed. For any permit authorized under this subsection the permit authority may impose a time limit within which the proposed site work must be completed, generally not to exceed one year.
        c. Conditions May Be Imposed. For any permit authorized under this subsection the permit authority may impose any conditions deemed necessary to mitigate potential adverse impacts on the environment and the public’s health, safety, and general welfare. (Ord. 2315, 2016)

14.237.050 General Conditions (Required of All Applicants).
Permittees shall comply with the following conditions, which shall apply to all permits:
A. Comply with all applicable City ordinances, City design and construction standards, specifications, policies, and administrative procedures.
B. Agree to defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the City of Snohomish, its officers, employees, and agents, for any and all suits, claims, causes of action, or liabilities caused by or arising out of any activities conducted by the permittee resulting from issuance of the permit.
C. Agree to special project notification of the City, affected property owners and tenants, or other agencies as specified by the City Engineer.
D. Notify the City 48 hours before installation of temporary erosion and sediment control measures and commencing any land-disturbing activity.
E. Install all temporary erosion and sediment control measures as identified in the approved plans prior to commencing any land-disturbing activity.
F. Delimit all potentially impacted critical areas and their buffers with a construction limits fence prior to any disturbance of the soil.
G. Notify the City within 24 hours after the temporary erosion and sediment control measures installation is completed and do not commence any land-disturbing activity until notified by the City that the installation of the temporary erosion and sediment control measures and construction limits fencing has been approved.
H. Obtain permission in writing from the City prior to modifying any of the plans.
I. Maintain all road drainage systems, storm water drainage systems, control measures, and other facilities identified in the plans.
J. Protect areas to remain undisturbed and identified for low impact development facilities/uses and minimize equipment encroachment into these areas.
K. Repair siltation or erosion damage to adjoining surfaces and drainage ways resulting from land-developing or -disturbing activities.
L. Inspect the erosion construction control measures at least once each week during construction after each rain of 0.5 inch or more (over a 24-hour period), and immediately make any needed repairs.
M. Allow the City to enter the site for the purpose of inspecting compliance with the plans or for performing any work necessary to bring the site into compliance with the plans.
N. Keep an up-to-date, approved copy of the plans on the site.
O. Understand and agree that the City Engineer may, at his or her discretion, attach other special conditions to any permit. Such condition(s) shall be necessary to satisfy the purpose of this chapter, compliance with the Ecology Stormwater Management Manual or to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
P. Understand and agree that all construction, workmanship and materials shall be in accordance with the City Engineering Design Standards, City adopted Department of Ecology Stormwater Management Manual for Western Washington, and where applicable, the most current edition of the State of Washington Standard Specifications for Road, Bridge and Municipal Construction. (Ord. 2315, 2016)

14.237.060 Minimum Standards.
The following minimum standards must be satisfied as a condition of issuance of any development permit:
A. Temporary Erosion and Sediment Control. Temporary erosion and sediment control plan shall be in accordance with the City Engineering Design Standards and the City adopted Department of Ecology Stormwater Management Manual for Western Washington.
B. Grading. The following are the minimum standards for grading unless otherwise modified by an approved grading plan:
    1. Grading shall not contribute to or create landslides, accelerated soil creep, or settlement of soils.
    2. Natural land and water features, vegetation, drainage and other natural features of the site shall be reasonably preserved.
    3. Grading shall not create or contribute to flooding, erosion, increased turbidity, or siltation of a watercourse.
    4. Groundcover and tree disturbance shall be minimized. Tree retention and/or removal shall be in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 14.240 SMC.
    5. Grading operations shall be conducted so as to expose the smallest practical area to erosion for the least possible time.
    6. Grading shall not divert existing watercourses.
    7. The duff layer and native soils shall be retained in an undisturbed state to the maximum extent practicable in areas not intended for building pads, access ways or other impervious surfaces.
C. Aesthetic and spatial impact of altered grades on adjacent properties both public and private shall be considered in site design.
D. Sites shall be developed to promote continuity and to minimize abrupt grade changes between sites.
E. Clearing and grading shall be the minimum necessary for the structure and to make installation and function of infrastructure feasible and economic for future service extensions to adjacent properties.
F. Natural topography and the proposed layout of the development shall be considered when siting roads in order to anticipate grading needs and minimize extensive grading.
G. Sensitive Areas. No land-disturbing activity shall be permitted in a regulated sensitive area, except as otherwise allowed by applicable laws and permits.
H. Clean-Up. Persons and/or firms engaged in clearing, grading, filling, or drainage activities shall be responsible for the maintenance of work areas free of debris or other material that may cause damage to or siltation of existing or new facilities or have the potential of creating a safety hazard.
I. Dust Suppression. Dust from clearing, grading and other construction activities shall be minimized at all times. Impervious surfaces on or near the construction area shall be swept, vacuumed, or otherwise maintained to suppress dust entrainment. Any dust suppressants used shall be approved by the director. Petrochemical dust suppressants are prohibited. (Ord. 2315, 2016)

14.237.070 Permit Restrictions.
All clearing, grading, filling, and excavation activities, regardless of whether or not a permit is required, are subject to the following restrictions:
A. No clearing, grading, filling, or excavation is allowed in a critical area and its buffers where such activities are prohibited by SMC Title 14.
B. For clearing and grading activities conducted between October 1st and March 31st, no more than one acre may be moved or graded at any one time.
C. Between October 1st and March 31st, grading of individual building lots in a subdivision shall be phased, with no more than 10 lots being graded in a subdivision at any one time. Before additional lots can be graded, the previously graded lots shall be hydro-seeded and mulched, sodded, or otherwise protected. (Ord. 2315, 2016)

14.237.080 Inspections.
A. Prior to any clearing, grading, filling, and/or drainage facility construction, the contractor may be required to conduct a preconstruction conference with the City’s Engineering Construction Inspector to coordinate the project.
B. All projects which include clearing, grading, filling or drainage shall be subject to inspection by the City Engineer or his designee, who shall be granted reasonable right of entry to the work site by the permittee. When required by the City Engineer, special inspection of the grading operations and special testing shall be performed by qualified professionals employed by the permittee.
C. Each site that has an approved clearing and grading, temporary erosion and sediment control or other required plans must be inspected as necessary to ensure that the temporary erosion and sediment control measures are installed and effectively maintained in compliance with the approved plan and permit requirements. Where applicable, the permittee must obtain inspection by the City at the following stages:
    1. Following the installation of sediment control measures or practices and prior to any other land-disturbing activity;
    2. During the construction of sediment basins or storm water management structures;
    3. During rough grading, including hauling of imported or wasted materials;
    4. Prior to the removal or modification of any sediment control measure or facility; and
    5. Upon completion of final grading, including establishment of groundcover and planting, installation of all vegetative measures, and all other work in accordance with an approved plan and/or permit. (Ord. 2315, 2016)

14.237.090 Completion of Work.
A. Construction Changes. Whenever changes must be made to the original, approved plan, the changes shall be submitted in writing and approved by the City Engineer in writing in advance of the construction of those changes.
B. Final Reports. Upon completion of the rough grading and at the final completion of the work, the City Engineer may require the following reports, drawings, and supplements thereto to be prepared and submitted by the owner and/or an appropriate qualified professional approved by the City Engineer:
    1. An as-built grading plan, including original ground surface elevations, final surface elevations, lot drainage patterns, and locations and elevations of all surface and subsurface drainage facilities.
    2. A soils grading and/or geologic grading report, including locations and elevations of field density tests and geologic features, summaries of field and other laboratory tests, and other substantiating data and comments or any other changes made during grading and their effect on the recommendations made in the approved grading plan.
C. Notification of Completion. The permittee or their agent shall notify the City Engineer when the grading operation is ready for final inspection. Final approval shall not be given until all work has been completed in accordance with the final approved grading, erosion sedimentation control and other required plans, and the required reports have been submitted and accepted. (Ord. 2315, 2016)

14.237.100 Permit Suspension or Revocation.
The City Engineer may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this chapter for any of the following reasons:
A. Whenever the permit was issued in error or on the basis of incorrect information supplied by the applicant.
B. Whenever the work does not proceed in accordance with the plans as approved, or conditions of approval.
C. Whenever, in the judgment of the City Engineer, the work is not being performed in compliance with the requirements of this chapter, other City ordinances, or state or federal law.
D. Whenever the City has been denied reasonable access to investigate and permitted work is proceeding.
E. Whenever any excavation or fill endangers or may reasonably be expected to endanger the public, the adjoining property or street, or utilities. (Ord. 2315, 2016)

14.237.110 Liability.
The obligation of complying with the requirements of this chapter rests upon the permittee, and no provision is intended to impose any special duty upon the City, or any of its officers, employees, or agents. Nothing contained in this chapter or any procedures adopted hereunder is intended to be or shall be construed to create a special relationship with any contractor, owner, permittee, or member of the public, or form the basis for liability on the part of the City, or its officers, employees, or agents, for any injury or damage resulting from the failure of the permittee to comply with the provisions hereof, or by reason or in consequence of any act or omission in connection with the implementation of enforcement of this chapter or any procedures adopted hereunder by the City, its officers, employees, or agents.
The City Engineer and other employees charged with the enforcement and administration of this chapter or agents of the City, acting for the City in good faith and without malice in the discharge of their duties, shall not thereby render themselves liable personally for any damages which may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or by reason of any act or omission in the discharge of such duties. (Ord. 2315, 2016)

14.237.120 Severability.
If any one or more sections, subsections, or sentences of this chapter are held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decisions shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code, and the same shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 2315, 2016)

Chapter 14.240 LANDSCAPING, SCREENING, FENCING, AND RETAINING WALLS

Sections:
14.240.010   General Provisions
14.240.020   Performance Assurance
14.240.030   Existing Vegetation
14.240.040   Landscape Requirements for Parking Lot and Site Development
14.240.050   Maintenance of Landscaping
14.240.060   Fence and Freestanding Wall Regulations

14.240.010 General Provisions.
A. Purpose. The intent of this chapter is to provide landscaping and site buffering requirements for proposed developments in order to:
    1. Maintain and protect property values.
    2. Enhance the appearance of the development.
    3. Preserve any existing natural wooded character.
    4. Reduce erosion.
    5. Promote utilization of natural systems.
    6. Provide permeable surface areas to recharge subsurface aquifer and reduce quantity of storm water runoff.
    7. Maintain or replace existing vegetation.
    8. Provide screening between different land uses.
    9. Promote public safety.
    10. Moderate the microclimate.
    11. Minimize noise, glare, and other negative impacts.
    12. Protect and enhance watercourses, riparian habitat, and associated wildlife.
    13. Provide a transition between different land uses.
    14. Reduce impacts of development on the storm drain system.
B. Scope. The landscape standards in this chapter are minimum requirements. This chapter does not apply to the development of individual single family residential lots.
C. Submittal requirements. All proposed development or redevelopment proposals shall include plans for landscaping in accordance with an approved landscaping plan that meets the requirements of this Chapter. If irrigation is to be provided, then plans shall be submitted with the landscape plans. Any existing significant trees shall be shown on the plans. Plans shall be prepared by a licensed landscape architect, certified nurseryman or other trained person determined by the City Planner as competent to provide acceptable landscape plans. Tree preservation plans shall be prepared by a certified arborist or landscape architect. All plans shall be drawn to a minimum scale of 1”=30’ and fit on a maximum sheet size of 24” x 36”. Landscaping plans shall identify the common name, the quantity, and location of any plant material used. The landscape plan and existing vegetation plan shall show the following:
    1. Methods of protection.
    2. Dripline of trees to be saved.
    3. Location of all proposed underground utilities.
    4. Site improvements, including building eaves, foundations, paving and areas to be graded (cut and fill).
D. Approvals. All landscape plans shall be reviewed and approved by the City Planner or designated representative, prior to the issuance of a building permit for the related structure.
E. Exemptions. The following activities are exempt from the requirement to obtain plan approval:
    1. Maintenance of required landscape areas.
    2. Replacement of plants or plant material, which are dead or damaged.
F. Alternative landscaping options. The applicant can submit for consideration a landscaping plan that differs from the specific criteria set forth in this chapter, if the proposed landscaping complies with the stated purpose and intent of the chapter and, in the opinion of the Design Review Board or City Planner, is more effective than would result by following this chapter.

14.240.020 Performance Assurance.
All landscape installation shall be completed prior to final inspection. If the installation is incomplete at the time of formal application for occupancy because of weather-related reasons, the City will require that the applicant submit a bond or some other form of cash surety acceptable to the City at a value of 150 percent of the cost of installation of the remaining materials as evidenced by a submitted bid price from an acceptable source. If the required landscaping is not made within six months of the occupancy of the building, the City will use the surety to install the landscaping.

14.240.030 Existing Vegetation.
A. General. New development shall retain all existing significant trees, unless the retention of such trees would unreasonably burden the development or cause a significant safety problem, as determined by the City.
B. Site Clearing. No site clearing, grading or removal of significant trees or other vegetation shall take place prior to approval of a proposed landscaping plan. Wholesale clearing or mass grading of sites is discouraged.
C. Retained vegetation shall be oriented, wherever possible, to disconnect adjacent impervious surfaces.
D. Significant Tree Protection Required. Any deciduous and evergreen trees eight inches or greater in diameter, as measured four feet above the ground, is considered a significant tree, with the exception that alders and cottonwoods (Alnas rubra and Populis trichocarpa) are not considered significant. The property owner shall either furnish a site plan showing all free-standing significant trees in areas proposed to be disturbed and the edge of tree cover in areas not proposed to be disturbed, or shall have an arborist provide a certificate stating there are no significant trees on the property.
For property proposed for single-family detached residential development and capable of being subdivided, applicants shall retain significant trees, except in the following areas: utility corridors, roads, and building pads and the yard areas around the proposed residences. For one of these exceptions to apply, the applicant shall depict the area on a site plan showing all free-standing significant trees in areas proposed to be disturbed and the edge of tree cover in areas not proposed to be disturbed. The applicant shall retain significant trees on the subject property to the maximum extent that is practical taking into consideration the nature of the proposed development.
    1. Protection Techniques. In order to provide the best possible conditions for the retention of significant trees, the applicant shall comply with the following requirements:
        a. The applicant may not fill, excavate, stack, or store any equipment, or disturb or compact the earth in any way within the critical root zone (CRZ) where feasible, which may extend beyond the drip line of existing tree branches of any tree to be retained. A drip line is defined as a perimeter formed by the points farthest away from the trunk of a tree where precipitation from the branches of that tree falls on the ground.
        b. The applicant shall construct a temporary but immovable four-foot-high sturdy fence around each tree to be retained, generally corresponding to the drip line of that tree.
        c. If the grade level around a tree to be retained is to be raised, the applicant shall construct a dry rock wall or rock well around the tree. The diameter of this wall or well must be equal to the diameter of the tree’s drip line.
        d. The applicant may not install impervious surface material within the area defined by the drip line of any tree to be retained, unless specifically approved by the City’s Planning and Development Services Department.
        e. The grade level around any tree to be retained may not be lowered within the area defined by the drip line of the tree.
        f. The applicant shall prune branches and roots as necessary, and fertilize and water plant material as appropriate.
    2. Replacement if significant trees designated to be retained are removed.
        a. For trees other than alders and cottonwoods (which are not protected as significant trees), the following shall apply: For any trees to be removed (except for diseased or dying trees) the City shall require the applicant to replant in an appropriate manner. Replacement trees must be at least two and one-half inches in diameter as measured four feet above grade for deciduous trees and a minimum of 10 feet in height for evergreen trees. Trees shall be replaced according to a plan prepared by the applicant and approved by the City. For the removal of diseased or dying trees, an arborist hired by the City at the applicant’s expense shall determine which trees are healthy and shall provide a written report on its findings. Any tree which poses an immediate threat to property may be removed if a report from a qualified consultant is submitted and approved by the City. A two-year maintenance bond shall be provided for all replacement trees in an amount equal to no less than 200 percent of the arborist’s estimate.
        b. In the event that a property owner believes that a threat to life or property exists with regard to an existing tree, the property owner may request that the City Planner or designee evaluate the tree, and, if the City Planner concurs that a hazardous condition exists, the property owner may remove the tree without a report from a qualified consultant.
            i. Replacement trees may be located in the street planter strip adjacent to the property.
            ii. Subdivision development involving the removal of significant trees may locate replacement trees in the street planter strip on or adjacent to the development. If the number of replacement trees exceeds the number of trees required for street planters, then the developer may locate the trees off-site in street planter strips. The location of off-site replacement trees shall be reviewed and approved by the Hearing Examiner.
                aFor properties capable of being subdivided, one significant tree for each legal lot area may be removed annually. Property owners shall provide the City with written notice of removal within 30 days of removal.
    3. Removal of Trees Designated to Remain. If any tree designated for retention or required to be planted is damaged or destroyed during construction, as a result of on-site construction practices, or within two years following the end of construction, as a result of on-site construction practices, the City shall require the planting of up to three approved trees, each at least two and one-half inches in diameter as measured four feet above grade for deciduous trees and 10 feet in height for evergreen trees, in the immediate vicinity of the damaged or destroyed tree, as determined by the Planning and Development Services Department. The City may require the applicant to remove the damaged or destroyed tree. (Ord. 2315, 2016)

14.240.040 Landscape Requirements for Parking Lot and Site Development.
Requirements for landscaping of parking lots and site development are set forth in the two Snohomish design standards documents: the Design Standards and Guidelines for the City’s Historic District and Design Standards and Guidelines for Areas Outside of the Historic District. Landscape plant materials used in low impact development facilities may be considered for review by the City Planner when evaluating compliance with the landscape and screening requirements.
A. Plant Materials. Landscape plant materials shall be selected from the landscape plant lists and street tree lists, as set forth below. Plants used for low impact development facilities shall be selected from the bioretention plant lists contained in Appendix 3 of the LID Technical Guidance Manual for Puget Sound. Selected plants must be suited to local soil conditions, if the site is not irrigated. Native plant species shall be preferred.
    1. Street Trees and Landscape Materials. 
        a. All subdivisions shall supply street trees along the entire frontage of the property and any interior streets. Landscape materials, including for the purpose of low impact development facilities, may be considered for frontage plantings.
        b. The following land use actions shall require the installation of street trees:
            i. Short subdivision;
            ii. Subdivision;
            iii. Recorded development plan;
            iv. Conditional use permit;
            v. Any activity involving street frontage improvements;
            vi. Rebuilding or installation of a street.
        c. All trees and other landscape materials, including for the purpose of low impact development facilities, planted to streets or in street right(s)-of-way must have approval from the City prior to planting and conform to the ROW vegetation maintenance regulations.
        [IMAGE: <14.240.040_00a.png>]
        [IMAGE: <14.240.040_00b.png>]
        [IMAGE: <14.240.040_00c.png>]
        [IMAGE: <14.240.040_00d.png>]
        [IMAGE: <14.240.040_00e.png>]
        [IMAGE: <14.240.040_00f.png>]
        [IMAGE: <14.240.040_00g.png>]
        [IMAGE: <14.240.040_00h.png>]
    2. Trees. Deciduous trees or broad leaf evergreen trees shall have a minimum caliper two and one-half (2½) inches measured four (4) feet above ground level. Trees in street right-of-way shall be a minimum two (2) inch caliper, dbh. Coniferous trees shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in height.
    3. Shrubs and ground cover. An informal arrangement of plants shall be installed in order to provide a variety of height and texture that will enhance the architectural designs and attractively screen views of parked vehicles and visually incompatible site land uses, including, but not limited to, parking, dumpsters and service areas. Unless more specifically required, ground covers shall be installed so there is at least 75 percent coverage in two years. Installed shrubs shall be a minimum eighteen (18) inches in height, when mature height is three (3) feet for more. Shrubs with mature height of less than three (3) feet shall be a minimum of twelve (12) inches in height at planting.
    4. Applicant may select species other than those listed, only with approval of the City.
B. Street frontage landscaping. Street frontage landscaping shall comply with the two sets of design standards adopted by the City of Snohomish: the Design Standards and Guidelines for the City’s Historic District and the Design Standards and Guidelines for Areas Outside of the Historic District.
C. Perimeter landscaping on interior lot lines (buffering requirements).
    1. To provide visual separation between abutting properties, the minimum planting strips of the designated width and landscape type shall apply on interior property lines, according to the following table:
    +-------------------------+---------------+--------------+------------+-----------+-------------+
    |    Adjacent to Land     | Single Family | Multi-family | Commercial | Industry  | Mobile home |
    |           Use           |               | Residential  |            | Bus. Park |    Park     |
    +-------------------------+---------------+--------------+------------+-----------+-------------+
    | Single-Family Residence | None          | Type III     | Type III   | Type IV   | Type III    |
    |                         |               |              |            | 20' Wide  |             |
    |                         |               | 8' Wide      | 10' Wide   |           | 10' Wide    |
    +-------------------------+---------------+--------------+------------+-----------+-------------+
    | Multi-family. Residence | None          | Type III     | Type III   | Type IV   | Type III    |
    |                         |               |              | 10' Wide   | 20' Wide  | 10' Wide    |
    |                         |               | 10' Wide     |            |           |             |
    +-------------------------+---------------+--------------+------------+-----------+-------------+
    | Mobile home Park        | None          | Type III     | Type III   | Type IV   | None        |
    |                         |               |              |            | 20' Wide  |             |
    |                         |               | 10' Wide     | 10' Wide   |           |             |
    +-------------------------+---------------+--------------+------------+-----------+-------------+
    | General Commercial      | None          | Type III     | None       | Type III  | Type III    |
    |                         |               |              |            | 10' Wide  | 10' Wide    |
    |                         |               | 10' Wide     |            |           |             |
    +-------------------------+---------------+--------------+------------+-----------+-------------+
    | Industry/ Bus.          | None          | Type IV      | Type III   | None      | Type III    |
    | Park                    |               | 10' Wide     |            |           |             |
    |                         |               |              | 10' Wide   |           | 10' Wide    |
    +-------------------------+---------------+--------------+------------+-----------+-------------+
    Note: In reaching a conclusion as to the exact landscaping buffer requirement to be used with regard to a specific development proposal, consideration shall be given to any existing buffer which may have been required on the adjacent property as a condition of the development on that property and how the additional buffer required of the new development may complement the earlier planting to produce a more effective result.
    Churches, auditoriums, and recreation facilities, including clubs, located in a Single-Family designation shall install and maintain a Type III planting strip, ten feet (10’) in width, on any interior property line. Where these uses are located in any use other than single-family, landscaping shall be provided in accordance with TABLE I above.
    Buffer requirements may be adjusted based upon Design Review Board or City Planner approval see Section 14.240.010(F).
D. Interior lot landscaping. The two sets of design standards adopted by the City of Snohomish: Design Standards and Guidelines for the City’s Historic District and a separate set of Design Standards and Guidelines for Areas Outside of the Historic District will be used for primary guidance in this area.
E. Outdoor storage and dumpsters. The two sets of design standards adopted by the City of Snohomish: the Design Standards and Guidelines for the City’s Historic District and the Design Standards and Guidelines for Areas Outside of the Historic District will apply.
F. Landscape types. The intent of the landscape type and the minimum requirements for each are described below. For minimum required plant sizes see Section 14.240.040(C), Landscape Development Standards.
    1. TYPE I: Open Area Landscaping. 
        a. Purpose. Type I landscaping is intended to visually soften large open spaces of parking areas.
        b. Description. Type I landscaping shall consist of deciduous trees spaced a maximum of thirty-five (35) feet on center in a continuous planting bed; a maximum of seventy-five (75) feet on center with segmented planting areas; and low lying shrubs with a maximum height of thirty-six (36) inches and ground cover or grass, which combined with shrubbery provide at least 75 percent coverage of the landscaped area within two years. Planting areas shall have a minimum width of four (4) feet.Figure 1. Type I – Open Area
    [IMAGE: <14.240.040_001.png>]
    2. TYPE II: Ornamental Landscaping. 
        a. Purpose. Type II landscaping is intended to provide visual relief and add to the overall quality of a development by softening the effect of the new building upon the landscape.
        b. Description. Type II landscaping shall consist of conifer and deciduous trees planted an average of thirty (30) feet apart on center in beds at least five (5) feet in width, along with evergreen and deciduous shrubs and ground cover forming an effective screen so as to cover over 75 percent of the landscaped area within two years.Figure 2. Type II – Ornamental
    [IMAGE: <14.240.040_002.png>]
    3. TYPE III: Visual Buffer. 
        a. Purpose. Type III landscaping is intended to provide visual separation of incompatible uses from streets, arterials, and along property lines.
        b. Description. Type III landscaping shall consist of conifers or a mixture of coniferous and deciduous (no greater than 80 percent deciduous) trees. Maximum spacing shall be twenty (20) feet on center for evergreen trees and thirty-five (35) feet on center for deciduous trees. Shrubs and live ground covers shall provide for at least 75 percent coverage of landscaped area within a two year period. An earthen berm may be used with low shrubbery (maximum thirty-six (36) inches, mature height) in place of more level terrain with larger three (3) to five (5) foot shrubbery.Figure 3. Type III – Visual Buffer
    [IMAGE: <14.240.040_003.png>]
    4. TYPE IV: Solid Screening. 
        a. Purpose. Type IV landscaping is intended to provide a solid sight barrier to totally separate incompatible uses.
        b. Description. Type IV landscaping shall consist of a double row of evergreen trees (with rows offset) planted at a maximum spacing of fifteen (15) feet triangulated on center, earth berming at a minimum height of two and one-half (2½) feet, along with a ground cover to provide 85 percent surface coverage within two years. As an alternative to earth-berming, a six (6) foot high sight-screening fence may be incorporated into the landscaping, as approved by the Design Review Board.Figure 4. Type IV – Solid Screening
        [IMAGE: <14.240.040_004.png>]
(Ord. 1917, 2000; Ord. 2315, 2016)

14.240.050 Maintenance of Landscaping.
Vegetation must be maintained and kept healthy for two years through at least two growing seasons. A maintenance guarantee specified by the City as acceptable shall be provided by the developer/owner for landscaping required by the City for any development project. The maintenance guarantee shall be in an amount equal to 20 percent of the total landscape construction costs and shall be in effect for at least two full growing seasons (March through October). The developer/owner must provide this landscape maintenance guarantee to the City at the time of final inspection of the development project.

14.240.060 Fence and Freestanding Wall Regulations.
A. General Regulations. Installation of fences and freestanding walls, except for public utility purposes, shall comply with the following general requirements:
    1. The design of all fences and freestanding walls shall be consistent with the City of Snohomish Design Standards and Guidelines for the City’s Historic District and the Design Standards and Guidelines for Areas Outside of the Historic District, whichever is applicable to the site.
    2. A building permit issued by the Building Official shall be required prior to installation of a fence or freestanding wall, except for when the fence or freestanding wall is located in the Single-Family land use designation area outside of the Historic District.
    3. All fences and freestanding walls shall meet the requirements for height, setback, sight obstruction, maintenance, and special location provisions as set forth in this section.
    4. The type, size, location, and height of fencing proposed for tennis courts, parks, or athletic fields shall be categorically exempt from the requirements outlined in this chapter and will be reviewed and approved by the Planning and Development Services Department on a project-by-project basis.
    5. No fence or freestanding wall shall create a safety hazard or sight obstruction as described in SMC 14.210.160.
    6. Fence and freestanding wall height shall be measured from the ground level where the fence/freestanding wall touches the ground (or if it does not touch the ground, the ground level where it would touch if extended straight down to the ground) to the highest point of the fence/freestanding wall. Where the ground levels on either side of a fence/freestanding wall differ, the height shall be measured from the lowest ground level elevation.
    7. The maximum allowed height of fences and freestanding walls located in the buildable area of the lot shall be the same as the maximum height allowed for the land use designation area where it is located.
    8. Decorative features, artwork, or trellises placed on top of a fence or freestanding wall that do not add to the screening effect or opaqueness of the fence/freestanding wall shall not be included when calculating the height of the fence/freestanding wall.
B. Fences in the Right-of-Way. Freestanding walls shall not be allowed in the public right-of-way. Fences shall not be allowed in the public right-of-way except under the following conditions:
    1. The proposed fence is on a lot with a residential use on the ground floor.
    2. The right-of-way is equal to or in excess of 60 feet.
    3. There will be no obstruction to the operation of utility equipment and the maintenance of utility lines.
    4. The fence is located on the nonstreet side of the sidewalk, or otherwise in the opinion of the Director, does not impede the normal flow of the public’s use of the right-of-way.
    5. The property owner-applicant proposing the fence executes and records an agreement, approved by the Planning Director or designee, to maintain the fence at the said owner-applicant’s expense and remove the fence at the said owner-applicant’s expense if required by the City for any reason, or a public utility in order to work in the right-of-way.
    6. The owner-applicant proposing the fence shall also comply with all requirements of Chapter 12.12 SMC, Right-of-Way Use Permit.
C. Electrical Fences. All electrical fences shall:
    1. Be located at least two feet from the property line and shall not be located in the right-of-way.
    2. Use an interrupted flow of current at intervals of one second on and two seconds off.
    3. Be limited to 2,000 volts at 17 mill amperes current.
    4. Require a “U.L. Approved” seal.
    5. Be posted with permanent signs with a minimum area of 36 square inches at intervals of not more than 50 feet stating that the fence is electrified.
D. Fences and Decorative Freestanding Walls in Single-Family, Residential, Parks, and Open Space Land Use Designation Areas. Fences/freestanding walls constructed in Single-Family, Residential, Parks and Open Space use designation areas shall comply with the following requirements:
    1. Electrical fences and fences with barbed wire, razor wire, concertina wire, or similar products are prohibited.
    2. Within front yard setback area.
        a. Solid Fence. No higher than three feet unless it connects side fences to the structure.
        b. Open Fence. Up to five feet if it does not create a sight obstruction.
    3. If located within a side yard setback area the maximum allowed height shall be six feet except fences located in a side yard setback area on the street side of a corner lot shall also be required to meet the sight clearance requirements for intersections as set forth in SMC 14.210.160.
E. Fences and Decorative Freestanding Walls in Commercial and Industrial Land Use Designation Areas. The maximum allowed height of fences/freestanding walls constructed in Commercial and Industrial land use designation areas shall be eight feet and shall comply with the adopted design standards applicable to where the fence/freestanding wall is located.
F. Fences and Decorative Freestanding Walls in the Urban Horticulture Land Use Designation Area. The maximum allowed height of fences/freestanding walls in the Urban Horticulture land use designation area shall be seven feet on any part of the lot (including within the buildable area).
G. Fences and Decorative Freestanding Walls in the Historic District. Fences constructed in the Historic District shall comply with the Design Standards and Guidelines for the City’s Historic District.
H. Retaining Walls and Rockeries. 
    1. Retaining wall and rockery installations in all land use designation areas shall comply with the adopted City of Snohomish Design Standards and development regulations which are applicable to the area where the retaining wall is located, except that:
        a. There shall not be a maximum height limit on retaining walls and rockeries located in the buildable area of a lot. However, the height of retaining walls and rockeries in the buildable area of a lot shall be the lowest necessary to achieve its intended functional purpose. If the proposed wall or rockery height exceeds the height limitation for the land use designation area where it is located it must be reviewed and approved by the Planning Director or designee on a project-by-project basis.
        b. The maximum height limit on retaining walls and rockeries located in a setback area shall be six feet.
    2. Except as otherwise provided below, retaining wall permits shall be required for all retaining walls. The permit application shall include a site plan, drawn to scale, which shows:
        a. The entire project site and all property lines; and
        b. Areas within 50 feet of the proposed retaining wall/rockery even if that includes adjacent properties; and
        c. All structures, including existing retaining walls and rockeries, within 50 feet of the proposed wall/rockery; and
        d. Existing topography with contour lines at two-foot vertical intervals. Topographical data obtained from public records is acceptable; and
        e. The materials proposed for use in construction; and
        f. The location of the proposed wall/rockery with all dimensions necessary to describe its location, depth, and height; and
        g. A cross section showing the wall/rockery and provisions for drainage.
    3. If the Building Official determines it is necessary, structural calculations and/or a geotechnical report prepared by a licensed professional engineer legally entitled to practice in the State of Washington shall be submitted with the application.
    4. A Type 1 retaining wall permit shall be required for retaining walls/rockeries four feet or less in height.
        a. Only retaining walls/rockeries that do not require structural calculation and/or a drainage system are eligible for a Type 1 permit.
        b. If a series of retaining walls/rockeries four feet or less in height where the slope measured from the bottom of the lowest retaining wall/rockery to the top of the highest retaining wall/rockery is greater than 1.5 feet horizontal to 1.0 feet vertical, then a Type 2 retaining wall permit shall be required.
    5. A Type 2 retaining wall permit may be required for all retaining walls/rockeries greater than four feet in height.
        a. Type 2 retaining wall permits shall require submittal of a:
            i. Geotechnical report; and
            ii. Structural calculations; and
            iii. Drainage system behind wall.
        b. The City Engineer may require additional submittals for Type 2 retaining wall permits.
    6. Private retaining walls/rockeries shall not be located in City rights-of-way except as may be otherwise provided in the Snohomish Municipal Code.
    7. The height of a retaining wall/rockery shall be measured from the lowest part of the wall/rockery or wall/rockery footing to the highest part of the wall/rockery at every location along the wall/rockery.
    8. No part of a retaining wall/rockery may extend into an adjacent lot.
    9. Guardrails required to be placed at the top of retaining walls/rockeries, pursuant to the City-adopted building codes, shall be permitted as part of the wall/rockery, and shall not be considered to be a fence or part of the wall/rockery height.
    10. A retaining wall may terminate at a property line; provided, that it must abut a retaining wall on the adjacent property and is structurally independent from such wall.
    11. Exemptions. 
        a. Permits shall not be required for fences or freestanding walls two feet or less in height.
        b. The City may waive the requirement for a retaining wall permit when:
        i. Every part of the wall/rockery is set back at least five feet from all property lines; and
        ii. The wall/rockery is no greater than four feet in height; and
        iii. The wall/rockery is not load bearing; and
        iv. The wall/rockery does not affect the structural integrity of adjacent structures; and
        v. Such waiver is made in writing by the Planning Director or designee.
    c. Permits shall not be required for retaining walls within new plats that are reviewed and approved by the City as part of the plat improvements.
I. Variances. All requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter shall be processed as a minor variance as provided for in SMC 14.70.020. (Ord. 2325, 2017)

Chapter 14.242 WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES

Sections:
14.242.010   Purpose
14.242.020   Definitions
14.242.030   Applicability and Exemptions
14.242.040   Prohibitions
14.242.050   Siting Hierarchy
14.242.060   Exception from the Standards
14.242.070   City-Owned WCF Sites
14.242.080   Types of WCF Permits Required
14.242.090   WCF Application Requirements
14.242.100   Permit Review (“Shot Clock”) Time Periods
14.242.110   Category 1 WCF Permit Process and Findings
14.242.120   Category 2 WCF Permit Process and Findings
14.242.130   Category 3 WCF Permit Process and Findings
14.242.140   Development Standards
14.242.150   Conditions of Approval
14.242.160   Third Party Technical Review
14.242.170   Public Notice
14.242.180   Removal of Abandoned Equipment
14.242.190   Revocation

14.242.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to accommodate wireless communication facilities (WCFs) in a manner that preserves the visual and aesthetic landscape and character of the city and minimizes adverse impacts to residents. These regulations are intended to provide all purveyors of wireless services an equal opportunity to serve the community in accordance with federal law.
A. This chapter is intended to further the following objectives:
    1. To establish procedural requirements and substantive criteria applicable to approval or denial of applications to modify existing WCFs or to locate and construct new WCFs in compliance with all applicable law.
    2. To minimize the adverse aesthetic impacts associated with WCFs through appropriate design and siting.
    3. To encourage the use of Distributed Antenna Systems (DAS) and other small cell systems that use components that are a small fraction of the size of macrocell deployments, and can be installed with little or no impact on utility support structures, buildings, and other existing structures.
    4. To encourage WCFs to locate on utility poles within the public right-of-way where a location in a residential area is necessary to meet the functional requirements of the telecommunication industry as defined by the Federal Communications Commission.
    5. To foster networks of telecommunications facilities that provide adequate wireless communication coverage to customers within the city and serve as an effective part of the City’s emergency response network.
    6. To ensure that decisions are made in a timely, consistent and competitively neutral manner.
B. To further these objectives, the City shall give due consideration to the zoning code, existing land uses, and environmentally, culturally and historically sensitive areas when approving sites for the location of communication towers and antennas.
C. These objectives are intended to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, to protect property values, and to minimize visual impacts, while furthering the development of enhanced telecommunications services in the city. These objectives were designed to comply with the Telecommunications Act of 1996. The provisions of this chapter are not intended to and shall not be interpreted to prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting personal wireless services. This chapter shall not be applied in such a manner as to unreasonably discriminate between providers of functionally equivalent wireless communication services.
D. To the extent that any provision of this chapter is inconsistent or conflicts with any other City ordinance, this chapter shall control. Otherwise, this chapter shall be construed consistently with the other provisions and regulations of the City.

14.242.020 Definitions.
The following abbreviations, phrases, terms and words shall have the meanings assigned in the section or, as appropriate, in Chapter 14.100 SMC, as amended, unless the context indicates otherwise. Words that are not defined in this section or elsewhere in this title shall have the meanings set forth in Chapter 5 of Title 47 of the United States Code, Part 1 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations, and, if not defined therein, their common and ordinary meaning.
A. “Antenna” means a specific device, the surface of which is used to transmit and/or receive radio-frequency signals, microwave signals, or other signals transmitted to or from other antennas for commercial purposes.
B. “Base station” means a structure or equipment at a fixed location that enables FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. The term does not include a tower, as defined herein, or any equipment associated with a tower. Base station includes, without limitation:
    1. Equipment associated with wireless communications services such as private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul.
    2. Radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment regardless of technological configuration (including Distributed Antenna Systems (“DAS”) and small-cell networks).
    3. Any structure other than a tower that, at the time the relevant application is filed with the City under this section, supports or houses equipment described in paragraphs 1-2 above that has been reviewed and approved by the City.
C. “Collocation” means the mounting or installation of transmission equipment on an eligible support structure for the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving radio frequency signals for communication purposes.
D. “Distributed Antenna System” or “DAS” means a network consisting of transceiver equipment at a central hub site to support multiple antenna locations throughout the designed coverage area.
E. “Eligible facilities request” means any request for modification of an existing tower or base station that, within the meaning of the Spectrum Act, does not substantially change the physical dimensions of that tower or base station and involves (a) the collocation of new transmission equipment, (b) the removal of transmission equipment, or (c) the replacement of transmission equipment.
F. “Eligible support structure” means any tower or base station that exists at the time the application is filed with the City.
G. “FCC” means the Federal Communications Commission or successor agency.
H. “Monopole” means a style of free-standing antenna support structure consisting of a single shaft usually composed of two or more hollow sections that are attached to a foundation on the ground. This type of antenna support structure is designed to support itself without the use of guy wires or other stabilization devices.
I. “Project” means a WCF for which a permit is required by the City.
J. “RF” means radio frequency on the radio spectrum.
K. “Spectrum Act” means Section 6409(a) of the Middle Class Tax Relief Act and Job Creation Act, 42 U.S.C. §1344(a) (providing, in part, “…a State or local government may not deny, and shall approve, any eligible facilities request for a modification of any existing wireless tower or base station that does not substantially change the physical dimensions of such tower or base station.”).
L. “Substantially change” means, in the context of an eligible support structure, a modification of an existing tower or base station where any of the following criteria is met:
    1. For a tower located outside of public rights-of-way:
        a. The height of the tower is increased by more than twenty feet or by more than ten percent, whichever is greater; or
        b. There is added an appurtenance to the body of the tower that would protrude from the edge of the tower by more than twenty feet or more than the width of the tower structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater.
    2. For a tower located in the public right-of-way and for all base stations:
        a. The height of the tower is increased by more than ten percent or ten feet, whichever is greater; or
        b. There is added an appurtenance to the body of that structure that would protrude from edge of the tower by more than six feet.
    3. For all base stations:
        a. The height of the base station is increased by more than ten percent or ten feet, whichever is greater; or
        b. It involves the installation of more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, but not more than for four cabinets.
    4. For either a tower or a base station:
        a. There is entailed in the proposed modification any excavation or deployment outside the current site of the tower or base station; or
        b. The proposed modification would cause the concealment or camouflage elements of the tower or base station to be defeated; or
        c. It does not comply with conditions associated with the prior approval of the tower or base station unless the non-compliance is due to an increase in height, increase in width, addition of cabinets, or new excavation that does not exceed the corresponding “substantial change” thresholds.
    5. To measure changes in height for the purposes of this section, the baseline is:
        a. For deployments that are or will be separated horizontally, measured from the original support structure.
        b. For all others, measured from the dimensions of the tower or base station, inclusive of the originally approved appurtenances and any modifications that were approved by the City or Snohomish County, in the case of annexed facilities, prior to February 22, 2012.
        c. To measure changes for the purposes of this section, the baseline is the dimensions that were approved by the City or Snohomish County, in the case of annexed facilities, prior to February 22, 2012.
M. “Tower” means any structure built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting any FCC-licensed or FCC-authorized antenna, including any structure that is constructed for wireless communication service. This term does not include base station.
N. “Temporary WCF” means a nonpermanent WCF installed on a short- term basis, for the purpose of evaluating the technical feasibility of a particular site for placement of a WCF, for providing news coverage of a limited event, or for providing emergency communications during a natural disaster or other emergencies that may threaten the public health, safety and welfare.
O. “Transmission equipment” means equipment that facilitates transmission of any FCC-licensed or FCC-authorized wireless communication service.
P. “Wireless communications facility” or “WCF” means any antenna, associated equipment, base station, small cell system, tower, and/or transmission equipment.
Q. “Wireless communications service” means, without limitation, all FCC- licensed backhaul and other fixed wireless services, broadcast, private, and public safety communication services, and unlicensed wireless services.

14.242.030 Applicability and Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all applications for new and expanded/altered wireless communication facilities located within the boundaries of the city except the following, which shall be permitted in all land use designations unless otherwise regulated by Title 14 SMC:
A. Systems for military and government communication and navigation.
B. Industrial processing equipment and scientific or medical equipment using frequencies regulated by the FCC.
C. Hand-held, mobile marine and portable radio transmitters and/or receivers.
D. Two-way radio used for temporary or emergency services’ communications.
E. Federally licensed amateur (ham) radio stations and citizen band stations, provided that:
    1. No portion of the tower or antenna exceeds the height limits of the applicable land use designation;
    2. The tower shall be located a distance equal to or greater than its height from any existing residential structure located on an adjacent parcel;
    3. Towers shall not be used for commercial purposes; and
    4. All towers shall meet all applicable state and federal statutes, rules, and regulations, including obtaining a building permit from the City, if applicable.
F. Receive-only television and satellite dish antennas as an accessory use.
G. A temporary WCF.

14.242.040 Prohibitions.
A. The following new wireless communication facilities are prohibited:
    1. Guyed towers.
    2. Lattice towers.
B. Unless demonstrated to be necessary and without effective alternative, new monopoles are prohibited within the boundaries of the Historic District.
C. WCFs are prohibited in the Public Park land use designation.

14.242.050 Siting Hierarchy.
Siting of antennas or support structures shall adhere to the siting hierarchy of this section. The order of preference ranking for antennas or antenna support structures, from highest to lowest, shall be Tier 1 to Tier 4. Except where a Tier 1 WCF is proposed, the applicant shall file relevant information including but not limited to an analysis and affidavit by a registered professional electrical engineer licensed in the State of Washington demonstrating that, despite diligent efforts to adhere to the established hierarchy within the geographic search area, higher tier options are not technically feasible or not justified given the location of the proposed wireless communications facility and the need to cover significant gaps in network coverage.
A. Tier 1 - A WCF that is:
    1. Concealed entirely within a non-residential building.
    2. Incorporated into the exterior architecture of an existing building above the first floor to match the building’s design.
    3. Designed with no antenna extending more than 12 feet above a utility pole or structure (other than a building) constructed for a non-WCF purpose upon which it is mounted.
    4. Located on an existing monopole or lattice structure in compliance with all original conditions of approval.
    5. Located on a high-voltage transmission tower within a transmission right-of-way and outside a public street right-of-way.
    6. A new monopole-style WCF with antennas in a canister located within the Business Park or Industrial designation.
    7. Located on a City water tower.
    8. Except as otherwise listed, any alternative not visible, and not anticipated to become visible, from any off-site location.
    9. Determined to be consistent with the purpose of this subsection and resulting in an equivalent or lower visual impact than the WCF alternatives in this subsection due to incorporation of technologies not in common use as of the date of this ordinance.
B. Tier 2 - A WCF that is:
    1. Located on a new or existing utility pole within a City right-of-way and extending no more than 25 feet above the existing pole height and having no antenna or other equipment extending more than 3 feet from the exterior of the pole on which it is mounted.
    2. Located on the flat roof of an existing non-residential building in a commercial or industrial designation and extending no more than 20 feet above the existing roof, provided the WCF is no closer to the edge of the roof than the height of the WCF.
C. Tier 3 - A WCF that is:
    1. Located on City-owned land not intended for public recreation where vegetation removal is the minimum necessary to allow installation and maintenance of the facilities, and where vegetation adjacent to the WCF location screens 80 percent of the height of the WCF where visible from off-site locations.
    2. Located on a new or existing utility pole within a City minor arterial and extending no more than 40 feet above the existing pole height and having no antenna or other equipment extending more than3 feet from the exterior of the pole on which it is mounted.
D. Tier 4 - WCF not meeting any of the options in A through C above when no reasonable alternative exists, where the facility height is demonstrated to be the lowest necessary to meet functional requirements, and when consistent with the following provisions:
    1. In developed street rights-of-way adjacent to residential designations where located on wood support structures a maximum of 60 feet in height.
    2. On non-building tracts within residential designations where vegetation removal is the minimum necessary to allow installation and maintenance of the facilities, and where vegetation adjacent to the WCF screens 80 percent of the height of the WCF from off-site locations.
    3. On publicly owned lands of three acres or larger and located to minimize visibility from and impacts to adjacent properties.
    4. In the Commercial, Mixed Use, and Pilchuck District designations, only where located on properties without residential uses and set back at least 20 feet from the front property line. The support structure shall be set back a distance equal to the height of the support structure from any residential designation.

14.242.060 Exception from the Standards.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no WCF shall be used or developed contrary to any applicable development standard unless an exception has been granted pursuant to this section. These provisions apply exclusively to WCFs and are in lieu of the generally applicable variance provisions in Chapter 14.70 SMC.
A. A WCF exception is a Type 4 permit process.
B. Submittal Requirements. In addition to the submittal requirements for the WCF permit application, an application for a WCF exception shall include:
    1. A written statement demonstrating how the exception would meet the criteria.
    2. A site plan that includes:
        a. A description of the proposed facility’s design and dimensions, as it would appear with and without the exception.
        b. Elevations showing all components of the WCF as it would appear with and without the exception.
        c. Color simulations of the WCF after construction demonstrating compatibility with the vicinity, as it would appear with and without the exception.
C. Criteria. An application for a WCF exception shall be granted if the following criteria are met:
    1. The exception is consistent with the purpose of the development standard for which the exception is sought.
    2. Based on a visual analysis, the design minimizes the visual impacts to residential designations, the Historic District, and public places, including street rights-of-way through mitigating measures, including, but not limited to, building heights, design, bulk, color, and landscaping.
    3. The applicant demonstrates the following:
        a. A significant gap in the coverage, capacity, or technologies of the service network exists such that users are regularly unable to connect to the service network, or are regularly unable to maintain a connection, or are unable to achieve reliable wireless coverage within a building;
        b. The gap in coverage or connectivity can only be filled through an exception to one or more of the standards of this chapter; and
        c. The exception requested is narrowly tailored to fill the service gap such that the wireless communication facility conforms to this chapter’s objectives and standards to the greatest extent possible.
    4. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, for a new tower proposed to be located within or adjacent to a residential designation, the applicant must also demonstrate that the manner in which it proposes to fill the significant gap in coverage, connectivity, capacity, or technologies of the service network is the least visually intrusive to the surrounding community and the most consistent with the standards in this chapter. (Ord. 2338, 2017)

14.242.070 City-Owned WCF Sites.
Except within rights-of-way, sale, lease or other use of City-owned lands for a WCF shall be subject to City Council approval following a public hearing. Public review of such sales, lease, or other use by the City Council is not subject to the permit review timeframes in SMC 14.242.100. Through its review, the City Council may deny a request to use City-owned land or, if approved, may require conditions in excess of this chapter.

14.242.080 Types of WCF Permits Required.
A WCF permit shall be required prior to the construction or installation of each new or modified WCF other than a temporary WCF as defined herein. A WCF permit is required in addition to any land use, building, or right-of-way use permit or approval to which the proposal is subject under this title.
A. A Category 1 WCF Permit shall be required for an eligible facilities request, as defined in this chapter.
B. A Category 2 WCF Permit shall be required for:
    1. Any modification of an eligible support structure, including the collocation of new equipment, that substantially changes the physical dimensions of the eligible support structure on which it is mounted; or
    2. Any collocation not eligible for a Category 1 WCF Permit.
C. A Category 3 WCF Permit shall be required for the siting of any WCF that is not a collocation subject to a Category 1 or 2 WCF Permit.

14.242.090 WCF Application Requirements.
All applications for a WCF Permit shall contain the following items:
A. The applicant shall specify in writing the classification of the proposal on the siting preference hierarchy in SMC 14.242.050. Except applications for any WCF Permit that are consistent with a siting preference Tier 1 WCF type, a justification for a lower tier shall be provided.
B. The applicant shall specify in writing whether the applicant believes the application is for an eligible facilities request subject to the Spectrum Act, and if so, provide a detailed written explanation as to why the applicant believes that the application qualifies as an eligible facilities request.
C. The applicant shall submit a land use application form, as may be amended from time to time.
D. The applicant shall submit a complete and signed application checklist available from the City, including all information required by the application checklist.
E. The applicant shall remit fees as prescribed in the adopted fee schedule.
F. The application shall be accompanied by all applicable permit applications with required application materials for each separate permit required by the City for the proposed WCF.
G. For Category 3 WCF Permits, the plans shall include a scaled depiction of the maximum permitted increase in the physical dimensions of the proposed project that would be permitted by the Spectrum Act, using the proposed project as a baseline.
H. The application submittal shall include such requirements as may be, from time to time, required by the City Planner, as publicly stated in the application checklist.

14.242.100 Permit Review (“Shot Clock”) Time Periods.
A. City review of application materials. For the purposes of this chapter, all time periods are measured in calendar days. The timeframe for review of an application shall begin to run when the application is submitted, but shall be “tolled”, meaning temporarily suspended, if the City finds the application incomplete and provides notice of incompleteness that delineates the missing information in writing. A notice of incomplete application shall be made within 30 days of submittal of the application. After submittal of all additional information included on the notice(s), the City will notify the applicant within 10 days of this submittal if the additional information failed to complete the application. If the City makes a determination pursuant to SMC 14.242.080B1 that the application submitted as a Category 1 eligible facilities request should be processed as a Category 2 or Category 3 WCF Permit, then the Category 2 or Category 3 processing time, as applicable, shall begin to run when the City issues this decision.
B. Category 1 WCF Permit processing time. For Category 1 WCF Permit applications, the City will act on the WCF application, together with any other City permits required for a WCF modification, within 60 days, adjusted for any tolling due to requests for additional information or mutually agreed extensions of time.
    1. If the City determines that the application does not qualify as a Category 1 eligible facilities request, the City will notify the applicant of that determination in writing and will process the application as a Category 2 or Category 3 WCF permit application, as applicable.
    2. To the extent federal law provides a “deemed granted” remedy for Category 1 WCF Permit applications not timely acted upon by the City, no such application shall be deemed granted until the applicant provides notice to the City, in writing, that the application has been deemed granted after the time period provided in Section B above has expired.
    3. Any Category 1 WCF Permit application that the City grants or that is deemed granted by operation of federal law shall be subject to all requirements of Section 14.242.140(C) and (E) and 14.242.150(A) through (F).
C. Category 2 processing time. For Category 2 WCF Permit applications, the City will act on the application within 90 days, adjusted for any tolling due to requests for additional information or mutually agreed upon extensions of time.
D. Category 3 processing time. For Category 3 WCF Permit applications, the City will act on the application within 150 days, adjusted for any tolling due to requests for additional information or mutually agreed upon extensions of time.
E. If the City denies a WCF application, the City will notify the applicant of the denial and the reasons for the denial, in writing.

14.242.110 Category 1 WCF Permit Process and Findings.
A. Denial of application. A Category 1 WCF Permit shall be reviewed by the City Planner, whose decision shall be final and shall not be appealable pursuant to Chapter 14.20 SMC.
B. The City Planner shall grant a Category 1 WCF Permit provided that the City Planner finds that the applicant proposes an eligible facilities request.
C. The City Planner shall impose the following conditions on the grant of a Category 1 WCF Permit:
    1. The proposed collocation or modification shall not defeat any existing concealment elements of the support structure; and
    2. The proposed WCF shall comply with the development standards in SMC 14.242.140C and E and the conditions of approval in SMC 14.242.150.

14.242.120 Category 2 WCF Permit Process and Findings.
A. A Category 2 WCF Permit shall be reviewed by the City Planner, whose decision shall be appealable to the Hearing Examiner pursuant to Chapter 14.20 SMC.
B. The Hearing Examiner, on appeal, shall grant a Category 2 WCF Permit subject to findings the proposed WCF complies with the development standards in SMC 14.242.140 and the conditions of approval in SMC 14.242.150 and that the justification under SMC 14.242.050 and SMC 14.242.060, as applicable, contain sufficient engineering analysis to justify the proposal.

14.242.130 Category 3 WCF Permit Process and Findings.
A. A Category 3 WCF Permit for a WCF designated as Tier 4 in the siting preference hierarchy in SMC 14.242.050 shall be reviewed by the Hearing Examiner as a conditional use permit. All other Category 3 WCF Permits shall be reviewed by the City Planner. Approval shall be subject to findings of compliance with the development standards in SMC 14.242.140, the conditions of approval in SMC 14.242.150, and the conditional use approval criteria in SMC 14.55.020, and that the justification under SMC 14.242.050 and SMC 14.242.060, as applicable, contains sufficient engineering analysis to justify the proposal.
B. The City Planner and Hearing Examiner decisions shall be appealable according to the provisions of Chapter 14.20 SMC.

14.242.140 Development Standards.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a proposed WCF project shall comply with the following standards:
A. The WCF project shall utilize the smallest footprint possible consistent with its functional service requirements.
B. The WCF project shall be designed to minimize the overall height, mass, and size of the base station.
C. The base station shall be screened from public view.
D. The WCF project shall be architecturally compatible with the existing site to the extent possible.
E. An antenna, base station, or tower shall be designed to minimize its visibility from off-site locations. Concealment, screening, and other techniques may be used to blend the facilities with the visual character of the surrounding area.
F. A building-mounted antenna, base station, or tower shall be architecturally compatible with the existing building on which the equipment is attached.
G. Any WCF project in the Historic District, except when subject to an eligible facilities request, shall be reviewed by the Design Review Board and a recommendation issued for the project record.
H. Except where proposed within a public right-of-way, a new support structure shall be set back from the street frontage to the extent possible.
I. Where aviation safety beacon lights are required, red is preferred over white. Where applicable, applicants shall identify the type of lighting proposed and provide a justification for the use of white lights over red lights.

14.242.150 Conditions of Approval.
In addition to any other conditions of approval permitted under federal and state law and this code that the decision authority deems appropriate or required under this chapter, all WCF projects approved under this chapter, whether approved or deemed granted by operation of law, shall be subject to the following conditions of approval:
A. Permit conditions. The grant or approval of a WCF Category 1 Permit shall be subject to the conditions of approval of the underlying permit, except as may be preempted by the Spectrum Act.
B. As-built plans. The applicant shall submit to the City Planner an as-built set of plans and photographs depicting the entire WCF as modified, including all transmission equipment and all utilities, within 90 days after the completion of construction.
C. The applicant shall hire a qualified engineer licensed by the State of Washington to measure actual radio frequency emission of the WCF and determine if it meets the FCC’s standards. A report, certified by the engineer, of all calculations, required measurements, and the engineer’s findings with respect to compliance with the FCC’s radio frequency emission standards shall be submitted to the City Planner within one year of commencement of operation.
D. Indemnification. To the extent permitted by law, the applicant shall indemnify and hold harmless the City, its City Council, its officers, employees and agents (the “indemnified parties”) from and against any claim, action, or proceeding brought by a third party against the indemnified parties and the applicant to attack, set aside or void, any permit or approval authorized hereby for the project, including (without limitation) reimbursing the City for its actual attorneys’ fees and costs incurred in defense of the litigation. The City may, in its sole discretion and at the applicant’s expense, elect to defend any such action with attorneys of its own choice.
E. Compliance with applicable laws. The applicant shall comply with all applicable provisions of this Code, any permit issued under this Code, and all other applicable federal, state, and local laws including, without limitation, all building codes, electrical code, and other public safety requirements. Any failure by the City to enforce compliance with any applicable laws shall not relieve any applicant of its obligations under this code, any permit issued under this code, or all other applicable laws and regulations.
F. Compliance with approved plans. The proposed project shall be built in compliance with the approved pans on file with the City.

14.242.160 Third Party Technical Review.
Although the City intends for City staff to review administrative matters to the extent feasible, the City may retain the services of an independent, RF technical expert to provide technical evaluation of permit applications for WCFs. The selection of the third party expert is at the discretion of the City. The applicant shall pay the cost for any independent consultant fees, along with applicable overhead recovery, through a deposit, estimated by the City, paid within 10 days of the City’s request. When the City requests such payment, the application shall be deemed incomplete for purposes of application processing timelines. In the event such costs and fees do not exceed the initial deposit amount, the City shall refund any unused portion within thirty days after the final permit is released or, if no final permit is released, within thirty days after the City receives a written request from the applicant. If the costs and fees exceed the deposit amount, then the applicant shall pay the difference to the City before the permit is issued. The third party expert review is intended to address interference and public safety issues and be a site-specific review of engineering and technical aspects of the proposed wireless communication facilities and/or a review of the applicants’ methodology and equipment used, and is not intended to be a subjective review of the site which was selected by an applicant. Based on the results of the expert review, the City may require changes to the proposal. The third party review may include, but is not limited to, the following:
A. The technical accuracy and completeness of submittals;
B. The applicability of analysis techniques and methodologies;
C. The validity of conclusions reached by the applicant;
D. The viability of other site or sites in the city for the use intended by the applicant;
E. Whether the WCF complies with the applicable approval criteria set forth in this chapter; and
F. Any specific engineering or technical issues identified by the City.

14.242.170 Public Notice.
Public notice of WCF applications shall be in accordance with the provisions of SMC 14.20.130. Notice of WCF applications shall be provided as follows:
A. SEPA-exempt Category 1 and Category 2 permits shall be exempt from notice requirements.
B. Notice of application shall be issued for Category 3 permits for WCFs listed as Tier 3 or Tier 4 on the preference hierarchy in SMC 14.242.050.
C. Public notice shall be in accordance with SMC 14.20.130, except that notice of application required shall be mailed to all owners of property located within the City. (Ord. 2338, 2017)

14.242.180 Removal of Abandoned Equipment.
A WCF (Category 1, Category 2, or Category 3) or a component of that WCF that ceases to be in use for more than 90 days shall be considered abandoned and shall be removed by the applicant, wireless communications service provider, or property owner within 180 days of the cessation of the use of the WCF. This presumption may be rebutted by a showing that such WCF is an auxiliary back-up or emergency utility or device not subject to regular use or that the WCF is otherwise not abandoned. If the WCF is not removed within the prescribed time period and within 90 days written notice from the City, the City may remove the WCF at the owner of the property’s expense or at the owner of the WCF’s expense, including all costs and attorney’s fees. If there are two or more wireless communications providers collocated on a single support structure, this provision shall not become effective until all providers cease using the WCF for a continuous period of 180 days.

14.242.190 Revocation.
The City Planner may revoke any WCF Permit if the permit holder fails to comply with any condition of the permit. The City Planner’s decision to revoke a permit shall be appealable pursuant to Chapter 14.20 SMC.

Chapter 14.245 SIGN REGULATIONS

Sections:
14.245.010    Intent and Purpose
14.245.015   Applicability and Interpretations
14.245.020   Definitions
14.245.030   Sign Permit Required
14.245.040   Sign Permit Fees
14.245.050   Sign Permit – Historic District
14.245.060   Signs Exempt from Permit Requirements
14.245.065   Freestanding Signs
14.245.070   Building Signs
14.245.075   Temporary Signs
14.245.080   Prohibited Signs
14.245.082   Off-Site Highway Signs
14.245.085   Electronic Changing Message Signs
14.245.090   Illumination of Signs
14.245.115   Signs in Residential Land Use Designations
14.245.120   Maintenance of Signs
14.245.130   Non-Conforming Signs

14.245.010  Intent and Purpose.
A. The intent of this chapter is to:
    1. Protect the City’s economic base and encourage business owners to advertise their businesses, products, location, and/or services to potential customers in an effective and appropriate manner that helps the businesses to thrive; and
    2. Promote the public health, safety and welfare through a comprehensive system of reasonable, effective, consistent, content-neutral and non‑discriminatory sign standards and requirements; and
    3. Protect and enhance the City’s historic and residential character; and
    4. Improve traffic safety by minimizing the distracting effect of signage which can cause visual confusion between advertising and traffic-control signs; and
    5. Avoid the creation of urban blight, destruction of natural beauty, and loss of property values that can result from unregulated signage.
B. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the number, size, location, height, illumination, character, and other pertinent features of signs, in order to:
    1. Provide adequate identification and advertising for businesses, and access to advertising signage in a manner that will promote commerce and fair economic competition and at the same time protect the public health, safety, and welfare in the City;
    2. Promote and accomplish the goals, policies and objectives of the City’s Comprehensive Plan and Zoning Code;
    3. Provide minimum standards in order to safeguard life, health, property and public welfare, and promote traffic safety by controlling the design, quality of materials, construction, illumination, size, location and maintenance of signs and sign structures;
    4. Recognize free speech rights by regulating signs in a content-neutral manner;
    5. Promote the free flow of traffic and protect pedestrians and motorists from injury and property damage caused by, or which may be fully or partially attributable to, cluttered, distracting and/or illegible signage;
    6. Protect the character of the Historic Business District with sign regulations that address the uniqueness of the District;
    7. Protect property values, the local economy, and the quality of life by preserving and enhancing the appearance of the streetscape;
    8. Provide consistent sign design standards;
    9. Provide an improved visual environment for the citizens of and visitors to the City; and
    10. Adopt clear, understandable regulations which enable the fair and consistent enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 2109, 2006; Ord. 2362, 2018)

14.245.015 Applicability and Interpretations.
A. This chapter applies to all signs, as defined in SMC 14.245.020, Definitions, and Chapter 14.100 SMC, Definitions, within the City which are functionally visible from any public street, sidewalk or place, regardless of the type or nature.
B. Signs not specifically allowed in this chapter are prohibited.
C. This chapter is not intended to, and shall not be interpreted to, restrict speech on the basis of its content, viewpoint, or message. No part of this chapter shall be construed to favor commercial speech over non‑commercial speech. To the extent that any provision of this chapter is ambiguous, the term shall be interpreted not to regulate speech on the basis of the content of the message. (Ord. 2362, 2018)

14.245.020 Definitions.
A. “A-board sign” means a type of portable sign with two (2) faces attached at the top so when the sign is deployed the bottom of the faces can be separated to create a stable sign.
B. “Balloon sign” means an inflated sign that is attached to the ground or some other anchor and is not a free-floating conveyance.
C. “Banner” means a temporary sign made of flexible material attached to a building or strung between two (2) support structures.
D. “Building sign” means any sign that is painted on, or attached directly to or supported by, an exterior building wall, including facade signs, awning signs, canopy signs, and marquees, but excluding window signs.
E. “City” means the City of Snohomish.
F. “Color, lightness” means the degree to which a color appears to emit or reflect light. Lightness ranges from black (dark) to white (light). Sometimes referred to as “brightness” or “value.” Lightness is one (1) of the three (3) standard measures of color appearance.
G. “Construction site sign” means a temporary sign placed on sites where an active building permit has been issued intended to display the names of the companies involved with the construction project.
H. “Directional sign” means a sign designed to guide or direct pedestrian or vehicular traffic to an area, place, or convenience and may include incidental graphics such as trade names and trademarks.
I. “Electronic changing message sign” means an electronically activated sign whose message content, either in whole or in part, may be changed by means of electronic or digital programming.
J. “Feather sign” or “feather flag” means a sign made of flexible material that is generally, but not always, rectangular in shape and attached to a pole on one (1) side so the sign can move with the wind.
K. “Freestanding sign” means a sign standing directly upon the ground and being detached from any building or similar structure.
L. “Incidental sign” means a small informational sign not legible from the public right-of-way intended for the convenience of the public while on the premises, designed to inform the public of facilities or services available on the premises, and may include but not be limited to signs designating:
    1. Restrooms;
    2. Hours of operation;
    3. Parking space designations;
    4. Entrance/exit;
    5. Acceptable credit cards;
    6. Property ownership or management;
    7. Recycling containers;
    8. ATM machines;
    9. Employment signs; and
    10. Open/closed status.
M. “Monument sign” means a ground-based freestanding sign which is constructed or connected directly on or to a sign support consisting of a permanent solid base material foundation.
N. “Off-site highway sign” means a sign located along, and oriented to, SR-9 and/or US-2 for the purpose of identifying, and providing travel information to, one (1) or more Snohomish businesses not otherwise visible from the highway(s).
O. “Off-site sign” means a sign advertising, identifying, or relating to an establishment, merchandise, service, or entertainment which is not sold, produced, manufactured, or furnished at the property on which such sign is located, e.g., billboards.
P. “Permanent sign” means a sign constructed of weather-resistant material and intended for permanent use and that does not otherwise meet the definition of “temporary sign.” Wall-mounted sign holders designed for insertion of signs and posters shall be considered permanent signage and subject to all standards of this chapter.
Q. “Portable sign” means a freestanding temporary sign which is capable of being moved by one (1) person and is not permanently affixed to the ground, a structure, or a building.
R. “Portable readerboard sign” means a portable sign, supported by feet or wheels, with changeable letters and generally internally illuminated.
S. “Sign” means any device, structure, fixture, or placard that is visible from a public right-of-way or surrounding properties and uses graphics, symbols, logos, trademarks, or written copy intended to identify any place, subject, firm, business establishment, product, goods, service, point of sale, or event.
“Sign” also includes balloons attached to sign structures, streamers, spinners, pennants, flags, inflatables, or similar devices intended to attract attention to a site or business, as well as architectural or structural forms, illuminated panels, spandrels, awnings, and other structural or architectural features not common to classic vernacular or non‑corporate regional architecture and that are intended to convey a brand, message, or otherwise advertise a location or product, whether or not such features include text or graphics and whether or not they serve other practical purposes such as lighting, covering, or enclosure of persons or products. “Sign” includes any device which streams, televises, or otherwise conveys electronic visual messages, pictures, videos, or images, with or without sound or odors. Refer to SMC 14.245.080 for a list of prohibited signs.
T. “Temporary sign” means any sign intended to be displayed for a limited period of time and that is not permanently mounted, painted on a structure, or otherwise affixed.
U. “Tenant” means a business, governmental, or non‑profit entity which occupies a building or other real property within the City.
V. “Window sign” means any sign located inside or on, affixed to, or located within the frame of a window of a building intended to be seen in, on, or through a window and that is visible from the exterior of the window.
W. “Video board” means a device such as a television, computer monitor, flat panel display, plasma screen, or similar video electronic medium used as signage. (Ord. 2109, 2006; Ord. 2204, 2011; Ord. 2362, 2018)

14.245.030 Sign Permit Required.
A. Except as otherwise permitted by this chapter, no sign shall be installed, erected, altered, or relocated without applying for and receiving a sign permit issued by the Planning Director.
B. No sign permit shall be required for cleaning or other normal maintenance and repair of a sign, or for changes to tenant or business names on multi-tenant signs; provided, that the original design, function, structure, and size of the sign are maintained and that they remain in compliance with this chapter. However, signs in the Historic Business land use designation being repaired or multi-tenant signs being changed require review by the Design Review Board. (Ord. 2362, 2018)

14.245.040 Sign Permit Fees.
A fee will be required for the processing of all sign permit applications other than those determined to be exempt under SMC 14.245.060. The fee will be as set forth in the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 2204, 2011; Ord. 2362, 2018)

14.245.050 Sign Permit – Historic District.
For signs within the Historic District, no permit for the erection of a sign shall be issued pursuant to this chapter until the permit applicant has complied with the permit and approval requirements of Chapter 14.225 SMC.

14.245.060 Signs Exempt from Permit Requirements.
The following types of signs or activities relating to signs are exempt from the permitting requirements of this chapter:
A. Non‑illuminated signs of two (2) square feet in area, or less, except in the Historic Business land use designation area.
B. Window signs.
C. Governmental Signs. Signs installed by the City, county, or a federal or state governmental agency for the protection of the public health, safety and general welfare, including, but not limited to, the following:
    1. Emergency and warning signs necessary for public safety or civil defense;
    2. Traffic and/or wayfinding signs erected and maintained by an authorized public agency;
    3. Signs required to be displayed by law;
    4. Signs showing the location of public facilities; and
    5. Any sign, posting, notice, or similar sign placed by or required by a governmental agency in carrying out its responsibility to protect the public health, safety and general welfare.
D. Historical plaques, memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings, building cornerstones, and date-constructed stones when cut into any masonry surface or inlaid so as to be part of the building; provided, that none of these exceed ten (10) square feet in area.
E. Occupant signs in residential districts, the content of which is limited to the name of the occupant and/or the address of the premises.
F. Signs required or specifically authorized for public purposes by any law, statute, or ordinance.
G. Religious symbols.
H. Flags bearing the official emblem of a nation, state, municipality, educational institution, or non‑commercial organization.
I. Identification signs for parking lots, not advertising premises or products and having an area of three (3) square feet or less.
J. Incidental signs.
K. Changes to the face or copy of changeable copy signs, digital signs, electronic messaging signs, provided such changes do not change the material or appearance of the sign as originally permitted by the City.
L. The normal repair and maintenance of conforming or legal non‑conforming signs.
M. Interior Signs. Signs or displays located entirely inside of a building and located at least three (3) feet away from transparent doors and windows.
N. Vehicle with Signs. Any sign on a vehicle, unless such vehicle is parked or stationed near an activity for the primary purpose of attracting public attention to such activity. However, any such vehicle or mobile unit that is regularly parked in any prominently visible location for the primary purpose of attracting public attention to the sign shall not be allowed.
O. Bench Signs. Any outdoor bench or furniture with any signs or plaques one (1) square foot or less in area.
P. Privately maintained traffic control signs in a subdivision with private roads or signs in a parking lot. (Ord. 2362, 2018)

14.245.065 Freestanding Signs.
Freestanding signs shall comply with the following regulations:
A. The maximum allowable sign height is indicated in the freestanding signs table below. In those instances where the roadway is depressed below or elevated above the adjacent property, adjustments in the allowed maximum height may be allowed by the City Planner in accordance with this section.
[IMAGE: <14.245.065_001.png>]
    1. The maximum height of a freestanding sign is measured from the elevation of the centerline of the adjacent roadway to the top of the frame or sign structure, whichever is tallest. Refer to the freestanding signs table below and the illustration above.
    2. If the side slope of the property perpendicular to the street right-of-way is so steep that it does not allow the construction of a six (6) foot tall sign within the maximum allowable height limit, the City Planner may allow the sign to extend eight (8) feet above the grade. Refer to the freestanding signs table and the illustration below.
    [IMAGE: <14.245.065_002.png>]
B. A freestanding sign may have two (2) faces. If the two (2) faces are located in such relationship to each other that both cannot be viewed from any point at the same time, only one (1) face will be counted in totaling the number of signs or sign area.
C. The maximum allowable sign face area, excluding the frame and mounting, shall be as set forth in the following freestanding signs table and as illustrated below:
+----------------+-----------------------------------------------+-------------+------------+
| No. of tenants |     Square foot area of allowable text on     | Sign height | Sign width |
|   or acreage   |                     sign                      |    limit    |   limit    |
|   (not both)   |                                               |             |            |
+----------------+-----------------------------------------------+-------------+------------+
| 1 – 3 tenants  | 40 square feet if sign face is not internally | 12'         | 5'         |
|                | illuminated and uses light lettering          |             |            |
|                | and logos on dark background                  |             |            |
|                | 25 square feet if the sign face is internally |             |            |
|                | illuminated or does not use light lettering   |             |            |
|                | and logos on a dark background                |             |            |
+----------------+-----------------------------------------------+-------------+------------+
| 4 – 7 tenants  | 60 square feet if sign face is not internally | 12'         | 6'         |
|                | illuminated and uses light lettering          |             |            |
|                | and logos on dark background                  |             |            |
|                | 40 square feet if the sign face is internally |             |            |
|                | illuminated or does not use dark lettering    |             |            |
|                | and logos on a light background               |             |            |
+----------------+-----------------------------------------------+-------------+------------+
| 8+ tenants     | 75 square feet if sign face is not internally | 15'         | 8'         |
|                | illuminated and uses light lettering          |             |            |
|                | and logos on dark background                  |             |            |
|                | 50 square feet if the sign face is internally |             |            |
|                | illuminated or does not use dark lettering    |             |            |
|                | and logos on a light background               |             |            |
+----------------+-----------------------------------------------+-------------+------------+
| 7 acres or     | 125 square feet if sign face is not           | 18'         | --         |
| more           | internally illuminated or uses light          |             |            |
|                | lettering and logos on dark background        |             |            |
|                | and is a non-internally illuminated           |             |            |
|                | monument sign with design elements            |             |            |
|                | related to the principal structures           |             |            |
|                | on site identifying the name of the           |             |            |
|                | development                                   |             |            |
|                | 75 square feet if the sign face is internally |             |            |
|                | illuminated or does not use light lettering   |             |            |
|                | and logos on a dark background                |             |            |
|                | In both of the above situations 1 additional  |             |            |
|                | monument sign may be installed with           |             |            |
|                | a maximum sign height of 5 feet above         |             |            |
|                | the ground and a maximum sign width           |             |            |
|                | of 8 feet. Said monument sign shall           |             |            |
|                | include design elements consistent            |             |            |
|                | with the principal structures on the          |             |            |
|                | site and shall relate to the entire           |             |            |
|                | site rather than an individual tenant         |             |            |
|                | For commercial developments 30 acres          |             |            |
|                | or more in size, a second 18-foot-high        |             |            |
|                | freestanding sign may be installed            |             |            |
|                | in lieu of the 5-foot-monument sign           |             |            |
|                | where: (1) the commercial development         |             |            |
|                | has more than 1 driveway along that           |             |            |
|                | street frontage; and (2) 2 freestanding       |             |            |
|                | signs are separated by a minimum of           |             |            |
|                | 500 feet                                      |             |            |
+----------------+-----------------------------------------------+-------------+------------+
[IMAGE: <14.245.065_003.png>]
D. In the freestanding signs table above, “light” and “dark” refer to the amount of light reflected by a color. A dark color reflects less light than a light color. The City Planner shall have the authority to interpret the lightness of lettering/logos and other graphics relative to the lightness of the sign background.
E. Sign Base. Freestanding signs must have a substantial base with a length of at least one-third (1/3) the maximum length of the sign at its maximum cross section as illustrated above.
F. Location. 
    1. Any portion of a freestanding sign must maintain a six (6) foot minimum setback from the public right-of-way and a five (5) foot minimum setback from any property line.
    2. Freestanding signs shall meet the sight distance requirements of the City of Snohomish Public Works Standards.
G. Number Per Site and Minimum Spacing. 
    1. One (1) freestanding sign per site is allowed, except that a business with frontage on a City street and a state highway, where the building is not visible from the highway, may have an additional freestanding sign facing the highway; provided, that the sign shall not exceed eighteen (18) feet in height as measured from pre‑existing grade or finished grade of the sign location and shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet in area.
    2. Sites fronting on two (2) streets may have one (1) freestanding sign per street; provided, that these signs are at least one hundred fifty (150) feet apart as measured along the property lines.
H. Landscaping. A defined landscaped area shall be provided at least two (2) feet around the base of the freestanding sign to make the base of the sign and any ground-based lighting more attractive and deter vehicles, shopping carts, and people from contacting the base of the sign. The landscaping shall consist of a combination of ground cover materials and low-growing shrubs.
I. Architectural Embellishment. An additional allowance of two (2) feet in sign height and width is permitted for architectural embellishment, which shall not include any logo, writing, or other form of business identification or advertisement. (Ord. 2109, 2006; Ord. 2142, 2008; Ord. 2362, 2018)

14.245.070 Building Signs.
Building signs shall comply with the following regulations:
A. Building signs must not extend higher than the building eave, parapet, roof, or cornice on which they are mounted.
B. The maximum allowable sign face area is twenty-five square feet plus 10 percent of the building facade area facing the street or main parking area, except that a business with frontage on a City street and a State highway, where the building is visible from the highway, may have an additional building sign that faces the highway, which sign shall not exceed eighty square feet in area and shall be constructed of individual, internally illuminated (or back lit) letters. This total allowable area shall include awning and marquee signs but shall not include the area allowed for blade signs or shingle signs that are mounted perpendicular to the building facade pursuant to subsection D.
C. The building signs must be integrated into the architectural design of the building and must be located in a manner compatible with other signs on the same building.
D. Each tenant may also display a single blade or shingle sign that has a face perpendicular to the building, provided that the sign is no larger than three square feet, is no less than eight feet above the ground, and does not extend more than three feet from the building or beyond an existing architectural canopy.
E. In the case of a multi-tenant building, the owner or the management of the building is responsible for allocation of sign area among the tenants and shall be a coapplicant on all sign applications pertaining to the building and property.
F. The illustration below depicts typical building signs as allowed by this section.
Total amount of sign: 25 s.f. + 10% if façade facing the street or main parking area.
[IMAGE: <14.245.070_001.png>]
(Ord. 2109, 2006)

14.245.075 Temporary Signs.
The following regulations shall apply to all temporary signs:
A. Types of Temporary Signs. 
    1. Portable signs.
    2. Banners.
    3. Construction site signs.
B. General Regulations for All Temporary Signs. 
    1. Only temporary signs as described in this section are allowed and, except as required by the International Building Code, or as otherwise required in this chapter, do not require building permits or sign permits.
    2. Temporary signs shall not be:
        a. Illuminated;
        b. Inflated;
        c. Animated or moving or have moving parts.
    3. Balloons, festoon flags, pennants, lights or any other display shall not be attached to any temporary sign.
    4. No landscaping, other than holes in sod for sign posts, may be damaged or modified to accommodate a temporary sign.
    5. Temporary signs shall not be placed on any streetlight, crosswalk, curb, curbstone, lamppost, street sign, utility pole, hydrant, tree or shrub.
    6. Temporary signs shall not block the sight distances pursuant to SMC 14.210.160 or create a safety hazard as determined by the City Engineer or his/her designee.
    7. The signs allowed in this section are in addition to any other signs allowed in this chapter.
    8. Signs that do not comply with the provisions of this section are subject to removal and disposal.
    9. Window signs are not regulated as temporary signs.
C. Portable Signs. 
    1. Except as noted below, portable signs are prohibited within the Historic Business District land use designation area because of their negative impact on the area’s historic character. A city-sponsored wayfinding sign program for the area has been established to serve the same purpose as A-board and sandwich board signs. However, portable signs are allowed on Second Street and Avenue D as those streets are on the edge of the District and portable signs located there will have minimal impact on the area’s historic character.
    2. Portable signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area or exceed dimensions of twenty‑four (24) inches in width and thirty‑six (36) inches in height. Feather signs or feather flags which exceed these maximum dimensions are prohibited.
    3. The top of portable signs shall not be more than forty‑eight (48) inches above the ground as measured from the existing ground level to the top of the sign.
    4. A sign permit shall not be required for portable signs.
    5. Portable signs may be located on public right-of-way; however, they shall be located so as not to create a safety hazard to pedestrians or motorists.
D. Banners. 
    1. Banners shall be attached to a building or fence or strung between two (2) support structures. They shall not be:
        a. Strung between trees; or
        b. Placed on the roof of a building.
    2. Banners shall not exceed forty‑five (45) square feet in area.
    3. The height of banners shall not exceed the height of the building or fence to which they are attached. If the banners are strung between two (2) support structures, the maximum height shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet, as measured from the existing ground level to the top of the banner.
    4. A maximum of one (1) banner shall be allowed on a parcel.
    5. A sign permit shall be required before displaying a banner.
    6. Banners may be displayed for not more than thirty (30) days in a calendar year.
E. Construction Site Signs. 
    1. Construction site signs shall not exceed thirty‑two (32) square feet in area.
    2. Construction site signs shall only be allowed on sites where an active development permit has been issued.
    3. A maximum of two (2) construction site signs may be allowed on a single construction site.
    4. Construction site signs shall be removed from a site no later than the date of issuance of the first occupancy permit for the site or two (2) years after placement of the signs, whichever occurs first. (Ord. 2109, 2006; Ord. 2362, 2018)

14.245.080 Prohibited Signs.
The following signs are prohibited:
A. Signs, or sign structures, which by coloring, working, or location resemble or conflict with traffic-control signs or devices.
B. Signs that create a safety hazard for pedestrians or vehicular traffic.
C. All signs that rotate, move, glare, flash, change, reflect, or blink, or appear to do any of those things, including search lights, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
D. All inflatable advertising or attention-getting devices, including balloon signs of all sizes.
E. Any signs located on public right-of-way without evidence of specific approval by the City, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
F. Signs with changeable letters and numbers with the exception of gas price signs at service stations, with the exception of thirty-five (35) percent of sign area for signs outside the Historic Business District land use designation area, and with the exception of electronic changing message signs as provided in this chapter.
G. Off-site signs, except for off-site highway signs as provided by SMC 14.245.082, and signs which advertise community events and meet the following criteria:
    1. Are not displayed for longer than two (2) weeks.
    2. Are not located in City right-of-way or are permitted by a City right-of-way use permit.
    3. Are allowed by the property owner.
H. Private signs attached to municipal sign and signal poles.
I. Portable signs in the Historic Business land use designation area pursuant to SMC 14.245.075, except portable signs are allowed in the Historic Business land use designation area if located on Second Street or Avenue D.
J. Electronic changing message signs in the Historic District pursuant to SMC 14.245.085.
K. Erection of Signs or Structures. It is unlawful to use, place, or erect any sign board, sign, billboard, bulletin board, post, pole, or device of any kind for advertising in any park; or to attach any notice, bill, poster, sign, wire, rod, or card to any tree, shrub, railing, post, or structure within any park; or to place or erect in any park a structure of any kind. (Ord. 2097, 2005; Ord. 2109, 2006; Ord. 2204, 2011; Ord. 2362, 2018)

14.245.082 Off-Site Highway Signs.
A. As permitted by Chapter 47.42 RCW, Chapter 468-66 WAC, and this section, an off-site highway sign visible from SR-9 or US-2 may identify and provide directional information to one or more businesses in Snohomish.
B. Location, number, and separation requirements.
    1. Off-site highway signs may be located upon properties that conform to the definition of “commercial and industrial areas” provided by RCW 47.42.020.
    2. Off-site highway signs shall be located within 150’ of and primarily visible from the right-of-way of SR-9 or US-2 (highway).
    3. For signs on the same side of a highway, no off-site highway sign shall be located within 2,000 feet of another off-site highway sign.
C. Eligibility requirements. Commercial developments meeting the specifications below shall be eligible for identification on an off-site highway sign:
    1. One or more individual businesses within one commercial district.
    2. Multi-tenant commercial developments and individual businesses therein.
    3. Business districts such as. Downtown Snohomish; Pilchuck District, Avenue D Business District; and the Bickford Avenue Corridor, and individual businesses therein.
    4. Off-site highway signs shall identify and promote businesses actively in operation. When businesses identified on an off-site highway sign cease operation or are renamed or replaced, the corresponding message area shall be updated, revised, removed, etc. within 60 calendar days.
D. Off-site highway signs shall identify businesses, commercial developments, and business districts and provide a primary message area, a secondary message area, and a directional message area as set out in this section, subject to the review and approval process described herein.
    1. The sole purpose of the primary message area is to identify individual businesses and commercial developments located within one commercial district.
    2. The sole purpose of the secondary message area is to identify the commercial development or commercial district where the businesses identified upon the primary message area are located.
    3. The sole purpose of the directional message area is to provide driving/ location information that will assist motorists in reaching the business district identified upon the secondary message area.
E. Dimensional requirements – Sign height.
    1. Except where the elevation of the highway has been raised to function as a ramp, bridge, or over-pass, sign height shall be measured from the elevation of the adjacent highway travel lane(s) to which the sign is oriented.
    2. Where the elevation of the highway has been raised to function as a ramp, bridge, or over-pass, sign height shall be measured from the elevation of the adjacent highway travel lane to which the sign is oriented, or the elevation of the sign location, whichever is lower.
    3. Minimum sign height: 15 feet.
    4. Maximum sign height: 35 feet.
F. Dimensional requirements – Primary message area.
    1. Maximum vertical dimension: 12 feet.
    2. Maximum horizontal dimension: 10 feet.
    3. Maximum sign area, calculated as one rectangle enclosing all panels, text, logos, illuminated areas, and corporate color fields: 120 sq. ft.
G. Dimensional requirements – Secondary message area
    1. Maximum vertical dimension: 18 inches.
    2. Maximum horizontal dimension: 12 feet.
    3. Maximum sign area:
    18 sq. ft.
H. Dimensional requirements – Directional message area
    1. Maximum vertical dimension: 2 feet.
    2. Maximum horizontal dimension: 10 feet.
    3. Maximum sign area: 20 sq. ft.
I. Design requirements – General.
    1. Except where the provisions of this section conflict, the provisions of this chapter applicable to all signs shall apply to off-site highway signs.
    2. Off-site highway signs shall be sited and oriented to be viewed from the travel lane(s) of the adjacent highway(s). The faces of off-site highway signs shall be perpendicular to the highway to which it is oriented.
    3. Off-site highway signs shall conform to the standard design for off-site highway signs adopted by the City Council by resolution.
    4. Off-site highway signs shall include each of the following:
        i. A primary message area identifying specific businesses.
        ii. A secondary message area identifying the commercial development or business district where the businesses identified on the primary message area are located.
        iii. A directional message area identifying the appropriate highway exit for the commercial development or business district identified on the secondary message area.
    5. In order to limit the amount of time required for a highway motorist to read and comprehend the content of an off-site highway sign, the number of letters, words, messages, symbols, and images shall be kept to the minimum amount practicable.
    6. Off-site highway signs shall not identify or advertise businesses (or the goods or services offered by businesses) located on the property where the sign is located.
    7. Electronic changing message signs and sign area with changeable messages, text, or images are prohibited.
    8. Off-site highway signs shall not display or support temporary signs, banners, pennants, etc.
    9. Structural and electrical service components shall be architecturally integrated and/or screened from view.
    10. Landscaping consisting of drought-tolerant groundcover and shrubs shall be provided surrounding the base of the sign’s vertical supports. The City Planner may approve alternative methods of screening or enhancing the appearance of the juncture of the sign supports and the ground.
    11. In instances where the City Planner determines that it is not practicable to extend conventional electric power to a remote off-site highway sign, the City Planner may authorize alternative means of illumination as provided below. The decision to approve an alternative means of illumination shall be made in writing. The City Planner’s decision to allow an alternative means of illumination shall confirm the following:
        i. No adverse impacts relating to glare, light spillage, or light pollution will occur.
        ii. The sign will be illuminated during the business’ regular hours of operation.
        iii. The sign text/symbols have a high level of reflectivity.
        iv. The sign face/background are a matte finish so as to minimize reflectivity.
        v. When conventional electrical service is available, the sign can be modified to comply with the internal illumination requirements specified by subsections J-L below.
J. Design Requirements – Primary message area.
    1. Sign cabinets and sign area shall be configured so no air space appears between signs, sign panels, or sign cabinets constituting the primary message area.
    2. In order to limit the amount of time required for a highway motorist to read an off-site highway sign, a maximum of six businesses, corporations, or entities may be identified within the primary sign area. Text shall be limited to the name of the development or business and words/symbols contained in a corporate logo or identifier. For example, a sign may contain the business name, “Safeway,” but not the business name along with other information, such as, “Safeway – Deli Pharmacy Gas.”
    3. Except for text and/or symbols contained in established corporate logos, text in capital letters shall have a minimum vertical height of 12 inches. The height of rotated text shall be measured perpendicular to the line of text.
    4. The primary sign area shall consist of one or more internally-illuminated sign cabinets or internally-illuminated, reverse pan-channel letters mounted upon an opaque background.
    5. The panels of internally-illuminated sign cabinets shall consist of translucent text/symbols and the remainder of the sign panel, constituting the sign background or field, shall be opaque.
K. Design Requirements – Secondary message area.
    1. The purpose of the Secondary message area is to identify the business district or the commercial development where the businesses identified on the primary sign area are located. Examples of business districts and commercial developments include, “Historic District,” “Historic Downtown,” “Pilchuck District,” “Second Street Shops,” “Avenue D Shops,” “Bickford Avenue,” and “Snohomish Station.” The Secondary message area shall not contain the name of a specific business.
    2. The Secondary message area shall be limited to one line of text.
    3. The panels of the internally-illuminated sign cabinets shall consist of translucent letters/text and background/field.
L. Design Requirements – Directional message area.
    1. The directional message area shall include succinct, route information for highway motorists, such as “Next Exit” or “Next Left” and may include an arrow.
    2. The directional message area shall consist of one internally-illuminated sign cabinet or internally-illuminated, reverse pan-channel letters mounted upon an opaque background.
    3. The panels of an internally-illuminated sign cabinet shall consist of translucent text/symbols and the remainder of the sign panel, constituting the sign background or field, shall be opaque.
    4. In order to promote safe and orderly operation of vehicles upon highways and streets, the directional message area shall not contain information unrelated to route of travel.
M. Properties with an off-site highway sign.
    1. Typically, an off-site highway sign shall be regulated as an accessory rather than primary land use.
    2. Electric power shall be provided by underground service line.
N. Approval process. Approval of a Site Development Plan as provided by Chapter 14.65 SMC is required for the construction of an off-site highway sign. The City Planner may impose conditions of approval to mitigate adverse impacts that may otherwise occur. The decision of the City Planner may be appealed pursuant to Chapter 14.20 SMC.
O. Decisional criteria. In addition to the Administrative Development Plan criteria specified by SMC 14.65.020.B., off-site highway signs shall satisfy the following criteria:
    1. No unmitigated adverse impacts such as glare, sight obstruction, soil erosion, obstruction of public scenic views, noise, etc. will occur.
    2. The overall height of the sign is no greater than necessary to facilitate visibility and readability of the sign from the adjacent highway.
    3. Provision is made for regular and ongoing maintenance of the sign. The application shall specify and the decision of the City Planner shall confirm the party or entity responsible for maintenance of the off-site highway sign.
    4. Provision is made for the removal of the sign at the time there is no longer a legal or financial basis for its existence. The application shall specify and the decision of the City Planner shall confirm the party or entity responsible for removal of the off-site highway sign. The City Planner may require the owner of the property served by a sign to execute a covenant in recordable form providing assurance for the removal of the sign.
    5. Written confirmation provided by the owner of the property where the sign is to be located regarding the property owner’s responsibility for compliance with this Title, including but not limited to removal of abandoned off-site highway signs. (Ord. 2204, 2011; Ord. 2215, 2011)

14.245.085 Electronic Changing Message Signs.
The following provisions shall apply to electronic changing message signs:
A. Electronic changing message signs are prohibited in the Historic District because they are inconsistent with the historic character of the District.
B. Only one (1) electronic changing message sign shall be allowed per development.
C. Electronic changing message signs shall only be allowed within the Commercial and Business Park land use designation areas.
D. The maximum height for the electronic portion of an electronic changing message sign shall be ten (10) feet.
E. The maximum sign area for an electronic changing message sign, which is freestanding or wall-mounted, shall be no greater than thirty‑five (35) percent of the maximum total allowable sign area.
F. All electronic changing message signs shall be constructed as an integral part of a permanent sign constructed on site. “Integral” shall be considered to be incorporated into the framework and architectural design of the permanent sign.
G. A maximum of two (2) colors shall be used for each electronic message displayed on an electronic changing message sign. The text of the message shall be a single color while the background color shall be a different, darker color.
H. The occupant’s name and address shall be provided in non‑electronic format.
I. The display shall be limited to numbers, letters, standard punctuation, and symbols. Video boards shall be prohibited.
J. Displays or messages on electronic readerboards shall not change more frequently than once every five (5) seconds with a three (3) second maximum transition time between messages. (Ord. 2109, 2006; Ord. 2362, 2018)

14.245.090 Illumination of Signs.
A. Light directed on, or internal to, any sign shall be so shaded, shielded, or directed that the light intensity or brightness shall not adversely affect surrounding or facing premises, nor adversely affect safe vision of operators of vehicles moving on public or private roads, highways, or parking areas. Light shall not shine or reflect on, or into, residential structures.
B. No sign shall have blinking, flashing, or fluttering lights, or other illumination devices which have a changing light intensity, brightness, or color, or which are so constructed and operated as to create an appearance or illusion of writing or printing, except those showing date, time, and temperature, exclusively. However, within the Historic Business land use designation area, this provision shall not apply to signs which are approved consistent with the procedures set forth in Chapter 14.225 SMC. Further, nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing the use of lights or decorations relating to religious and patriotic festivities. (Ord. 2362, 2018)

14.245.115 Signs in Residential Land Use Designations.
Signs in residential land use designations shall be allowed as set forth in the following table:
+-------------------------+------------------------+------------------------+-----------------------+
|                         |      Places of worship, school, and public      | Other non‑residential |
|                         |                    land uses                    |       land uses       |
+-------------------------+------------------------+------------------------+-----------------------+
| "                       |   Sites under 1 acre   |    Sites 1 acre and    | "                     |
|                         |                        |        greater         |                       |
+-------------------------+------------------------+------------------------+-----------------------+
| Freestanding signs                                                                                |
+-------------------------+------------------------+------------------------+-----------------------+
| Maximum sign area       | 12 sq. ft.             | 24 sq. ft.             | 12 sq. ft.            |
+-------------------------+------------------------+------------------------+-----------------------+
| Maximum sign height     | 5'                     | 8'                     | 5'                    |
+-------------------------+------------------------+------------------------+-----------------------+
| Maximum number of       | 1 per frontage with    | 1 per frontage with    | 1 per frontage with   |
| signs                   | 150' separation        | 150' separation        | 150' separation       |
+-------------------------+------------------------+------------------------+-----------------------+
| Minimum setback from    | 10'                    | 10'                    | 10'                   |
| internal property       |                        |                        |                       |
| line                    |                        |                        |                       |
+-------------------------+------------------------+------------------------+-----------------------+
| Minimum setback from    | 6'                     | 6'                     | 6'                    |
| right-of-way            |                        |                        |                       |
+-------------------------+------------------------+------------------------+-----------------------+
| Changeable messages     | Yes                    | Yes                    | No                    |
+-------------------------+------------------------+------------------------+-----------------------+
| Building signs                                                                                    |
+-------------------------+------------------------+------------------------+-----------------------+
| Maximum sign area       | 12 sq. ft.             | 20 sq. ft. or 5%       | 12 sq. ft.            |
|                         |                        | of 1 street-facing     |                       |
|                         |                        | facade up to 60        |                       |
|                         |                        | sq. ft.                |                       |
+-------------------------+------------------------+------------------------+-----------------------+
| Maximum number of       | 1 per frontage         | 1 per frontage         | 1 per frontage        |
| signs                   |                        |                        |                       |
+-------------------------+------------------------+------------------------+-----------------------+
| Changeable messages     | Up to 80% of allowable | Up to 40% of allowable | No                    |
|                         | sign area              | sign area              |                       |
+-------------------------+------------------------+------------------------+-----------------------+
| General                                                                                           |
+-------------------------+------------------------+------------------------+-----------------------+
| External illumination   | Yes1                   | Yes1                   | Yes1                  |
| and halo lighting       |                        |                        |                       |
+-------------------------+------------------------+------------------------+-----------------------+
| Internal illumination   | No                     | Yes1,2                 | No                    |
+-------------------------+------------------------+------------------------+-----------------------+
| Electronic signs        | No                     | No                     | No                    |
+-------------------------+------------------------+------------------------+-----------------------+
| A-frame signs           | No, except as allowed  | No, except as allowed  | No                    |
|                         | for special events     | for special events     |                       |
+-------------------------+------------------------+------------------------+-----------------------+
| Signs identifying       |                        |                        | One freestanding      |
| occupants of individual |                        |                        | or building sign      |
| dwelling, bed and       |                        |                        | not to exceed 2       |
| breakfast or home       |                        |                        | sq. ft.               |
| occupation              |                        |                        |                       |
+-------------------------+------------------------+------------------------+-----------------------+
1Signs, where allowed to be illuminated, shall not be illuminated between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
2Subject to the following:
aSign shall be no closer than fifty (50) feet from an internal property line and twenty (20) feet from right-of-way;
bEither background or foreground type and images shall be opaque; and
cNo light source shall be visible, including neon and bare bulbs.
(Ord. 2109, 2006; Ord. 2180, 2009; Ord. 2258, 2013; Ord. 2362, 2018)

14.245.120 Maintenance of Signs.
All signs and components thereof which are not kept in good repair and in safe, neat, clean, and attractive condition are in violation of this code and shall be subject to abatement as a public nuisance.

14.245.130 Non-Conforming Signs.
A. A sign legally in existence at the effective date of this chapter that does not comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed non‑conforming and may continue to exist. For the purpose of this section, “legally in existence” shall mean:
    1. Installed prior to the existence of sign regulation within the City; or
    2. Installed pursuant to a permit issued by Snohomish County prior to annexation into the City of Snohomish; or
    3. Installed pursuant to a permit issued by the City of Snohomish or pursuant to an exemption from permit requirements.
B. Modification of a sign legally in existence on the effective date of this chapter that does not comply with the provisions of this chapter may only occur as follows:
    1. As part of an action to bring the entire sign more into compliance with the sign regulations in effect at the time of the modification; or
    2. Replacement of the sign face/cabinet.
C. The non‑conforming status of a sign shall not be affected by cleaning or other normal maintenance and repair, including changes to tenant or business names on multi-tenant signs; provided, that the original design function, operational capability, and structure of the sign are maintained and the sign is not otherwise enhanced or upgraded.
D. Abatement. 
    1. Signs located within the street rights-of-way that are not in compliance with this chapter and are not legally non‑conforming pursuant to subsection A of this section shall be abated in the following manner:
        a. The property owner or business owner responsible for the sign will be contacted by certified mail from the City Building Official and/or City Planner, informed of the observed violation, and given a copy of the sign ordinance. The mailed notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the sign must be removed. If the City confirms that the sign has not been removed after the specified time period has passed, City crews will remove and impound the sign. The business or property owner will be charged one hundred dollars ($100.00) per sign to recover the sign.
        b. No notice or hearing will be required to remove signs from the street right-of-way where the sign is determined to be an immediate danger to public health, safety, or welfare, or interferes with maintenance of the right-of-way. Such determination shall be made in the sole discretion of the City Engineer.
    2. Signs located on private property which are not in compliance with this chapter and are not legally non‑conforming pursuant to subsection A of this section shall be abated as provided in Chapter 14.85 SMC.
E. Subject to compliance with all other provisions of this chapter, permits may be issued for new signs on property containing one (1) or more non‑conforming signs. (Ord. 2077, 2005; Ord. 2109, 2006; Ord. 2362, 2018)

Chapter 14.250 SHORELINE MANAGEMENT

Sections:
14.250.010   Purpose
14.250.020   Shoreline Master Program Regulations and Relationship to Other Regulations
14.250.030   Definitions.
14.250.040   General Provisions
14.250.050   Permits, Decisions, and Appeals – General
14.250.060   Substantial Development Permit, Conditional Use Permit and Variance
14.250.070   Non-Conforming Shoreline Uses and Structures
14.250.080   Shoreline Environments
14.250.090   Shoreline Environment – Designation Change
14.250.100   Development Regulations – General
14.250.110   Use Regulations – General
14.250.120   Table 1: Shoreline Uses
14.250.130   Regulations Specific to Agriculture Uses
14.250.140   Regulations Specific to Aquaculture Uses
14.250.150   Regulations Specific to Commercial Uses
14.250.160   Regulations Specific to Industrial Uses
14.250.170   Regulations Specific to Residential Uses
14.250.180   Regulations Specific to Recreation and Cultural Uses 
14.250.190   Regulations Specific to Boat Launches and Marinas
14.250.200   Regulations Specific to Transportation and Parking
14.250.210   Regulations Specific to Utilities
14.250.220   Regulations Specific to In-Water Structural Uses
14.250.230   Regulations Specific to Public Facilities
14.250.240   Regulations Specific to Public Access
14.250.250   Regulations Specific to Signs
14.250.260   Shoreline Modifications – General
14.250.270   Table 2: Shoreline Modifications 
14.250.280   Regulations Specific to Shoreline Stabilization
14.250.290   Regulations Specific to Flood Protection
14.250.300   Regulations Specific to Grading, Filling, Dredging, and the Disposal of Dredge Material
14.250.310   Regulations Specific to Breakwaters, Jetties, Groins and Weirs
14.250.320   Regulations Specific to Docks and Piers
14.250.330   Critical Areas in Shoreline Jurisdiction

14.250.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to:
A. Implement the Washington State Shoreline Management Act (Chapter 90.58 RCW), the City of Snohomish Shoreline Master Program (SMP), and the City of Snohomish Comprehensive Plan (Comprehensive Plan).
B. Promote public health, safety, and general welfare by providing regulations for protection, development and use of shorelines.
C. Manage shorelines in an effective and equitable manner.
D. Achieve the City’s responsibilities specified by the Shoreline Management Act. (Ord. 2336, 2018)

14.250.020 Shoreline Master Program Regulations and Relationship to Other Regulations.
A. The following regulations shall constitute the Snohomish Shoreline Master Program development regulations, are incorporated herein and provided in Appendix A, attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter, for reference purposes, except as supplemented or modified under SMC 14.250.330, with the exceptions specified below:
    1. Chapter 14.250 SMC – Shoreline Management (Ordinance 2336, dated May 15, 2018).
    2. Chapter 14.255 SMC – Critical Areas – General (Ordinance 2083, dated May 3, 2005).
    3. Chapter 14.265 SMC – Critical Aquifer Recharge Areas (Ordinance 2083, dated May 3, 2005).
    4. Chapter 14.270 SMC – Flood Hazard Areas (Ordinance 2090, dated August 16, 2005).
    5. Chapter 14.275 SMC – Geologically Hazardous Areas (Ordinance 2083, dated May 3, 2005).
    6. Chapter 14.280 SMC – Habitat Conservation Areas (Ordinance 2083, dated May 3, 2005).
B. Unless specifically stated, this chapter does not alter the provisions and requirements specified by other chapters of the Snohomish Municipal Code. In no case shall this chapter be construed to lessen the requirements of any other City regulation.
C. The following sections and subsections of the Snohomish Municipal Code are excluded from incorporation and do not apply in the shoreline jurisdiction:
    1. SMC 14.255.060 – Exemptions.
    2. SMC 14.255.130 – Variances.
    3. SMC 14.265.020 – Exemptions.
    4. SMC 14.275.030 – Exemptions.
    5. SMC 14.255.120(G).
    6. SMC 14.260.040 – Substantive Requirements.
    7. SMC 14.280.050 – Substantive Requirements.
    8. SMC 14.280.060 – Habitat Conservation Area Buffers.
D. Any provisions of the City of Snohomish Critical Areas Code (Chapters14.255 through 14.280 SMC) that are not consistent with the Shoreline Management Act, Chapter 90.85 RCW, and supporting Washington Administrative Code chapters shall not apply in the shoreline jurisdiction.
E. Where this program makes reference to RCW, WAC, or other state or federal law or regulation, the most recent amendment or version shall apply.
F. In the event of any conflict between the Shoreline Master Program development regulations and any other regulations of the City, the regulations that provide greater protection of the shoreline natural environment and aquatic habitat, as determined by the Planning Director or designee, shall prevail.
G. The Planning Director, or designee, is authorized to issue permits and approvals for development and/or construction upon regulated shorelands after confirming that the proposed activity is consistent with this master program.
H. Issuance of a substantial development permit, conditional use permit, and/or variance approval does not constitute approval pursuant to any other federal, state or City laws or regulations. (Ord. 2336, 2018)

14.250.030 Definitions.
In addition to the definitions provided in this section, the definitions contained in this title, Chapter 90.58 RCW, and Chapters 173-26 and 173-27 WAC apply within the shoreline jurisdiction. Where definitions in this chapter conflict with definitions elsewhere in this title, the definitions provided in this section shall control.
Access, public or public access:  means the ability of the general public to reach, touch, and enjoy the water’s edge, to travel on waters of the state, and/or to view the water and the shoreline from adjacent locations.
Accessory structure:  means a structure that is incidental to and on the same site as the principal structure.
Agricultural activities: means agricultural uses and practices including, but not limited to: producing, breeding, or increasing agricultural products; rotating and changing agricultural crops; allowing land used for agricultural activities to lie fallow in which it is plowed and tilled but left unseeded; allowing land used for agricultural activities to lie dormant as a result of adverse agricultural market conditions; allowing land used for agricultural activities to lie dormant because the land is enrolled in a local, state, or federal conservation program, or the land is subject to a conservation easement; conducting agricultural operations; maintaining, repairing, and replacing agricultural equipment; maintaining, repairing, and replacing agricultural facilities; provided, that the replacement facility is no closer to the shoreline than the original facility; and maintaining agricultural lands under production or cultivation.
Agricultural equipment and agricultural facilities:  includes, but is not limited to:
    1. The following used in agricultural operations: equipment; machinery; constructed shelters, buildings, and ponds; fences; upland finfish rearing facilities; water diversion, withdrawal, conveyance, and use equipment and facilities including, but not limited to, pumps, pipes, tapes, canals, ditches, and drains;
    2. Corridors and facilities for transporting personnel, livestock, and equipment to, from, and within agricultural lands;
    3. Farm residences and associated equipment, lands, and facilities; and
    4. Roadside stands and on-farm markets for marketing fruit or vegetables.
Agricultural land:  means those specific land areas on which agricultural activities are conducted as of the date of adoption of this code, as evidenced by aerial photography or other documentation. After the effective date of the master program, land converted to agricultural use is subject to compliance with the requirements of the master program.
Agricultural products:  includes, but is not limited to, horticultural, viticultural, floricultural, vegetable, fruit, berry, grain, hops, hay, straw, turf, sod, seed, and apiary products; feed or forage for livestock; Christmas trees; hybrid cottonwood and similar hardwood trees grown as crops and harvested within twenty (20) years of planting; and livestock including both the animals themselves and animal products including, but not limited to, meat, upland finfish, poultry and poultry products, and dairy products.
Aquaculture:  means the culture or farming of fish, shellfish, or other aquatic plants and animals.
Associated wetlands:  means wetlands that are in proximity to tidal waters, lakes, rivers or streams that are subject to the Shoreline Management Act and either influence or are influenced by such waters. Factors used to determine proximity and influence include, but are not limited to: proximity to a regulated shoreline, susceptibility to tidally-influenced geo-hydraulic processes, presence of a surface connection, including through a culvert or tide gate; location in whole or in part within the floodplain of a shoreline; periodic inundation; and/or hydraulic continuity.
Average grade level : within the shoreline jurisdiction means the average of the natural or existing topography of the portion of the lot, parcel, or tract of real property which will be directly under the proposed building or structure. In the case of structures to be built over water, average grade level shall be the elevation of the ordinary high water mark. Calculation of the average grade level shall be made by averaging the ground elevations at the midpoint of all exterior walls of the proposed building or structure.
Base flood:  See Chapter 14.270 SMC and 44 CFR 59.1.
Breakwater:  means an in-water structure, either floating or not, designed and purposed to absorb, dampen, or reflect wave energy.
Building height: means the measurement from average grade level to the highest point of a structure, except that television antennas, chimneys, and similar appurtenances that do not obstruct the view of the shoreline from a substantial number of residences shall not be used in calculating height. However, temporary construction equipment is excluded in this calculation.
Buffer or shoreline buffer:  means a non-clearing area adjacent to a wetland, river, or stream that, generally, functions to protect the integrity, function, and values of affected critical area or shoreline. Specifically, a buffer may:
    1. Physically isolate the water body from surrounding areas using distance, height, visual and/or sound barriers;
    2. Minimize risk to the public and property damage from the natural processes and occasional catastrophic actions of water bodies;
    3. Protect the functions and values of the water body from adverse impacts of adjacent development and activities;
    4. Provide shading, input of organic debris, and coarse sediments, room for variation and changes in natural wetland, river, or stream characteristics;
    5. Cleanse and recharge stormwater runoff to minimize sediment and chemical transport to the water body; and/or
    6. Provide habitat for wildlife.
Buffers may be modified and reduced to accommodate allowed uses when consistent with the Act and this program, and when conducted so that no net loss of critical area or shoreline ecological functions occurs. Under optimal conditions, buffers are composed of intact native vegetation. Buffer widths are measured horizontally.
Bulkhead:  means a solid or open wall of rock, concrete, steel, timber, or other material erected generally parallel to the shoreline for the purpose of protecting upland areas from inundation, saturation, waves, current, etc. A bulkhead may have earthen fill placed upland of the wall structure.
Channel migration zone:  means the area along a river within which the channel(s) can be reasonably predicted to migrate over time as a result of natural and normally occurring hydrological and related processes when considered with the characteristics of the river and its surroundings.
Commercial:  means a use that involves wholesale or retail trade, or the provision of services.
Critical areas:  as defined under Chapter 36.70A RCW includes the following areas and ecosystems:
    1. Wetlands;
    2. Areas with a critical recharging effect on aquifers used for potable waters;
    3. Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas;
    4. Frequently flooded areas; and
    5. Geologically hazardous areas.
Development:  means a use consisting of the construction or exterior alteration of structures; dredging; drilling; dumping; filling; removal of any sand, gravel or minerals; bulkheading; driving of piling; placing of obstructions; and/or any project of a permanent or temporary nature which interferes with the normal public use of the surface of the waters overlying lands subject to this chapter at any state of water level.
Dock:  means an anchored platform structure in or floating upon water to facilitate pedestrian access to the water or to watercraft. Docks may provide moorage for watercraft, and may include ancillary features such as piling, anchors, gangways, floats, fingers, etc. For the purposes of this chapter, “dock” is synonymous with “pier.”
Dredging:  means the removal, displacement, and/or disposal of unconsolidated earth material such as sand, silt, gravel, or other submerged materials, from the bottom of water bodies, ditches, or wetlands; maintenance dredging and/or support activities are included in this definition.
Ecological functions or shoreline functions:  means the work performed or role played by physical, chemical and biological processes that contribute to the maintenance of the aquatic and terrestrial environments that constitute the shoreline’s natural ecosystem.
Feasible:  means that an action, such as a development project, mitigation, or preservation requirement meets all of the following conditions:
    1. The action can be accomplished with technologies and methods that have been used in the past in similar circumstances, or studies or tests have demonstrated in similar circumstances that such approaches are currently available and likely to achieve the intended results; and
    2. The action provides a reasonable likelihood of achieving its intended purpose; and
    3. The action does not physically preclude achieving the project’s primary intended legal use.
In determining an action’s infeasibility, the Planning Director shall also consider the action’s relative public costs and public benefits, considered in the short- and long-term time frames.
In cases where certain actions are required unless they are not feasible or infeasible, the burden of proving infeasibility is on the applicant.
Fill:  means the addition of soil, sand, rock, gravel, sediment, earth retaining structure or any other earthen or organic material to an area waterward of the ordinary high water mark, in wetlands, or on shorelands in a manner that raises the elevation of, or creates, dry land.
Float:  means a structure or device which is not a breakwater and which is moored, anchored, or otherwise secured in the water in a manner that allows the structure or device to remain at the surface of the water.
Floodplain:  is synonymous with 100-year floodplain and means that land area susceptible to inundation with a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The limit of this area shall be based upon flood ordinance regulation maps or a reasonable method which meets the objectives of the Act.
Floodway:  means the area, as identified in a master program, that either:
    1. Has been established in Federal Emergency Management Agency Flood Insurance Rate Maps or floodway maps; or
    2. Consists of those portions of a river valley lying streamward from the outer limits of a watercourse upon which flood waters are carried during periods of flooding that occur with reasonable regularity, although not necessarily annually, said floodway being identified, under normal conditions, by changes in surface soil conditions or changes in types or quality of vegetative ground cover condition, topography, or other indicators of flooding that occurs with reasonable regularity, although not necessarily annually. Regardless of the method used to identify the floodway, the floodway shall not include those lands that can reasonably be expected to be protected from flood waters by flood control devices maintained by or maintained under license from the federal government, the state, or a political subdivision of the state.
Grading:  means the movement or redistribution of the soil, sand, rock, gravel, sediment, or other material on a site in a manner that alters the natural contour of the land.
Groin:  means a barrier-type structure extending from the backshore into the water across the beach. The purpose of a groin is to interrupt sediment movement along the shore.
Hatchery:  means a facility for the rearing and/or holding of fish, the design of which is compatible with the natural environment and contains minimal development necessary for fish propagation.
In-water utility:  means infrastructure related to public infrastructure for domestic water, stormwater, wastewater, power generation, etc., that by nature and common design must be located in or in the immediate vicinity of a river, stream, or lake.
Jetty:  means an artificial barrier used to change the natural littoral drift to protect inlet entrances from clogging by excess sediment.
Marina:  means a water-dependent facility that provides launching, storage, supplies, moorage and other accessory services for five or more pleasure and/or commercial water craft.
Non-conforming development or non-conforming structure:  means an existing structure that was lawfully constructed at the time it was built but is no longer fully consistent with present regulations such as setbacks, buffers or yards; area; bulk; height or density standards due to subsequent changes to the master program.
Non-conforming lot:  means a lot that met dimensional requirements of the applicable master program at the time of its establishment but now contains less than the required width, depth or area due to subsequent changes to the master program.
Non-conforming use:  means an existing shoreline use that was lawfully established prior to the effective date of the Act or the applicable master program, but which does not conform to present use regulations due to subsequent changes to the master program.
No net loss:  means that the Snohomish Shoreline Master Program provisions shall, to the greatest extent feasible, protect existing shoreline ecological processes and functions and avoid new adverse impacts to ecological processes and functions. The term “net,” as used herein, recognizes that any development has potential for short-term or long-term impacts and that through application of appropriate development standards, avoidance of impacts and use of mitigation measures, those impacts will not diminish the shoreline resources and values as they currently exist. This standard is achieved through both the SMP planning process and by appropriately regulating individual developments through the permit review process.
Non-water-oriented uses:  means those uses that are not water-dependent, water-related or water-enjoyment.
Normal protective bulkhead common to single-family residences:  means a bulkhead constructed on a lot designated to permit one single-family residence and containing one single-family residence.
Ordinary high water mark: , as defined in Chapter 90.58 RCW, as now or hereafter amended and determined in the field, means on all lakes, streams, and tidal water the mark that will be found by examining the bed and banks and ascertaining where the presence and action of waters are so common and usual, and so long continued in all ordinary years, as to mark upon the soil a character distinct from that of the abutting upland, in respect to vegetation as that condition exists on June 1, 1971, as it may naturally change thereafter, or as it may change thereafter in accordance with permits issued by a local government or the department; provided, that in any area where the ordinary high water mark cannot be found, the ordinary high water mark adjoining salt water shall be the line of mean higher high tide and the ordinary high water mark adjoining freshwater shall be the line of mean high water. In cases where the location of the ordinary high water mark is contested, its determination shall rest with the Washington State Department of Ecology.
Park:  means land maintained for purposes of active or passive recreation.
Pier:  See “Dock.”
Planning Director:  means the manager of the City of Snohomish Department of Planning and Development Services. “Planning Director” means the same as City Planner as provided for in Chapter 2.34 SMC.
Principal use parking lot:  means a parking lot that is not dedicated to serving the residents, customers, or employees of specific sites or uses but is available for general public use whether free or for a fee.
Public access:  See “Access, public.”
Recreational use:  means a private or public facility designed and used to provide recreational opportunities to the public. Water-oriented recreation includes fishing, swimming, diving, hiking, and viewing. Recreational development provides the opportunity for the use and enjoyment of the shoreline by the public.
Residential development:  means the development of single-family residences, including appurtenant structures and uses. Residential development also includes multifamily development and the creation of new residential lots through land subdivision. Residential development does not include hotels, motels, or bed and breakfast facilities.
Restoration or ecological restoration:  means the reestablishment or upgrading of impaired or diminished ecological shoreline processes or functions. This may be accomplished through measures including, but not limited to, revegetation, removal of intrusive shoreline structures and removal or treatment of toxic materials. Restoration does not imply a requirement for returning the shoreline area to aboriginal or pre-European settlement conditions.
Riprap:  means angular, quarry rock used for revetments or other bank stabilization projects.
Shall:  means a mandate; the action must be done.
Shorelands or shoreland areas:  means those lands extending landward for two hundred (200) feet in all directions as measured on a horizontal plane from the ordinary high water mark; floodways and contiguous floodplain areas landward two hundred (200) feet from such floodways; and all wetlands and river deltas associated with the streams and lakes that are subject to the provisions of Chapter 90.58 RCW.
Shoreline environment designations:  means a regulatory classification of shorelines of the state established in the Shoreline Master Program to differentiate between areas subject to differing objectives regarding their use and future development.
Shoreline jurisdiction:  means all shorelines of the state and “shorelands” as defined in RCW 90.58.030 and as depicted in Map B below.Map B
[IMAGE: <14.250.030.jpg>]
Shoreline Management Act (Act):  means the Washington State Shoreline Management Act, Chapter 90.58 RCW.
Shoreline modifications:  means actions that change the physical configuration or qualities of the shoreline area, such as clearing, grading, or the application of chemicals; or the construction of physical elements such as a dike, breakwater, groin, jetty, fill, bulkhead, or similar shoreline structure.
Shoreline stabilization:  means actions taken to prevent or diminish erosion impacts to property or structures caused by natural hydrological processes, such as current, flood, tides, wind or wave action. These actions include installation or expansion of structures, such as bulkheads, jetties, groins, etc., and nonstructural methods, such as the planting of vegetation.
Shorelines:  means all of the water areas within Snohomish and their associated shorelands, together with the lands underlying them, except:
    1. Shorelines of statewide significance; and
    2. Shorelines on segments of streams upstream of a point where the mean annual flow is twenty (20) cubic feet per second or less and the wetlands associated with such upstream segments; and
    3. Shorelines on lakes less than twenty (20) acres in size and wetlands associated with such small lakes.
Shorelines of statewide significance:  means those shorelines described in RCW 90.58.030(2)(f). Within the City of Snohomish, the Snohomish River is designated as a shoreline of statewide significance.
Shorelines of the state:  means the total of all “shorelines” and “shorelines of statewide significance” within the state, as defined in RCW 90.58.030.
Should:  means that the particular action is required unless there is a demonstrated, compelling reason, based on policy of the Shoreline Management Act and this chapter, against taking the action.
Sign:  means any device, structure, fixture, or placard that is visible from a public right-of-way or surrounding properties and uses graphics, symbols, logos, or written copy for the purpose of advertising or identifying any establishment, product, good, service, or event.
Significant vegetation removal:  means the removal or alteration of trees, shrubs, and/or ground cover by clearing, grading, cutting, burning, chemical means, or other activity that causes significant ecological impacts to functions provided by such vegetation. The following do not constitute significant vegetation removal:
    1. Removal of invasive or noxious weeds;
    2. Tree pruning, not including tree topping, where it does not affect ecological functions;
    3. Mowing of established public and private lawn/grass areas; and
    4. Normal maintenance, including mowing and volunteer sapling clearing of utility maintenance corridors and active use recreation areas.
Substantial development:  means any development as defined in RCW 90.58.030(3)(e), as now or hereafter amended, and which requires a shoreline substantial development permit.
Utilities or utility facilities:  means services and facilities that produce, convey, store or process electric power, gas, sewage, water, communications, oil, and waste. This includes drainage conveyances and swales. On-site utility features serving a primary use, such as a water, sewer or gas line to a residence, are “accessory utilities” and shall be considered a part of the primary use.
For the purposes of this chapter, “utility facilities” does not mean infrastructure for administrative or support functions, such as professional offices, customer service centers, fleet maintenance facilities, storage yards, etc.
Water-dependent use:  means a use or portion of a use which cannot exist in a location that is not adjacent to the water and which is dependent on the water by reason of the intrinsic nature of its operations.
Water-enjoyment use:  means a recreational or other use that facilitates public access to the shoreline as a primary characteristic of the use; or a use that provides for recreational use or aesthetic enjoyment of the shoreline for a substantial number of people as a general characteristic of the use and which through location, design, and operation ensures the public’s ability to enjoy the physical and aesthetic qualities of the shoreline. In order to qualify as a water-enjoyment use, the use must be open to the general public and the shoreline-oriented space within the project must be devoted to the specific aspects of the use that fosters shoreline enjoyment.
Water-oriented use:  means a use that is water-dependent, water-related, or water-enjoyment, or any combination thereof.
Water-related use:  means a use or portion of a use that is not intrinsically dependent on a waterfront location but whose economic viability is dependent on a waterfront location because:
    1. The use has a functional requirement for a waterfront location such as the arrival or shipment of materials by water or the need for large quantities of water; or
    2. The use provides a necessary service supportive of the water-dependent uses, and the proximity of the use to its customers makes its services less expensive and/or more convenient.
Wetlands:  means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. Wetlands do not include those artificial wetlands intentionally created from non-wetland sites, including, but not limited to, irrigation and drainage ditches, grass-lined swales, canals, detention facilities, wastewater treatment facilities, farm ponds, and landscape amenities, or those wetlands created after July 1, 1990, that were unintentionally created as a result of the construction of a road, street, or highway. Wetlands may include those artificial wetlands intentionally created from nonwetland areas to mitigate the conversion of wetlands. (Ord. 2336, 2018)

14.250.040 General Provisions.
A. The City of Snohomish’s Shoreline Master Program, prepared and adopted in compliance with the Shoreline Management Act, consists of:
    1. This chapter;
    2. The shoreline element of the City of Snohomish Comprehensive Plan; and
    3. The City of Snohomish Shoreline Restoration Plan;
    4. City of Snohomish Cumulative Impacts Analysis; and
    5. The City of Snohomish Shoreline Inventory and Characterization Report.
B. This chapter shall be known as “the shoreline management code.”
C. This chapter shall be exempted from the rule of strict construction and shall be liberally construed to give full effect to the purposes for which the Shoreline Management Act was enacted.
D. Unless specifically excluded by statute, all proposed uses and development occurring within the shoreline jurisdiction shall conform to Chapter 90.58 RCW, the Shoreline Management Act and this Shoreline Master Program whether or not a permit is required.
E. Development prohibited by this chapter but otherwise permitted by the Land Use Development Code is prohibited within the shoreline jurisdiction.
F. In the event of conflict between City regulations and the Shoreline Management Act, state regulations shall prevail.
G. Mitigation and/or conditions of approval imposed by the Planning Director, or designee, pursuant to this chapter shall reflect reasonable proportionality to the potential adverse impact being mitigated.
H. The Planning Director, or designee, is authorized to enforce, and if necessary in a cooperative effort with the state, the provisions of this chapter and any administrative rules enacted to implement this chapter. Enforcement shall be consistent with the provisions of Chapters 1.14 and 14.85 SMC or Chapter 173-27 WAC.
I. Alteration or reconstruction of uses or structures that do not conform to the requirements of this program shall be subject to SMC 14.250.070. Alteration or reconstruction of uses or structures that do not conform to the requirements of other chapters of this title shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 14.80 SMC.
J. The Planning Director is authorized to make administrative decisions and interpretations of the policies and regulations of this program and the Act in accordance with SMC 14.05.050. The City shall consult with Ecology to ensure that any formal written interpretations are consistent with the purpose and intent of Chapter 90.58 RCW, and Chapters 173-26 and 173-27 WAC.
K. Applicability to Federal Lands and Agencies. 
    1. The Act and this program, including the permit system, shall apply to all non-federal developments and uses undertaken on federal lands and on lands subject to non-federal ownership, lease or agreement, even though such lands may fall within the external boundaries of a federal ownership.
    2. Areas and uses in those areas that are under exclusive federal jurisdiction as established through federal or state statutes are not subject to the jurisdiction of Chapter 90.58 RCW or this Shoreline Master Program per WAC 173-22-070.
    3. Direct federal agency activities affecting the uses or resources subject to the Act must be consistent to the maximum extent practicable with the enforceable provisions of the Act as required by WAC 173-27-060.
    4. Pursuant to RCW 90.58.350, nothing in this chapter shall affect any rights established by treaty to which the United States is a party. The rights of treaty tribes to resources within their usual and accustomed areas should be accommodated. (Ord. 2336, 2018)

14.250.050 Permits, Decisions, and Appeals – General.
A. The Planning Director, or designee, is authorized to create:
    1. Permit application form(s) as deemed necessary to ensure efficient and proper processing; and
    2. A submittal checklist of all required submittals necessary for the application to be determined to be complete.
B. A complete application for a shoreline substantial development, shoreline conditional use, or shoreline variance permit shall contain, at a minimum, the following documents and information:
    1. The name, address and phone number of the applicant. The applicant should be the owner of the property or the primary proponent of the project and not the representative of the owner or primary proponent.
    2. The name, address and phone number of the applicant’s representative if other than the applicant.
    3. The name, address and phone number of the property owner, if other than the applicant.
    4. Location of the Property. This shall, at a minimum, include the property address and identification of the section, township and range to the nearest quarter, quarter section or latitude and longitude to the nearest minute. All applications for projects located in open water areas away from land shall provide a longitude and latitude location.
    5. Identification of the name of the shoreline (water body) that the site of the proposal is associated with. This should be the water body from which jurisdiction of the Act over the project is derived.
    6. A general description of the proposed project that includes the proposed use or uses and the activities necessary to accomplish the project.
    7. A general description of the property as it now exists including its physical characteristics and improvements and structures.
    8. A general description of the vicinity of the proposed project including identification of the adjacent uses, structures and improvements, intensity of development and physical characteristics.
    9. A site development plan consisting of maps and elevation drawings, drawn to an appropriate scale to depict clearly all required information, photographs and text which shall include:
        a. The boundary of the parcel(s) of land upon which the development is proposed.
        b. The ordinary high water mark of all water bodies located adjacent to or within the boundary of the project. This may be an approximate location; provided, that for any development where a determination of consistency with the applicable regulations requires a precise location of the ordinary high water mark, the mark shall be located precisely and the biological and hydrological basis for the location as indicated on the plans shall be included in the development plan. Where the ordinary high water mark is neither adjacent to nor within the boundary of the project, the plan shall indicate the distance and direction to the nearest ordinary high water mark of a shoreline.
        c. Existing and Proposed Land Contours. The contours shall be at intervals sufficient to accurately determine the existing character of the property and the extent of proposed change to the land that is necessary for the development. Areas within the boundary that will not be altered by the development may be indicated as such and contours approximated for that area.
        d. A delineation of all wetland areas that will be altered or used as a part of the development.
        e. A general indication of the character of vegetation found on the site.
        f. The dimensions and locations of all existing and proposed structures and improvements including, but not limited to: buildings, paved or graveled areas, roads, utilities, septic tanks and drainfields, material stockpiles or surcharge, and stormwater management facilities.
        g. Where applicable, a landscaping plan for the project.
        h. Where applicable, plans for development of areas on or off the site as mitigation for impacts associated with the proposed project shall be included and contain information consistent with the requirements of this section.
        i. Quantity, source and composition of any fill material that is placed on the site whether temporary or permanent.
        j. Quantity, composition and destination of any excavated or dredged material.
        k. A vicinity map showing the relationship of the property and proposed development or use to roads, utilities, existing developments and uses on adjacent properties.
        l. Where applicable, a depiction of the impacts to views from existing residential uses and public areas.
        m. On all variance applications the plans shall clearly indicate where development could occur without approval of a variance, the physical features and circumstances on the property that provide a basis for the request, and the location of adjacent structures and uses.
C. Permit application and review fees shall be as specified by the City of Snohomish fee schedule as established by resolution of the Snohomish City Council.
D. The applicant shall have the burden of proving the application/request satisfies the applicable criteria.
E. The Planning Director, or designee, may impose conditions of approval to a shoreline permit or determination of exemption as necessary to ensure the proposal is consistent with the City’s Shoreline Master Program and the Act.
F. When a shoreline substantial development permit and a shoreline conditional use permit or variance are required for a development, the submittals of the permits shall be made concurrently.
G. For development where a permit decision by the Hearing Examiner is required in addition to an administrative shoreline permit, the Hearing Examiner shall conduct an open-record public hearing and issue decisions for all land use permits related to development of the site. In such instances, the Planning Director, or designee, shall provide a written analysis of the development’s consistency with applicable regulations and provide a recommendation whether to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the permit application.
H. Any decision on an application for a shoreline permit, whether it is an approval or a denial, shall, concurrently with the transmittal of the ruling to the applicant, be filed with the Department of Ecology and the Attorney General.
I. As specified by RCW 90.58.140, the date of filing of the City’s decision on a shoreline substantial development permit shall be the date of actual receipt by the Department of Ecology. The date of filing of shoreline conditional use permits and shoreline variance permits shall be the date the Department of Ecology transmits the permit decision to the City and the applicant. When the City simultaneously transmits to Ecology its decision on a shoreline substantial development with its decision of either a shoreline conditional use permit or variance, or both, the shoreline substantial development permit shall have the same date of filing as the shoreline conditional use permit or variance.
J. Any person aggrieved by the granting, denying, or rescinding of a permit or permit revision on shorelines of the state pursuant to RCW 90.58.140 and this chapter may seek review from the Shorelines Hearings Board by filing a petition for review within twenty-one (21) days of the date of filing the decision, pursuant to RCW 90.58.180 and WAC 461-08-340. (Ord. 2336, 2018)

14.250.060 Substantial Development Permit, Conditional Use Permit and Variance.
A. Review Criteria for All Development. 
    1. All shoreline permits or statements of exemption issued for development or use within shoreline jurisdiction shall include written findings prepared by the City, documenting compliance with bulk and dimensional policies and regulations of this program. The City may attach conditions to the approval as necessary to assure consistency with Chapter 90.58 RCW and this program.
    2. All uses and development on shorelines of the state shall be determined consistent with the policy and provisions of the Act and this Shoreline Master Program. Any new or expanded building or structure of more than thirty-five (35) feet above average grade level shall only be permitted if it will not obstruct the view of a substantial number of residences and when the public interest will be served.
B. Substantial Development. 
    1. Permit Required. A substantial development permit is required prior to commencement of construction of a structure or commencement of a use or activity constituting “substantial development” as defined in WAC 173-27-040, which is not exempt, within the shorelines of the City. No development shall be undertaken within the shoreline jurisdiction unless such development is authorized by a substantial development permit or an exemption.
    2. A substantial development permit shall be granted only when the development proposed is consistent with:
        a. The policies and procedures of the Act;
        b. The provisions of Chapter173-27 WAC; and
        c. The applicable policies and regulations of this Shoreline Master Program.
C. Developments Exempt from the Substantial Development Permit Process. 
    1. A development or activity determined by the Planning Director, or designee, to meet the provisions of WAC 173-27-040 or to otherwise be specifically exempt under the Shoreline Management Act is not considered shoreline substantial development and a shoreline substantial development permit is not required.
    2. Exemptions shall be construed narrowly. Only those developments that meet the precise terms of one (1) or more of the listed exemptions may be granted exemption from the substantial development permit process.
    3. All exempt development and activities within the shoreline jurisdiction shall be consistent with the provisions of the Shoreline Management Act and the Shoreline Master Program. An exemption from the substantial development permit process is not an exemption from compliance with the Act or this master program, nor from any other regulatory requirements. To be authorized, all uses and developments must be consistent with the policies and provisions of this master program and the Act.
    4. A development or use that is listed as a conditional use pursuant to the local master program or is an unlisted use, must obtain a conditional use permit even though the development or use does not require a substantial development permit. When a development or use is proposed that does not comply with the bulk, dimensional and performance standards of the master program, such development or use can only be authorized by approval of a variance.
    5. Applicants requesting a determination of exemption pursuant to this section shall submit a written justification and provide adequate documentation of consistency with the applicable exemption provision(s). The burden of proof that a development or use is exempt from the permit process is on the applicant.
    6. Where an exemption is granted for a development or activity meeting the conditions in subsections (C)(6)(a) and (C)(6)(b) of this section, the City shall prepare and issue a written determination that cites the applicable exemption provision and contains the findings of the Planning Director regarding the proposal’s consistency with the Shoreline Management Act and the Shoreline Master Program. This letter of exemption shall be provided to the applicant and the Department of Ecology.
        a. The activity will occur waterward of the ordinary high water mark; or
        b. The project will require either of the following federal permits:
            i. For a project on or over navigable waters, a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Section 10 permit under the Rivers and Harbors Act of 1899; or
            ii. For a project involving discharge of dredge or fill material to any water or wetland, a Section 404 permit under the Federal Clean Water Act.
D. Conditional Use Permit. 
    1. The purpose of a CUP is to provide flexibility in authorizing uses in a manner consistent with RCW 90.58.020. Accordingly, special conditions may be imposed to prevent undesirable effects of the proposed use and/or to assure consistency of the project with the Act and this program.
    2. A development or use that is listed as a conditional use pursuant to this program, or is an unlisted use, must obtain a conditional use permit even if the development or use does not require a substantial development permit.
    3. A shoreline conditional use permit may be approved as provided by RCW 90.58.140, RCW 90.58.143, and WAC 173-27-160, provided the applicant can demonstrate all of the following:
        a. That the proposed use is consistent with the policies of RCW 90.58.020 and the master program;
        b. That the proposed use will not interfere with the normal public use of public shorelines;
        c. That the proposed use of the site and design of the project is compatible with other authorized uses within the area and with uses planned for the area under the comprehensive plan and Shoreline Master Program;
        d. That the proposed use will cause no significant adverse effects to the shoreline environment in which it is to be located; and
        e. That the public interest suffers no substantial detrimental effect.
    4. In the granting of all conditional use permits, consideration shall be given to the cumulative impact of additional requests for like actions in the area. For example, if conditional use permits were granted for other developments in the area where similar circumstances exist, the total of the conditional uses shall also remain consistent with the policies of RCW 90.58.020 and shall not produce substantial adverse effects to the shoreline environment.
    5. Uses which are specifically prohibited by this master program may not be authorized with a conditional use permit.
    6. When a conditional use is requested, the Hearing Examiner shall be the approval authority for the City. However, shoreline conditional use permits are subject to review and final approval by the Washington State Department of Ecology per RCW 90.58.140(10) and WAC 173-27-200.
E. Variance Permit. 
    1. The purpose of a variance permit is strictly limited to granting relief from specific bulk, dimensional, or performance standards set forth in this program where there are extraordinary or unique circumstances relating to the property such that the strict implementation of this master program will impose unnecessary hardship on the applicant or thwart the policies set forth in RCW 90.58.020.
    2. A development or use that does not comply with the bulk, dimensional and/or performance standards of this program shall require a shoreline variance even if the development or use does not require a substantial development permit.
    3. As provided by RCW 90.58.140 and WAC 173-27-170, a shoreline variance should be granted in circumstances where denial of the permit would result in a thwarting of the policy enumerated in RCW 90.58.020. In all instances extraordinary circumstances shall be shown and the public interest shall suffer no substantial detrimental effect.
    4. Variance permits for development and/or uses that will be located landward of the ordinary high water mark (OHWM), and/or landward of any wetland, may be authorized provided the applicant can demonstrate all of the following:
        a. That the strict application of the bulk, dimensional or performance standards set forth in the applicable master program precludes, or significantly interferes with, reasonable use of the property;
        b. That the hardship described in subsection (E)(4)(a) of this section is specifically related to the property, and is the result of unique conditions such as irregular lot shape, size, or natural features and the application of the master program, and not, for example, from deed restrictions or the applicant’s own actions;
        c. That the design of the project is compatible with other authorized uses within the area and with uses planned for the area under the comprehensive plan and Shoreline Master Program and will not cause adverse impacts to the shoreline environment;
        d. That the variance will not constitute a grant of special privilege not enjoyed by the other properties in the area;
        e. That the variance requested is the minimum necessary to afford relief; and
        f. That the public interest will suffer no substantial detrimental effect.
    5. Variance permits for development and/or uses that will be located waterward of the ordinary high water mark (OHWM) or within any wetland may be authorized provided the applicant can demonstrate all of the following:
        a. That the strict application of the bulk, dimensional or performance standards set forth in the applicable master program precludes all reasonable use of the property;
        b. That the proposal is consistent with the criteria established under subsection (E)(4)(b) through (E)(4)(f) of this section; and
        c. That the public rights of navigation and use of the shorelines will not be adversely affected.
    6. In the granting of all variance permits, consideration shall be given to the cumulative impact of additional requests for like actions in the area. For example, if variances were granted to other developments and/or uses in the area where similar circumstances exist, the total of the variances shall also remain consistent with the policies of RCW 90.58.020 and shall not cause substantial adverse effects to the shoreline environment.
    7. A variance from City Land Use Development Code requirements approved pursuant to Chapter 14.70 SMC shall not be construed to mean a variance from the Shoreline Master Program development regulations. Similarly, a variance from the Shoreline Master Program development regulations granted pursuant to this chapter shall not be construed to mean a variance from development standards in other chapters of this title.
    8. Consistent with WAC 173-27-170(5), shoreline variances may not authorize a land use that is otherwise prohibited by this program.
    9. When a shoreline variance is requested, the Hearing Examiner shall be the approval authority for the City. However, shoreline variance permits are subject to review and final approval by the Washington State Department of Ecology per RCW 90.58.140(10) and WAC 173-27-200.
F. Permit Revisions. 
    1. A permit revision is required whenever the applicant proposes substantive changes to the design, terms, or conditions of a project from that which is approved in the permit. Changes are substantive if they materially alter the project in a manner that relates to its conformance to the terms and conditions of the permit, the Shoreline Management Program, and/or the policies and provisions of Chapter 90.58 RCW. Changes that are not substantive in effect do not require approval of a revision. A request to revise a substantial development, conditional use, or variance permit shall be accompanied by detailed plans and text describing the proposed changes to the permit.
    2. If the Planning Director, or designee, determines that the proposed changes are within the scope and intent of the original permit and consistent with the Shoreline Master Program and the Shoreline Management Act, the revision may be approved. Within the scope and intent of the original permit shall mean all of the following:
        a. No additional over-water construction is involved except that pier, dock, or float construction may be increased by five hundred (500) square feet or ten (10) percent from the provisions of the original permit, whichever is less;
        b. Ground area coverage and height may be increased by a maximum of ten (10) percent from the provisions of the original permit;
        c. The revised permit does not authorize development to exceed any standard approved by variance for the original permit;
        d. Additional or revised landscaping is consistent with any conditions of the original permit;
        e. The use authorized with the original permit is not changed; and
        f. No adverse environmental impacts will be caused by the project revision.
    3. If the revision, or the sum of the revision and any previously approved revisions, will violate the criteria specified in subsection (F)(2) of this section, a new shoreline substantial development permit, conditional use permit, or variance, as appropriate, shall be required.
    4. When a shoreline permit revision is requested, the City shall make a decision to approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the request. However, if the original permit involved a conditional use or variance, the revision shall be subject to review and final approval by the Washington State Department of Ecology per WAC 173-27-100. (Ord. 2336, 2018)

14.250.070 Non-Conforming Shoreline Uses and Structures.
A. General Non-Conforming Provisions. 
    1. All legally established uses and structures that do not conform to the requirements of this chapter shall be allowed to continue and remain in the form and location in which they existed prior to the effective date of this chapter.
    2. All non-conforming uses authorized through a conditional use permit and non-conforming structures authorized through a variance shall be considered legal non-conforming uses and structures and the requirements of this section shall apply as they apply to pre-existing non-conformities.
    3. For non-conforming situations not addressed by this chapter, the “Nonconforming use and development standards” in WAC 173-27-080 shall apply.
B. Non-Conforming Uses. 
    1. Uses that were legally established and are non-conforming with regard to the use regulations of this chapter shall not be expanded or intensified, with the exception of non-conforming single-family residential uses that are located landward of the ordinary high water mark.
    2. For the purposes of this chapter, a non‑conformity is intensified if:
        a. The total floor area used by the non-conforming use is increased; or
        b. The amount of floor area used for non‑water-oriented use is increased; or
        c. The amount of floor area used for water-oriented use is decreased.
    3. An existing non‑conforming use may be replaced with another non‑conforming use only upon a finding that:
        a. No reasonable alternative non-conforming use is practical; and
        b. The proposed use will be at least as consistent with the Snohomish Shoreline Master Program and as compatible with the uses in the area as the pre-existing use.
    4. If a non-conforming use is changed to a conforming use, the non-conforming use is abandoned and shall not be resumed.
    5. If a non-conforming use is discontinued for twelve (12) consecutive months the non-conforming rights shall be considered abandoned and subsequent use shall be conforming. The following shall not be included in calculating the period of discontinuance:
        a. Normal seasonal cessation of use; and
        b. Temporary discontinuance of a use for purposes of maintenance or improvements; and
        c. Time when property is being marketed for sale or rent for the same non-conforming use.
C. Non-Conforming Structures. 
    1. Structures that were legally established and are non-conforming with regard to setbacks, height, or buffers described in this program may be maintained and repaired and may be enlarged or expanded; provided, that the enlargement/expansion does not increase the extent of the non‑conformity by further encroaching upon or extending into areas where construction or use would not be allowed for new development or uses.
[IMAGE: <14.250.070.png>]
    2. A non-conforming structure which is moved or relocated either elsewhere on the same parcel or to another shoreland parcel shall be brought as closely as practicable into conformance with this program, the Shoreline Management Act, and any applicable sections of Snohomish Municipal Code.
    3. If a non-conforming structure is damaged or destroyed, it may be reconstructed to the configurations existing immediately prior to the time the development was damaged or destroyed; provided, that application is made for the permits necessary to restore the development within two (2) years of the date the damage occurred.
D. Non-Conforming Lots. A non-conforming lot may be developed if permitted by other land use regulations of the local government and so long as such development conforms to all other requirements of the applicable master program and the Act. (Ord. 2336, 2018)

14.250.080 Shoreline Environments.
A. Purpose. 
    1. The purpose of the individual shoreline environment designations is to provide for different regulations applicable to different shoreline areas in response to the specific shoreline conditions of each area such as geography, hydrology, topography, habitat, infrastructure, and existing and envisioned land uses. The purpose of each designation is as provided in the goals and polices in the City of Snohomish Comprehensive Plan’s shoreline element.
    2. The purpose of the regulations applicable to individual environment designations is to encourage development and land uses that enhance or are compatible with the desired character of the environment while establishing reasonable standards and restrictions so that the environment is not adversely impacted.
B. In order to accomplish the goals, policies, and regulations of the Shoreline Management Act and the Snohomish Shoreline Master Program, the following shoreline environment designations are hereby established:
    1. Aquatic environment.
    2. Rural Utility environment.
    3. Shoreline Residential environment.
    4. Historic Riverfront environment.
    5. Urban Conservancy environment.
C. The shoreline environment designations are depicted on the Shoreline Environment Designation Map within the shoreline element of the Comprehensive Plan and below (Map B). The mapped designations are based upon and implement the designation criteria provided in the shoreline element of the Comprehensive Plan. In the event of conflict between the Shoreline Environment Designation Map and adopted designation criteria, the criteria shall control. Any land located within the shoreline jurisdiction without a shoreline environment designation shall be regulated as Urban Conservancy environment until the Shoreline Environment Designation Map is amended.
D. Shoreline Buffers. 
    1. Shoreline buffers shall be measured perpendicularly to the OHWM. Where wetland buffers also apply as specified by this chapter, the widest buffer width shall be required.
    2. Except on agricultural lands existing on January 1, 2018, buffer restoration to meet the minimum requirements of this chapter may be required for any shoreline conditional use and shall be required as part of a substantial development if any of the following criteria apply:
        a. Removal of improvements within the minimum prescribed buffer whether through intent or natural causes, except where determined to constitute maintenance and repair of existing improvements and except where voluntary partial restoration is proposed to improve the ecological function of the shoreline.
        b. A change of the primary use of the site in combination with construction of new building floor area within the shoreline jurisdiction.
        c. Where disturbance of the existing buffer is unavoidable due to the requirements of the use or activity.
        d. Where required as a condition of approval of a shoreline conditional use or variance.
    3. Where the Planning Director, or designee, determines that ecological benefit of strict compliance with the buffer requirements of this chapter is negligible due to separation of sites from the shoreline by an intervening and lawfully created public road or other existing substantial off-site improvements, an intervening parcel under separate ownership, or a publicly maintained flood levee, requirements for a vegetated buffer may be modified or waived by the Planning Director, or designee, irrespective of prescribed buffer widths. A critical area report may be required to substantiate that a buffer would provide minimal or no ecological benefit.
    4. Within the Rural Utility environment, a one hundred (100) foot shoreline buffer shall be maintained except for utility facilities and where necessary to provide direct shoreline access by water-dependent uses. Except for utility facilities necessary for the operation of a utility and for water-dependent uses within the buffer, no structures shall be closer than ten (10) feet to the buffer boundary.
    5. Within the Urban Conservancy environment, a one hundred (100) foot shoreline buffer and ten (10) foot structural setback from the buffer boundary shall be maintained except:
        a. Where direct shoreline access is necessary for water-dependent uses.
        b. For facilities exclusively designed for public access.
        c. Where existing pavement or other impervious surfaces encroach into the standard shoreline setback. In such cases, no further encroachment shall occur. Redevelopment of parcels with existing buffer encroachments shall maintain the existing vegetated buffer or provide a minimum fifty (50) foot buffer, whichever is greater. In all cases where a buffer less than one hundred (100) feet is proposed, a vegetation management plan shall be submitted and implemented. No structures shall be constructed within ten (10) feet of a buffer boundary.
        d. Where existing levees are maintained. In such cases, management of woody vegetation is permitted where determined by the City or flood control district to be necessary for the integrity and continued function of the levee. Unpaved maintenance roadways are allowed along the top of levees.
    6. Within the Shoreline Residential environment, a fifteen (15) foot shoreline buffer shall be provided and structures and other impervious surfaces shall be set back fifty (50) feet from the shoreline, except as follows:
        a. On a lot containing an existing, legally established residential structure or public recreation use, new structures and impervious surfaces may be located within the setback area without a variance; provided, that if such modification adds more than two hundred (200) square feet of impervious surface within the setback, an equivalent area of the setback shall be enhanced with native vegetation. Where provided, the enhanced area shall abut the OHWM, shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet from any path or structure, except fences, and shall be permanently maintained in native vegetation.
        b. Development of a lot without an existing residential structure or public recreational use may modify the buffer to provide usable area along the shoreline. A buffer so modified shall provide an equivalent in area to a standard buffer and shall abut the OHWM. Impervious surfaces may encroach into the setback; provided, that an equivalent area of buffer is provided in addition to the standard buffer requirement. All designated buffer area shall abut the OHWM, shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet from any path or structure, except fences, and shall be permanently maintained in native vegetation.
    7. Within the Historic Riverfront environment, the regulated buffer shall be that area waterward of the Riverfront Trail, where applicable, and for all other areas shall be the first one hundred (100) feet from the OHWM, except where direct shoreline access is necessary for water-dependent uses or for public access to the shoreline.Map C
[IMAGE: <14.250.080.jpg>]
(Ord. 2336, 2018)

14.250.090 Shoreline Environment – Designation Change.
A. Shoreline environments established by the Shoreline Master Program may be amended by the City Council where the designation change is consistent with the provisions of Chapter 173-26 WAC, Chapter 14.15 SMC, and this chapter.
B. A change in shoreline environment designation shall be processed and considered as an amendment of the Shoreline Master Program and the Comprehensive Plan. In conjunction with the procedural requirements of Chapter 14.15 SMC, the proposed designation change shall conform to the procedural requirements for Shoreline Master Program amendments specified by Chapter 90.58 RCW and Chapter 173-26 WAC.
C. Proposed shoreline environment designation changes shall include information specified by Chapter 14.55 SMC, as determined by the Planning Director, or designee. The application shall include written explanation of how the proposed change satisfies applicable criteria and written justification for such based on existing development patterns, the biophysical capabilities and limitations of the shoreline being considered, and the goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan. (Ord. 2336, 2018)

14.250.100 Development Regulations – General.
A. As provided by WAC 173-26-186(8), land development, land uses, and modifications within the shoreline jurisdiction shall not result in a net loss of shoreline ecological functions and processes. Mitigation for impacts resulting from development, uses, and modifications shall comply with the priorities specified in the shoreline restoration plan and Appendices C, E and F of the City of Snohomish Shoreline Master Program.
B. Maximum structure height in the shoreline jurisdiction areas shall be thirty-five (35) feet, except in the following circumstances:
    1. Bridges located in any shoreline environment may exceed thirty-five (35) feet.
    2. In the Historic Riverfront environment, structure height for buildings fronting on First Street shall not exceed forty (40) feet.
C. For work at or below the ordinary high water mark, a field determination of the ordinary high water mark shall be made no more than one year prior to submittal of a complete application. The field determination may be subject to verification by the Washington State Department of Ecology.
D. All shoreline uses and developments shall conform to the following standards:
    1. Consistency with the Comprehensive Plan and applicable provisions of the Land Use Development Code.
    2. All shoreline uses and development shall be located, constructed and operated so as to preserve and protect public health, safety and welfare.
    3. All shoreline uses and development shall protect the quality and quantity of surface and ground water. New permits and development shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 15.16 SMC, including the Department of Ecology Stormwater Management Manual for Western Washington, as adopted or hereafter amended.
    4. Shoreline uses and development shall not release solid or liquid waste, oil, hazardous materials, or untreated effluent to any water bodies or shorelands.
    5. The use of chemicals to control invasive aquatic weeds is prohibited, except that milfoil and other aquatic weeds recognized as noxious weeds by the Noxious Weed Control Board of Washington State may be removed using chemicals; provided, that the chemicals are applied by a licensed pesticide applicator and approved for aquatic use.
    6. Heating and cooling equipment shall not be placed in waters of the state.
    7. All shoreline uses and development shall be located, designed, constructed and managed to avoid and minimize adverse impacts to critical areas to the greatest extent practical consistent with the standard in SMC 14.250.330(C).
    8. Land clearing, grading, filling and alteration of natural drainage features and landforms shall be limited to the minimum necessary for development. It shall be the applicants’ responsibility to obtain all required state and federal approvals prior to beginning work within wetlands or below the ordinary high water mark. To the extent practical, native vegetation and native topsoils shall be preserved and reused on site. Areas cleared of vegetation but not developed shall be replanted with appropriate native species as determined by the Planning Director or designee.
    9. Shoreline uses and development shall be located, designed, constructed, and managed to minimize adverse impacts to natural shoreline processes such as water circulation, erosion and accretion.
    10. All shoreline uses and development shall be located and designed to minimize reliance upon shoreline defense and stabilization measures and flood protection works such as bulkheads, bank stabilization, landfills, levees, dikes, groins, jetties or substantial site regrading.
    11. All development in the 100-year floodplain designated on the current flood insurance rate map issued by FEMA shall include an assessment prepared by a qualified professional regarding the potential effects of the project would have on channel migration, and shall incorporate measures to mitigate significant adverse impacts on channel migration.
    12. All debris, overburden and other waste materials from construction shall be disposed of in such a way as to prevent their entry by erosion from drainage, high water or other means into any water body.
    13. Navigation channels shall be kept free of hazardous or obstructing development or uses.
    14. Within shoreline environments, archaeological, historic, and cultural resources shall be assessed and protected as provided below:
        a. Sites with known or suspected resources:
            i. Disturbance of known archaeological sites shall be consistent with applicable state requirements, including Chapters 27.44, 27.53, and 68.50 RCW;
            ii. If a development proposal may adversely impact a known or suspected archaeological, historic, or cultural resource, the Planning Director, or designee, shall require a site inspection or evaluation by a professional archaeologist and shall consult with the Washington State Department of Archaeology and Historic Preservation (DAHP) and affected tribe or tribes; and
            iii. In considering shoreline permits or shoreline exemptions, the Planning Director, or designee, may impose conditions of approval or provide a specified period of time for the Planning Director, or designee, to consult with the DAHP and affected tribes to ensure that resources are properly assessed and protected.
        b. Inadvertent discovery of archaeological, historical, or cultural resources:
            i. Consistent with the provisions of Chapters 27.44, 27.53 and 68.50 RCW, whenever potentially significant archaeological, historical, or cultural resources are discovered in the process of development on shorelines, work on that portion of the development site shall stop immediately and the discovery shall be reported within twenty-four (24) hours to the DAHP and the Planning Director, or designee. The Planning Director, or designee, shall report such discovery to affected tribes; 
            ii. Upon consultation with the DAHP and affected tribes, the Planning Director, or designee, may require the preparation of a historic property assessment by a qualified professional, such as an archaeologist, ethnographer, historic preservation professional, etc., to determine the significance of the discovery in accordance with Chapter 27.53 RCW and Chapter 25-48 WAC. The written historic property assessment shall be provided to the Planning Director, or designee, the DAHP, and affected tribes; and
            iii. Following the review of the historic property assessment and consultation with DAHP and affected tribes, the Planning Director, or designee, may require that a historic property management plan be prepared by a qualified professional archaeologist or other appropriate professional before construction activity is authorized to resume. The historic property management plan may include provisions for public access to the resource area.
    15. Shoreline development on publicly owned land or that is publicly funded shall include improvements to incorporate shoreline public access. (Ord. 2336, 2018)

14.250.110 Use Regulations – General.
A. Within the shoreline jurisdiction, uses shall conform to all applicable provisions of this chapter.
B. In the shoreline jurisdiction of the Snohomish River, a shoreline of statewide significance, preference shall be given, in the following order, to new uses that:
    1. Recognize and protect the statewide interest over local interest;
    2. Preserve the natural character of the shoreline;
    3. Result in long-term over short-term benefit;
    4. Protect the resources and ecology of the shoreline;
    5. Increase public access to publicly owned areas of the shorelines; and
    6. Increase recreational opportunities for the public in the shoreline.
C. For a use to be allowed in the shoreline, it must be a permitted use or conditional use in the underlying land use designation and in this chapter. Within the shoreline jurisdiction, the provisions of this chapter may impose conditions or limitations in addition to those specified by other chapters of this title, Land Use Development Code.
D. Uses not specifically addressed in the shoreline use table may be permitted as conditional uses in the shoreline jurisdiction, provided the use is not otherwise prohibited by the program and the applicant can demonstrate that the use meets the criteria for a shoreline conditional use permit.
E. The shoreline use table provided herein specifies whether a use is permitted, allowed as a conditional use, or is prohibited in the shoreline jurisdiction.
    1. Permitted Use. The letter “P” at the intersection of a column and row indicates that the use specified in that row is permitted in that shoreline environment.
    2. Conditional Use. The letter “C” at the intersection of a column and row indicates that the use specified in that row is allowed only upon the approval of a shoreline conditional use permit. The scope, type, and intensity of the use shall be limited to the terms of the conditional use permit.
    3. Specific Regulations Pertaining to a Use. A number specified with a “P” or “C” corresponds to a particular regulation or limitation provided as a footnote to the table. Additional use-specific regulations are specified in the sections following the shoreline use table.
    4. Prohibited Use. The letter “X” at the intersection of a column and row indicates that the use specified in that row is prohibited in that shoreline environment designation.
    5. Not Applicable. The letters “NA” at the intersection of a column and the row indicate that the use specified in that row is by definition not applicable to that shoreline environment designation, and is not permitted.
F. Utilities, roads, parking areas, and signs associated with development shall be allowed as accessory to the principal use. (Ord. 2336, 2018)

14.250.120 Table 1: Shoreline Uses.
+----------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
|           P – Permitted Use            |                          Shoreline Environment                          |
|     C – Shoreline Conditional Use      |                                                                         |
|           X – Prohibited Use           |                                                                         |
|          NA – Not Applicable           |                                                                         |
+----------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| "                                      |  Historic   |  Shoreline  | Urban Conservancy | Rural Utility | Aquatic |
|                                        | Riverfront1 | Residential |                   |               |         |
+----------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| Agriculture                                                                                                      |
+----------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| Agriculture and agricultural           | P           | P           | P                 | P             | X       |
| sales                                  |             |             |                   |               |         |
+----------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| Agricultural accessory uses,           | P2          | X           | C2                | X             | X       |
| including agri-tourism uses            |             |             |                   |               |         |
+----------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| Feedlots                               | X           | X           | X                 | X             | X       |
+----------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| Aquaculture                            | X           | X           | X                 | X             | C3      |
+----------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| Commercial                                                                                                       |
+----------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| General sales and service              | P4          | X           | P4                | X             | C5      |
+----------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| Eating and drinking establishments     | P4          | X           | P4                | X             | X       |
+----------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| Hotels, motels, and other forms        | P           | X           | P                 | X             | X       |
| of temporary lodging; excludes         |             |             |                   |               |         |
| recreational vehicle parks             |             |             |                   |               |         |
+----------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| Industrial                                                                                                       |
+----------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| Industrial uses, except mining,        | X           | X           | P6                | X             | C6      |
| lumber mills, and log storage          |             |             |                   |               |         |
+----------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| Mining                                 | X           | X           | X                 | X             | X       |
+----------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| Lumber mills and log storage           | X           | X           | C                 | X             | C       |
+----------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| Residential Development                                                                                          |
+----------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| Single-family dwellings                | P7          | P7          | P7                | X             | X       |
+----------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| Multi-family dwellings                 | P7          | X           | P7                | X             | X       |
+----------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| Mobile home park                       | X           | P           | P                 | X             | X       |
+----------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| Group residences                       | P           | P           | P                 | X             | X       |
+----------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| Accessory dwellings                    | P           | P           | P                 | X             | X       |
+----------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| Park/Recreation Uses                                                                                             |
+----------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| Recreational/cultural facilities,      | P8          | P9          | P9                | P10           | P       |
| except boat launches                   |             |             |                   |               |         |
+----------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| Recreational vehicle parks             | X           | X           | X                 | X             | X       |
+----------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| Boat launches and marinas              | P           | P           | P11               | C             | P       |
+----------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| Transportation Uses                                                                                              |
+----------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| Airport/heliport or helistop           | X           | X           | X                 | X             | X       |
+----------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| Facilities for water transportation    | P           | X           | P                 | X             | P       |
| of passengers                          |             |             |                   |               |         |
+----------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| Highway, street, and railroad,         | P12         | P12         | P12               | P12           | P12     |
| except in-water and over-water         |             |             |                   |               |         |
| uses                                   |             |             |                   |               |         |
+----------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| Parking, principal use, except         | X           | X           | X                 | X             | X       |
| vehicle impound and storage            |             |             |                   |               |         |
+----------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| Utilities                                                                                                        |
+----------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| Domestic water production, except      | P13         | P13         | P13               | P13           | NA      |
| in-water uses                          |             |             |                   |               |         |
+----------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| Wastewater treatment, except           | X           | X           | P                 | X             | NA      |
| in-water uses                          |             |             |                   |               |         |
+----------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| Stormwater management, except          | P13         | P13         | P13               | P13           | NA      |
| in-water uses                          |             |             |                   |               |         |
+----------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| Utility facility, except in-water      | P13         | P13         | P13               | P13           | NA      |
| uses                                   |             |             |                   |               |         |
+----------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| Major communication facility           | X           | X           | X                 | X             | X       |
+----------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| In-Water Uses                                                                                                    |
+----------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| In-water municipal water production,   | C14         | C14         | C14               | C14           | C14     |
| in-water wastewater treatment          |             |             |                   |               |         |
+----------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| New dams and new hydroelectric         | X           | X           | X                 | X             | X       |
| generation                             |             |             |                   |               |         |
+----------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| Other in-water utility facilities      | C15         | C15         | C15               | C15           | C15     |
+----------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| In-water and over-water highway        | C16         | C16         | C16               | C16           | C16     |
| and street facilities                  |             |             |                   |               |         |
+----------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| In-water fish and wildlife management, | P17         | P17         | P17               | P17           | P17     |
| except aquaculture                     |             |             |                   |               |         |
+----------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| Public facilities (other than          |  P18        |  P18        |  P18              |  P18          |  P18    |
| above)                                 |             |             |                   |               |         |
+----------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
Footnotes to shoreline use table:
1In addition to the permitted and conditional uses provided for in the shoreline use table, all permitted and conditional uses allowed in the Historic Business District pursuant to Chapter 14.207 SMC, Land Use Tables, shall be allowed in the Historic Riverfront District.
2Where located with and accessory to ongoing agricultural uses, new agri-tourism uses including, but not limited to, lodging or a farm restaurant may be permitted in the shoreline jurisdiction if designed to include patron access to the shoreline.
3Aquaculture shall be located so as not to impede or restrict established commercial navigational lanes, and shall not materially interfere with the normal public use of the water; provided, that unlimited recreational navigation over the water surface shall not be construed as normal public use.
4Commercial uses on parcels that are physically separated from the water by a developed public roadway or a parcel under separate ownership with existing commercial, industrial or residential development shall be subject to the underlying zoning and do not have to be a water-oriented use. For all other parcels:
aWater-oriented commercial uses are permitted.
bNon-water-oriented commercial uses shall be allowed if any one of the following criteria is met:
iThe use is part of a project that includes a water-dependent use and provides a significant public benefit with respect to the Shoreline Management Act’s objectives such as providing public access and/or ecological restoration; or
iiThe capability of the water body adjacent to the site to support a water-dependent commercial use is severely limited; or
iiiThere is not a feasible physical access point between the site and the water body to support a water-oriented use; or
ivThe commercial use will provide a significant public benefit with respect to the Shoreline Management Act’s objectives such as providing public access and/or ecological restoration; or
vThe proposed use or development does not conflict with or displace existing water-oriented uses.
5Commercial development may be located on or over water only if the portion of use that is over water is a water-dependent use.
6Limited to water-dependent or water-related uses.
7Residential development over water is prohibited.
8In the Historic Riverfront environment, only water-oriented, public recreational uses such as parks, docks, and public access trails and facilities may be allowed; provided, that minor, non-water-oriented, accessory uses such as children’s play equipment, picnic tables, or similar equipment may also be allowed if they meet the other requirements of this chapter. All other recreational uses are prohibited in the Historic Riverfront environment.
9Limited to parks, trails, overlooks, and athletic fields, subject to any limitations in this chapter.
10In the Rural Utility environment, water-oriented passive and low-impact recreational uses shall be allowed. All other recreational uses are prohibited.
11Long-term moorage and vehicular boat launches are prohibited on the Pilchuck River.
12Highway, street, and railroad, except in-water and over-water uses, may be permitted where:
aThere is no feasible alternate location;
bThe alternative would result in unreasonable and disproportionate cost; and/or
cThe facility is necessary to serve adjacent shoreline uses.
13Utility facilities may be located within the shoreline jurisdiction if there is no feasible alternative location and where no net loss of shoreline ecological functions will occur. On-site utility features serving a primary use shall be considered a part of and accessory to the primary use.
14Limited to water-dependent facilities/processes.
15May be permitted as conditional use where: a) there is no feasible alternate location; b) the alternative would result in unreasonable and disproportionate cost; or c) the facility is necessary to serve adjacent shoreline uses.
16In-water or over-water transportation facilities may be permitted as conditional use where:
aThere is no feasible upland location;
bThe substantive requirements of Chapter 14.255 SMC are satisfied; and
cThe priorities of the City of Snohomish Shoreline Restoration Plan are addressed in the project’s mitigation plan.
17In-water structures that are part of habitat restoration projects approved by state and federal resource agencies are permitted.
18Public facilities other than utilities and parks as regulated herein may be permitted in the shoreline jurisdiction only if the portion of the facility located in the shoreline is water-dependent.
(Ord. 2336, 2018)

14.250.130 Regulations Specific to Agriculture Uses.
A. No modification to existing, legally established agricultural activities occurring on agricultural lands shall be required for compliance with this chapter. New agricultural activities on land not meeting the definition of agricultural land, conversion of agricultural lands to other uses, and other development on agricultural land that does not meet the definition of agricultural activities shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. In all cases, a substantial development permit shall be required for new nonexempt development.
B. Creation of new agricultural areas and new structures for accessory uses on agricultural lands are subject to the requirements for structure setbacks and critical areas regulations specified by this chapter, and shall be located and designed to ensure no net loss of ecological function.
C. The keeping of animals is subject to the provisions of SMC Title 7.
D. Agricultural plowing and cultivation, where legally established and maintained consistent with all applicable regulations, shall not be regulated as grading. Modification of land contours in a manner that alters drainage patterns, including conversion of areas not currently in cultivation, shall be regulated as grading. (Ord. 2336, 2018)

14.250.140 Regulations Specific to Aquaculture Uses.
A. Applications for new aquaculture facilities or operations shall be accompanied by a report by a qualified biologist on the effects the proposal would have on the ecological functions of the shoreline.
B. Aquaculture structures shall not detract from the aesthetic qualities of the surrounding environment.
C. Floating aquaculture structures are prohibited.
D. In addition to any development establishing a new aquaculture use, the following aquaculture activities require the issuance of a substantial development permit:
    1. Construction and expansion of facilities.
    2. Disposal of solid or liquid wastes such as may result from confined rearing operations for salmon or other aquatic life.
    3. Construction of dikes or the dredging of bottom materials.
    4. The propagation of non-native stocks of aquatic plants and animals.
E. The following operations/activities shall be conducted in a manner consistent with the authorizing substantial development permit and hydrologic project approval (HPA) and applicable provisions of this chapter:
    1. Propagation, cultivation, feeding.
    2. Harvesting; provided, that such harvesting does not result in a significant alteration to the natural ecosystems of the area.
    3. Routine maintenance activities and procedures.
F. Processing of aquaculture products, other than on a tending boat or barge, shall be governed by applicable regulations for industrial uses. (Ord. 2336, 2018)

14.250.150 Regulations Specific to Commercial Uses.
A. Except for commercial structures that are dependent on direct, contiguous access to the water, all commercial structures shall be located outside the shoreline buffer area as provided in this chapter.
B. Applications for commercial development shall include a detailed statement explaining the nature and extent of water orientation of the proposed activity. Such statement shall include:
    1. Nature of the commercial activity;
    2. Need for shoreline frontage (where appropriate); and
    3. Provisions for public visual and/or physical access to the shoreline.
C. New commercial developments and expansions of existing commercial developments shall be designed and constructed so that the site and/or building(s) provide visual or physical public access to the shoreline, except where adequate public access improvements exist between the proposed structures and the water or where the site is separated from the shoreline so that visual or physical access is infeasible. Where required, public access shall be implemented by the following means:
    1. A pedestrian trail with a minimum width of six (6) feet within a public easement located between the development and the water where the improvement and associated public activities can occur without a net loss of ecological function;
    2. A pedestrian overlook accessible by the public that provides shoreline views. An overlook may be incorporated into a building, e.g., as an exterior deck, or may be a separate improvement; or
    3. An alternative measure determined by the Planning Director, or designee, to provide comparable physical or visual public access to the shoreline. (Ord. 2336, 2018)

14.250.160 Regulations Specific to Industrial Uses.
A. Industrial uses in the shoreline shall provide public visual and/or physical access to the shoreline, or public access improvements in accordance with the regulations specific to commercial uses contained in SMC 14.250.150.
B. Outdoor storage areas shall be designed in accordance with Chapter 15.16 SMC and the Snohomish Engineering Design and Construction Standards.
C. The following regulations shall apply to lumber mills and forestry uses:
    1. Except where no practical alternative exists, log storage shall occur on land.
    2. Log storage shall not be permitted in waters of the state where water quality standards cannot be met or where log storage precludes the public’s use and navigation of waters of the state.
    3. Free-fall dropping of logs into water is prohibited.
    4. Bark and wood debris from mill operations shall be kept out of water bodies.
    5. Logs shall not be dumped, stored, or floated in areas where grounding will occur. (Ord. 2336, 2018)

14.250.170 Regulations Specific to Residential Uses.
A. Applications for subdivisions and short subdivisions for land within the shoreline jurisdiction shall include the following information (in addition to the application materials required by Chapters 14.55 and 14.215 SMC):
    1. Detailed statement (graphic and textual) of any proposed alteration of the natural character of the shoreline.
    2. Provisions for lot owner access to the water body (for shoreline lots).
    3. Provisions for public access to the shoreline as required by this chapter.
    4. Delineation of the channel migration zone upon the plat, if applicable, and demonstration that shoreline stabilization or structural flood control measures will not be necessary.
    5. Demonstration that the design, configuration, and development of the subdivision or short subdivision at full build-out of all the lots will result in no net loss of ecological function.
    6. Demonstration that the subdivision or short subdivision is consistent with the underlying shoreline environment designation criteria and management policies.
    7. Demonstration that the subdivision or short subdivision is consistent with the requirements of WAC 173-26-241(3)(j).
B. All critical areas and/or buffers shall be placed in a critical area tract or conservation easement, the purpose of which is to set aside and protect the critical area. The delineation of critical areas and their buffers shall be shown on the final recorded plat.
C. Residential accessory structures shall meet the following standards:
    1. Below-grade swimming pools shall be sited and designed so that they do not adversely affect the flow of groundwater or endanger unstable slopes.
    2. Accessory structures shall be sited to preserve visual access to the shoreline from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way to the maximum extent practical.
    3. Non-water-dependent accessory structures and facilities such as sheds, gazebos, swimming pools, and driveways shall not be located in shoreline buffer areas.
    4. Stairs and paths to a dock or beach may be allowed in the shoreline buffer areas, but shall be limited to the minimum necessary to provide pedestrian access.
D. Subdivisions of more than four (4) lots and new multi-unit development of more than four (4) residential units shall provide public pedestrian access to the shorelines, unless physical access to the shoreline is not feasible due to the presence of regulated critical areas such as wetlands or steep slopes. Where public access is not feasible, improvements to existing public access in the vicinity may be required in lieu of on-site public access.
E. New residential lots created adjacent to Blackmans Lake shall provide for common or shared dock(s) in lieu of individual docks for each lot. (Ord. 2336, 2018)

14.250.180 Regulations Specific to Recreation and Cultural Uses .
Lighting of outdoor facilities within the shoreline environment shall be designed and configured to avoid light spill into regulated critical areas and their buffers or onto adjacent properties. Where light spill cannot be avoided, such lighting shall be the minimum necessary to achieve the intended purpose. (Ord. 2336, 2018)

14.250.190 Regulations Specific to Boat Launches and Marinas.
A. Boat launches, marinas, and similar uses shall be designed and operated so that there is no net loss of ecological function within the shoreline jurisdiction. Restoration and enhancement of critical habitat areas and/or native growth protection areas, preferably within the same catchment, shall be required to compensate for unavoidable adverse impacts upon ecological functions.
B. Boat launches and marinas shall be sited and designed to protect rights of navigation upon navigable waters.
C. Boat launches and marinas shall not alter river currents such that adverse impacts would occur downstream. Boat launches and marinas shall be designed to meet criteria by the State Department of Fish and Wildlife relative to disruption of currents, restriction of tidal prisms, flushing characteristics, and fish passage.
D. Marinas shall have facilities for handling wastes typically generated by marina patrons and visitors. Marinas shall not discharge or release any waste, treated or untreated, into the body of water on which they are located. Oil and gas handling systems shall be designed to minimize potential oil and gas spills. Marinas shall have provisions for containment and cleanup of such spills.
E. Floating homes and live-aboards are prohibited.
F. Marinas shall be designed to include native vegetation where feasible and practical.
G. Marinas shall be designed to provide public access to the shoreline wherever feasible and practical.
H. Structures for accessory uses that are not water dependent shall not be located over water.
I. Parking for boat launches and marinas shall be located upland of shoreline buffer areas.
J. Vehicular access to a boat launch located within a critical area buffer or habitat conservation area shall be the minimum size necessary to provide safe maneuvering of vehicles. (Ord. 2336, 2018)

14.250.200 Regulations Specific to Transportation and Parking.
A. Non-water-dependent transportation uses, including accessory parking, that cannot be located outside of the shoreland area shall be located as far landward as possible. Parking facilities in shorelines are not a preferred use and shall be allowed only as necessary to support an authorized use.
B. Major roads and railroads shall cross shoreland areas by the shortest, most direct route feasible, unless such route would cause significant adverse environmental impacts.
C. Highway, street and railroad infrastructure that must be located in or over water, such as bridges and bridge supports, may be permitted; provided, that the substantive critical areas requirements of this chapter (SMC 14.250.330) are satisfied, and the priorities of the City of Snohomish Shoreline Restoration Plan are addressed in designing mitigation for project impacts.
D. Applications for installation of transportation facilities shall include the following (at a minimum):
    1. Purpose and need for the project;
    2. Demonstration that the facility is not feasible in a location outside the shoreline area;
    3. Location of other transportation facilities in the project vicinity;
    4. Proposed method(s) of construction;
    5. Plans for restoration of areas disturbed during construction;
    6. Mitigation plan for impacts to ecological functions of the shoreline; and
    7. Landscape plan.
E. Bridge abutments of earthen fill shall not be located within an area of special flood hazard as delineated on Flood Insurance Rate Maps issued by FEMA.
F. Transportation uses and facilities shall be designed to avoid or minimize placement of fill or structures that would restrict floodplain capacity or limit channel migration. Where transportation uses or facilities are proposed within floodplains, floodways, or channel migration zones, the proposal shall conform to the substantive critical areas requirements of this chapter (SMC 14.250.330) and Chapter 14.270 SMC.
G. New roads and off-street parking facilities shall be located where new shoreline stabilization is not required.
H. New off-street parking shall be located outside of required shoreline and critical area buffers.
I. Parking facilities over water shall not be permitted.
J. Exterior lighting for parking areas shall be designed to avoid or minimize light spill into regulated critical areas and their buffers. (Ord. 2336, 2018)

14.250.210 Regulations Specific to Utilities.
A. Where feasible, utility facilities shall be located in existing rights-of-way or in existing utility corridors.
B. Where feasible, utility lines and facilities outside of existing rights-of-way or utility corridors shall be located underground unless long-term environmental benefit is demonstrated through use of aerial utility lines.
C. Utility transmission and distribution infrastructure that cannot be located below ground or outside the shoreline jurisdiction shall be located as far landward as feasible to preserve public views.
D. Utility facilities shall avoid and minimize crossing of water bodies and wetlands to the greatest extent feasible.
E. Applications for installation of utility facilities shall include the following (at a minimum):
    1. Reason the facility must be located in a shoreline area;
    2. Alternative locations considered and reasons for their elimination;
    3. Location of other utility facilities in the project vicinity;
    4. Proposed method(s) of construction;
    5. Plans for restoration of areas disturbed during construction; and
    6. Plans for landscaping/screening.
F. Minor communication facilities may be allowed subject to a determination that significant shoreline views will not be obstructed or impaired.
G. Stream crossings for utilities shall:
    1. Use the best available technology and practices to protect health, safety, and the environment;
    2. Avoid critical habitat to the greatest extent feasible;
    3. If crossing beneath a river or stream, utilities shall be designed to avoid river bed/stream bed mobilization and adverse environmental impacts in general. Such utility lines shall be placed in a sleeve or conduit to facilitate replacement without additional boring or excavation; and
    4. Mitigate adverse impacts to shoreline ecological functions.
H. Banks and dikes where utility facilities enter or leave a body of water shall be restored to the extent feasible, shall be protected against erosion, and shall be maintained by the utility.
I. Stormwater and sewage outfalls may be permitted in shoreline environments in accordance with the substantive critical areas requirements of this chapter (SMC 14.250.330) and state and federal regulations.
J. Water intakes shall comply with Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife fish screening criteria. (Ord. 2336, 2018)

14.250.220 Regulations Specific to In-Water Structural Uses.
A. In-water structural uses may be permitted provided they conform to the substantive critical areas requirements of this chapter (SMC 14.250.330) and the priorities of the shoreline restoration plan are addressed in designing measures to mitigate project impacts. It shall be the applicants’ responsibility to obtain all required state and federal approvals for work below the ordinary high water mark.
B. Applications for installation of in-water utility facilities shall include the following (at a minimum):
    1. Justification that the facility must be located in a shoreline area;
    2. Alternative locations considered and reasons for their elimination;
    3. Location of other utility facilities in the project vicinity;
    4. Proposed method(s) of construction; and
    5. Plans for restoration of areas disturbed during construction. (Ord. 2336, 2018)

14.250.230 Regulations Specific to Public Facilities.
Applications for installation of government facilities shall include the following (at a minimum):
A. Justification that the facility must be located in a shoreline area;
B. Alternative locations considered and reasons for their elimination;
C. Proposed method(s) of construction; and
D. Plans for restoration of areas disturbed during construction. (Ord. 2336, 2018)

14.250.240 Regulations Specific to Public Access.
A. Except as provided in this section, public access may be required for public projects and development on public lands, commercial uses, industrial uses, marinas, multifamily developments of more than four (4) residential units, and residential subdivisions containing more than four (4) lots. Where public access is required, it shall:
    1. Where feasible, connect to other public and private public access and recreation facilities on adjacent parcels along the Snohomish River and Pilchuck River shorelines;
    2. Be sited and designed to promote public safety;
    3. Be open to the general public and accessible from a public right-of-way or public access easement; and
    4. Enhance access and enjoyment of the water body or shoreline and provide one (1) or more features from the following options, listed by preference. Applicants shall justify a lower-preference option:
        a. Public open space allowing unobstructed physical access to or near the water’s edge;
        b. Improved pathways in easements for pedestrians and bicyclists where no structures are located between the trail and the water;
        c. Beach or water access improvements for boats, such as launch facilities for small craft, touch-and-go docks, or temporary moorage, where public use is reasonably likely;
        d. Improved seating area with benches and picnic tables affording water views unobstructed by structures on the same parcel; and/or
        e. Platforms or similar improvements providing view points of the water or immediate shoreline habitat;
    5. Be sited and designed to minimize impacts to native habitat, critical areas and buffers.
B. Where public access is required, the area dedicated and improved for public access shall be roughly proportional to the scale of the proposed development and its impacts in accordance with applicable state and federal law.
C. Trails and other public access improvements are subject to the substantive critical areas requirements of this chapter (SMC 14.250.330) and standards for recreational uses provided herein.
D. The provisions of this section do not apply:
    1. Where public access is determined by the Planning Director, or designee, to be infeasible or impractical due to incompatible uses, safety, security, steep topography, the location or configuration of existing structures, or impact to the shoreline environment; and
    2. To commercial development which abuts the Riverfront Trail. (Ord. 2336, 2018)

14.250.250 Regulations Specific to Signs.
A. All signs located within the shoreline jurisdiction shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 14.245 SMC, Sign Regulations.
B. Except noncommercial signs related to public safety, signs shall be prohibited waterward of the ordinary high water mark.
C. Light and glare from illuminated signs shall be shielded or directed away from adjacent properties, habitat, and the water.
D. In approving a sign permit, the Planning Director, or designee, may impose conditions as necessary to ensure consistency with the Shoreline Management Act and the Shoreline Master Program. (Ord. 2336, 2018)

14.250.260 Shoreline Modifications – General.
A. A shoreline modification proposal may only be permitted if associated with a new development or redevelopment proposal as allowed by the underlying land use regulations and by this chapter.
B. Each category of shoreline modification is subject to the regulations for that modification, as provided by this chapter.
C. The shoreline modifications table provided in the following section specifies whether a shoreline modification is permitted, may be conditionally allowed, or is prohibited. Conditionally allowed modifications must satisfy the criteria for shoreline conditional uses, and are processed as a conditional use permit. A number following a “P” or “C” corresponds with an additional provision or limitation provided in the table footnotes. Additional regulations specific to shoreline modifications are provided in the sections following the shoreline modification table. (Ord. 2336, 2018)

14.250.270 Table 2: Shoreline Modifications .
+-------------------------------------+------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
|                 KEY                 |                         Shoreline Environment                          |
|     P – Permitted Modification      |                                                                        |
|    C – Conditional Modification     |                                                                        |
|     X – Prohibited Modification     |                                                                        |
|         NA – Not Applicable         |                                                                        |
|                                     |                                                                        |
|     Shoreline modifications may     |                                                                        |
|     be authorized only as part      |                                                                        |
|         of a permitted use.         |                                                                        |
+-------------------------------------+------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| "                                   |  Historic  |  Shoreline  | Urban Conservancy | Rural Utility | Aquatic |
|                                     | Riverfront | Residential |                   |               |         |
+-------------------------------------+------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| Shoreline Stabilization                                                                                      |
+-------------------------------------+------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| Shoreline stabilization facilities1 | P2         | P2          | P2                | P2            | C2      |
+-------------------------------------+------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| Repair or replacement shoreline     | P3         | P3          | P3                | P3            | P3      |
| stabilization facilities1           |            |             |                   |               |         |
+-------------------------------------+------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| Flood protection facilities1        | P2         | C2          | P2                | C2            | C2      |
+-------------------------------------+------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| Filling, Grading, and Dredging                                                                               |
+-------------------------------------+------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| Grading upon shorelands1            | P          | P           | P                 | P             | NA      |
+-------------------------------------+------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| Filling (waterward of OHWM)         | C          | C           | C                 | C             | C       |
| 1                                   |            |             |                   |               |         |
+-------------------------------------+------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| Dredging1                           | P          | P           | P                 | P             | P       |
+-------------------------------------+------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| Disposal of dredge material1        | P          | P           | P                 | P             | P       |
+-------------------------------------+------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| Piers and docks1                    | P4         | P4          | P4                | X             | P4      |
+-------------------------------------+------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| Breakwaters, jetties, groins        | C5         | C5          | C5                | C5            | C5      |
| and weirs1                          |            |             |                   |               |         |
+-------------------------------------+------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
| Shoreline habitat and natural       | P          | P           | P                 | P             | P       |
| systems enhancement projects1       |            |             |                   |               |         |
+-------------------------------------+------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------+---------+
Footnotes to shoreline modifications table:
1Work waterward of the ordinary high water mark and within wetlands requires state and federal authorization in addition to local approval. It shall be the applicants’ responsibility to obtain all required state and federal approvals for work below the ordinary high water mark.
2Shoreline stabilization, including bulkheads and flood protection facilities, may be permitted where such measures are necessary to protect existing legally established primary structures, public improvements, proposed or existing water-dependent development and restoration/mitigation improvements and when consistent with WAC 173-26-231(3)(a)(iii).
3An existing, legally established shoreline stabilization structure may be replaced or augmented where needed to protect primary structures from erosion caused by currents, tidal action, or waves.
4New docks and piers shall be:
aAllowed only for public access or water-dependent uses, including as accessory uses to single-family residences;
bRestricted to the minimum size necessary to serve a proposed water-dependent use; and
cPermitted only when specific need is demonstrated, except for docks accessory to single-family residences.
5Breakwaters, jetties, groins and weirs shall only be permitted where necessary to support water-dependent uses, public access, approved shoreline stabilization, or other public uses, as determined by the Planning Director, or designee. No conditional use permit is required for those structures installed to protect or restore ecological functions, such as woody debris installed in streams.
(Ord. 2336, 2018)

14.250.280 Regulations Specific to Shoreline Stabilization.
A. Shoreline stabilization shall be designed and constructed to avoid adverse impacts affecting downstream banks.
B. New shoreline stabilization shall not preclude river channel migration within the floodway.
C. Shoreline stabilization shall be designed and constructed consistent with the critical areas report required by SMC 14.250.330(A)(5). Where possible, shoreline vegetation shall be preserved.
D. In addition to the required permit application materials required by other sections of this title, the applicant shall provide the following materials under the stamp of a qualified professional engineer:
    1. Description of project’s purpose and scope.
    2. Description of the hydraulic characteristics of the water body within one-half (1/2) mile of the proposed project, before and after the stabilization/protection project.
    3. Description of existing shoreline stabilization within one-half (1/2) mile of the proposed project.
    4. Proposed construction materials and methods.
E. Using studies by qualified professionals, including a geotechnical analysis and a field determination of the ordinary high water mark done no more than one (1) year before submittal of a complete application, the applicant shall demonstrate the following:
    1. That the structure is in danger from shoreline erosion from tidal action, waves or currents, including a description of the damage or loss that is expected to occur if stabilization is not provided, and a timeframe within which such damage or loss is anticipated to occur.
    2. Erosion is not caused by upland conditions on the project site that, if corrected, would eliminate the need for shoreline stabilization;
    3. The proposal is the minimum necessary to protect existing legally established structures; existing water-dependent development; or achieve restoration of ecological functions.
    4. Except for the protection of the shoreline requiring stabilization, the effect on natural fluvial, hydrological, and geomorphological processes will be minimized.
    5. Mitigation measures will maintain or augment shoreline processes and critical fish and wildlife habitat so that no net loss of function of riparian habitat will occur.
    6. Shoreline stabilization shall minimize the adverse impact to other properties to the maximum extent practical.
    7. Shoreline stabilization shall not interfere with surface or subsurface drainage into the water body or to or from wetlands.
F. Replacement of an existing shoreline stabilization structure that can no longer adequately serve its purpose may be permitted without a determination of imminent need subject to the following:
    1. The replacement structure shall be designed, located, sized, and constructed to ensure no net loss of ecological functions;
    2. Replacement of walls or solid bulkheads shall not encroach waterward of the OHWM or existing structure unless protecting a residence that was occupied prior to January 1, 1992, and there are overriding safety or environmental concerns. In such cases, the replacement structure shall abut the existing shoreline stabilization structure;
    3. Where stabilization would extend waterward of the OHWM, distance shall be the minimum necessary to preserve the stabilization function.
G. New hardened shoreline stabilization shall not be permitted unless the analysis confirms that there is a significant possibility that the upland structure will be damaged within three (3) years in the absence of hardened stabilization measures; or unless the analysis confirms that waiting until the need is immediate will foreclose on the opportunity to use measures that avoid impacts on ecological functions.
H. Shoreline stabilization shall not be used to create new shoreland area.
I. Material that may release hazardous substances shall not be used for shoreline stabilization.
J. Shoreline stabilization shall be designed so as not to constitute a hazard to navigation.
K. Shoreline stabilization shall be designed so as not to create a need for shoreline stabilization elsewhere.
L. Shoreline stabilization measures shall not be allowed within any designated floodway except as may be necessary to protect existing development or prevent serious impairment of channel function.
M. Shoreline stabilization measures shall be consistent with the Integrated Stream Protection Guidelines (Washington Departments of Fish and Wildlife, Ecology, and Transportation, 2003). (Ord. 2336, 2018)

14.250.290 Regulations Specific to Flood Protection.
A. Flood protection facilities shall be consistent with the provisions of Chapter 14.270 SMC, the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP), and the Integrated Stream Protection Guidelines (Washington Departments of Fish and Wildlife, Ecology, and Transportation, 2003).
B. Flood control dikes shall be landward of the designated floodway and any shoreline associated wetlands. (Ord. 2336, 2018)

14.250.300 Regulations Specific to Grading, Filling, Dredging, and the Disposal of Dredge Material.
A. Grading, dredging, and filling shall be located, designed, and conducted to protect shoreline ecological functions and ecosystem-wide processes, including channel migration, and mitigation shall employ the mitigation sequence specified by Chapter 14.255 SMC.
B. Grading, dredging, dredge material disposal and filling shall be consistent with Chapter 14.270 SMC.
C. Fill may be permitted below the ordinary high water mark only:
    1. When necessary to support a water-dependent use;
    2. To provide for public access;
    3. When necessary to mitigate conditions that endanger public safety, including flood risk reduction projects;
    4. To allow for cleanup and disposal of contaminated sediments as part of an interagency environmental cleanup plan;
    5. To allow for the disposal of dredged material considered suitable under, and conducted in accordance with, the Dredged Material Management Program of the Washington Department of Natural Resources;
    6. For expansion or alteration of transportation or utility facilities currently located on the shoreline upon demonstration that alternatives to fill are not feasible; or
    7. As part of mitigation actions, environmental restoration projects and habitat enhancement projects.
D. Dredging and disposal of dredged material below the ordinary high water mark shall be permitted only:
    1. When necessary for the operation of a water-dependent use;
    2. When necessary to mitigate conditions that endanger public safety or fisheries resources;
    3. For establishing, maintaining, expanding, relocating or reconfiguring navigation channels and basins when necessary to ensure safe and efficient accommodation of existing navigation uses where:
        a. Significant ecological impacts are minimized and mitigation is provided;
        b. The substantive requirements of Chapter 14.255 SMC are satisfied; and
        c. Dredging is maintained to the authorized location, depth and width;
    4. For restoration projects associated with implementation of the Model Toxics Control Act or the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act; or any enhancement or restoration project;
    5. For flood risk reduction projects conducted in accordance with Chapter 14.270 SMC.
E. Dredging and dredge material disposal shall be performed in a manner which avoids or minimizes significant ecological impacts. Impacts that cannot be avoided should be mitigated in a manner that assures no net loss of shoreline ecological functions.
F. Maintenance dredging of established navigation channels and basins should be restricted to maintaining previously dredged and/or authorized location, depth, and width.
G. Dredging is not allowed waterward of the ordinary high water mark for the primary purpose of obtaining fill material except where the material is necessary for the restoration of ecological functions. Where permitted, the site where the fill is to be placed must be located waterward of the OHWM and the action must be required for an approved habitat enhancement project.
H. Disposal of dredged material shall be allowed only in approved disposal sites.
I. Stockpiling of dredged material in wetlands and habitat conservation areas and their associated buffers, and in or under water, is prohibited.
J. No dredging may commence in any shoreline environment without the responsible person having first obtained either a substantial development permit or a determination of exemption.
K. The removal of gravel for flood management is allowed only after biological and geomorphological studies show that extraction has a long-term benefit to flood hazard reduction, results in no net loss of ecological functions, and is part of a comprehensive flood management solution.
L. Dredging in or the disposal of dredge spoils on known archaeological sites is prohibited unless approved in writing by the Department of Archaeology and Historic Preservation in consultation with any affected tribes.
M. Applications for dredging permits shall include the following information (at a minimum):
    1. Physical analysis of material to be dredged: material composition and amount, grain size, organic materials present, source of material, etc.;
    2. Chemical analysis of material to be dredged: volatile solids, chemical oxygen demand (COD), grease and oil content, mercury, lead and zinc content, etc.;
    3. Biological analysis of material to be dredged;
    4. Information on stability of bedlands adjacent to proposed dredging and spoils disposal;
    5. Dredging procedure: time of dredging, method of dredging, and spoils disposal; and
    6. Dredge spoils disposal area: location, size, capacity, and physical characteristics.
N. New dredging projects shall, in addition to the above, provide the following information with their application:
    1. Total initial spoils volume;
    2. Frequency and quantity of project maintenance dredging;
    3. Area proposed for initial spoils disposal; and
    4. Provisions for long-term/ongoing disposal of maintenance spoils.
O. Applications for dredge spoils disposal sites shall include the following, whether in the City of Snohomish shoreline jurisdiction or elsewhere:
    1. Disposal site area and final depth of spoils;
    2. Methods to control water quality from spoils, including a perimeter dike or similar control system, and methods of ingress and egress from the spoils site that will not result in off-site water quality impacts;
    3. A landscaping plan providing landscape screening and erosion control during the period of disposal; and
    4. A description of the ultimate use of the site after spoil disposal is complete.
P. New development shall be sited and designed to avoid the need for new and maintenance dredging. (Ord. 2336, 2018)

14.250.310 Regulations Specific to Breakwaters, Jetties, Groins and Weirs.
A. Breakwaters, jetties, groins, and weirs located waterward of the ordinary high water mark shall be allowed only where necessary to support water-dependent uses, public access, shoreline stabilization, or other specific public purpose.
B. Applications for breakwaters, jetties, groins and weirs shall provide (at a minimum) the following information:
    1. Purpose of project;
    2. Construction material; 
    3. Method of construction;
    4. Analysis of shoreline conditions demonstrating the need for the project;
    5. Assessment of the expected effects of the project on ecological functions of the shoreline; and
    6. A mitigation plan demonstrating no net loss of ecological functions in the shoreline.
C. Applications for groins shall also include the source and destination of material proposed to be trapped by the groin(s).
D. Breakwaters shall meet or exceed all design requirements of the State Department of Fish and Wildlife.
E. Jetties and groins shall not result in a net adverse effect upon nearby beaches. (Ord. 2336, 2018)

14.250.320 Regulations Specific to Docks and Piers.
A. Shoreline subdivisions vested with complete application after the effective date of this chapter, temporary lodging, and multifamily uses shall be served by no more than one (1) joint use dock.
B. Docks, piers, long-term moorage, and vehicular boat launches are prohibited on the Pilchuck River.
C. No dock, pier, moorage, buoy, float or launching facility authorized by this chapter shall interfere with safe navigation, or normal public use of the water. All such facilities shall be located and managed in a manner that minimizes impacts to aquatic habitat.
D. Applications for piers and docks on the Snohomish River shall include an assessment of impacts on anadromous salmon habitat, and a mitigation plan addressing any impacts expected from the project. Compensatory mitigation shall be provided for impacts that cannot be avoided through design and siting.
E. Prior to issuance of a permit for a pier or dock on the Snohomish River, the applicant shall provide evidence of all required state and federal permits.
F. Boat lifts may be approved by conditional use permit with a demonstration that no net loss of ecological functions or significant impacts to shoreline views will occur.
G. Docks and piers serving residential uses shall be subject to the requirements of subsections F through I of this section, or shall demonstrate that the project provides an equal or greater degree of protection of ecological functions and anadromous species habitat. For the purposes of meeting this requirement, the Planning Director, or designee, may require a critical area report to determine whether the project is adequately protective.
H. Except as otherwise provided in this section, only one (1) dock, pier, moorage, buoy, float, or launching facility may be permitted for each parcel developed with a single-family dwelling, and only if the applicant demonstrates there is no other feasible option for shared use facilities.
I. New residential development of two (2) or more adjacent lots or two (2) or more residential units shall have no more than one (1) dock and shall allow for joint use rather than one (1) dock for each unit, unless demonstrated to be infeasible.
J. Skirting is prohibited on any pier or dock.
K. Water surface coverage by docks (defined by the outside dimensions of all over-water portions of the floats, ramps, and ells, regardless of surface materials used) shall be limited as follows:
    1. A dock serving only one (1) residential waterfront lot shall not exceed four hundred eighty (480) square feet;
    2. A dock serving two (2) residential waterfront lots shall not exceed seven hundred (700) square feet; and
    3. A dock serving three (3) or more residential waterfront lots shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet.
L. Wood treated with toxic compounds shall not be used for decking, pilings, or other in-water components. Tires shall not be used on moorage facilities. Foam material may be used if fully encapsulated.
M. No private moorage or other structure waterward of the ordinary high water mark, including structures attached thereto, shall be closer than twelve (12) feet to any adjacent property line except when there is a mutual agreement of adjoining property owners.
N. No covered dock, pier, covered moorage, covered float, or other covered structure is permitted waterward of the ordinary high water mark. (Ord. 2336, 2018)

14.250.330 Critical Areas in Shoreline Jurisdiction.
A. General. 
    1. The provisions and regulations of Chapters 14.255 SMC, Critical Areas; 14.265 SMC, Critical Aquifer Recharge Areas; 14.270 SMC, Flood Hazard Areas; and 14.275 SMC, Geologically Hazardous Areas shall be applicable to development within the shoreline jurisdiction except as exempted in SMC 14.250.020 or as may be modified in this section. If the provisions of any of those chapters conflict with this chapter, or any part of the Shoreline Management Program, the provisions of this chapter and the program shall prevail.
    2. The provisions and regulations of SMC 14.260.040, 14.280.050, and 14.280.060 are not applicable within the shoreline jurisdiction.
    3. Activities that are exempt from Chapters14.255, 14.265, 14.270, and 14.275 SMC shall comply with this chapter. Such activities may require a shoreline letter of exemption, shoreline substantial development permit, shoreline variance or shoreline conditional use permit consistent with the provisions of this chapter.
    4. The variance and reasonable use provisions of SMC 14.255.020, 14.255.120 and 14.255.130 shall not apply to development in the shoreline jurisdiction. Projects that propose to vary from the standards of this chapter, including the critical areas, bulk, dimensional, and performance standards of Chapters14.255 through 14.280 SMC, incorporated by reference, shall require a shoreline variance according to the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 173-27 WAC.
    5. Critical area reports shall be provided consistent with requirements of SMC 14.255.080.
B. No Net Loss. 
    1. To ensure there is no net loss in shoreline ecological functions from the current conditions, proposed development in the shoreline jurisdiction must be designed to avoid impacting the environment.
    2. If avoidance is not feasible then the development must be designed to minimize the impacts and compensate for them.
    3. To ensure there is no net loss in shoreline ecological functions resulting from any individual development proposal where avoidance of environmental impacts was not feasible, the Director may require applicants to provide a special analysis that:
        a. Describes the options that were considered to avoid impacts but were determined to be not feasible;
        b. Demonstrates how the design of the project minimizes the effect of any unavoidable impacts; and
        c. Shows how proposed mitigation measures will adequately compensate for the negative impacts.
C. Mitigation Sequencing. 
    1. Adverse environmental impacts shall be avoided if feasible. Where not feasible to completely avoid environmental impacts, mitigation measures shall be applied in the following sequence of steps, in order of priority:
        a. Avoiding the impact altogether by not taking a certain action or parts of an action;
        b. Minimizing impacts by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action and its implementation by using appropriate technology or by taking affirmative steps to avoid or reduce impacts;
        c. Rectifying the impact by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the affected environment;
        d. Reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation and maintenance operations;
        e. Compensating for the impact by replacing, enhancing, or providing substitute resources or environments;
        f. Monitoring the impact and the compensation projects and taking appropriate corrective measures.
    2. Lower priority measures shall be applied only where higher priority measures are determined to be infeasible or inapplicable.
    3. Application of the mitigation measures must achieve no net loss of ecological functions for each development and shall not result in required mitigation in excess of that necessary to assure that the development will result in no net loss of shoreline ecological functions.
    4. When compensatory measures are appropriate pursuant to the mitigation priority sequence above, preferential consideration shall be given to measures that replace the impacted functions directly and in the immediate vicinity of the impact. However, alternative compensatory mitigation within the watershed that addresses limiting factors or identified critical needs for shoreline resource conservation based on watershed or comprehensive resource management plans applicable to the area of impact may be authorized.
D. Wetlands. 
    1. Wetlands shall be designated in accordance with the approved federal wetland delineation manual and applicable regional supplements as set forth in WAC 173-22-035.
    2. Wetlands shall be rated according to the Washington State Department of Ecology wetland rating system found in the 2014 Washington State Wetland Rating System for Western Washington (Ecology Publication No. 14-06-029). Wetlands shall be rated based on categories that reflect the functions and values of each wetland, with categories based on the criteria provided in the 2014 Washington State Wetland Rating System for Western Washington, as follows:
        a. Category I Wetlands. Category I wetlands are those wetlands of exceptional value in terms of protecting water quality, storing flood and stormwater, and/or providing habitat for wildlife as indicated by a rating system score of twenty-three (23) points or more. These are wetland communities of infrequent occurrence that often provide documented habitat for sensitive, threatened or endangered species, and/or have other attributes that are very difficult or impossible to replace if altered.
        b. Category II Wetlands. Category II wetlands have significant value based on their function as indicated by a rating system score of twenty (20) to twenty-two (22) points. They do not meet the criteria for Category I rating but occur infrequently and have qualities that are difficult to replace if altered.
        c. Category III Wetlands. Category III wetlands have important resource value as indicated by a rating system score of between sixteen (16) and nineteen (19) points.
        d. Category IV Wetlands. Category IV wetlands are wetlands of limited resource value as indicated by a rating system score of less than sixteen (16) points. They typically have vegetation of similar age and class, lack special habitat features, and/or are isolated or disconnected from other aquatic systems or high quality upland habitats.
    3. Wetland buffer width standards within SMC 14.260.040 shall be superseded by the following:
        a. Wetland buffers identified in Table 3: Standard Wetland Buffer Widths are based on the category of wetland and the habitat score as determined by a qualified wetland professional using the required wetland rating system. Wetland buffers have been established in accordance with the best available science.
        +------------------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
        |                        | Buffer width (in feet) based on habitat score |
        +------------------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
        |    Wetland Category    |    3-4    |     5     |    6-7    |    8-9    |
        +------------------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
        | Category I:            | 75        | 105       | 165       | 225       |
        |      Based on total    |           |           |           |           |
        | score                  |           |           |           |           |
        +------------------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
        | Category I:            | 190                               | 225       |
        |      Bogs and Wetlands |                                   |           |
        | of High Conservation   |                                   |           |
        | Value                  |                                   |           |
        +------------------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
        | Category I:            | 75        | 105       | 165       | 225       |
        |      Forested          |           |           |           |           |
        +------------------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
        | Category II:           | 75        | 105       | 165       | 225       |
        |      Based on score    |           |           |           |           |
        +------------------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
        | Category III (all)     | 60        | 105       | 165       | 225       |
        +------------------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
        | Category IV (all)      | 40                                            |
        +------------------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
        b. The use of the standard buffer widths requires the implementation of the measures in Table 4: Required Measures to Minimize Impacts to Wetlands, where applicable to a specific proposal, to minimize the impacts of the adjacent land uses. If an applicant chooses not to apply the mitigation measures in Table 4, then a thirty-three (33) percent increase in the width of all buffers listed in Table 3 is required.
        +----------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
        |        Disturbance         |             Required Measures to Minimize Impacts              |
        +----------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
        | Lights                     | • Direct lights away from wetland.                             |
        +----------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
        | Noise                      | • Locate activity that generates noise away from wetland.      |
        |                            | • If warranted, enhance existing buffer with native            |
        |                            | vegetation plantings adjacent to noise source immediately      |
        |                            | adjacent to the outer edge of the wetland buffer.              |
        +----------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
        | Toxic runoff               | • Route all new, untreated runoff away from wetland            |
        |                            | while ensuring wetland is not dewatered.                       |
        |                            | • Establish covenants limiting use of pesticides within        |
        |                            | 150 feet of wetlands.                                          |
        |                            | • Apply integrated pest management.                            |
        +----------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
        | Stormwater runoff          | • Retrofit stormwater detention and treatment for roads        |
        |                            | and existing adjacent development.                             |
        |                            | • Prevent channelized flow from lawns that directly            |
        |                            | enters the buffer.                                             |
        |                            | • Use low impact development techniques (per PSAT publication  |
        |                            | on LID techniques).                                            |
        +----------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
        | Change in water regime     | • Infiltrate or treat, detain, and disperse into buffer        |
        |                            | new runoff from impervious surfaces and new lawns.             |
        +----------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
        | Pets and human disturbance | • Use privacy fencing or plant-dense vegetation to             |
        |                            | delineate buffer edge and to discourage disturbance            |
        |                            | using vegetation appropriate for the ecoregion.                |
        |                            | • Place wetland and its buffer in a separate tract             |
        |                            | or protect with a conservation easement.                       |
        +----------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
        | Dust                       | • Use best management practices to control dust.               |
        +----------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
        | Disruption of corridors    | • Maintain connections to off-site areas that are undisturbed. |
        | or connections             | • Restore corridors or connections to off-site habitats        |
        |                            | by replanting.                                                 |
        +----------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
        c. Outright reduction of wetland buffer widths shall not be allowed within shoreline jurisdiction.
        d. No wetland buffer occurring in the shoreline jurisdiction shall be reduced in any location by more than twenty-five (25) percent of the standard buffer width, regardless of wetland category, and only when reduction occurs as part of wetland buffer averaging.
    4. Identification of hydric soils and identification and delineation of wetlands shall be done in accordance with the approved federal wetland delineation manual and applicable regional supplements. For wetland delineation purposes, the definitions of “forested wetland” and “mature forested wetland” shall be consistent with the definitions provided within wetland identification, delineation, and rating systems required by this chapter.
    5. Mitigation shall be provided consistent with this chapter and SMC 14.260.050.Wetland mitigation ratios tables within SMC 14.260.050(J) shall be superseded by the mitigation ratios in Table 5: Wetland Mitigation Ratios. Ratios for rehabilitation and enhancement may be reduced when combined with 1:1 replacement through creation or reestablishment (see Table 1a, Wetland Mitigation in Washington State Part 1: Agency Policies and Guidance Version 1; Ecology Publication No. 06-06-011a, Olympia, WA, March 2006, or as revised).
    +-----------------------+-----------------------------+---------------------+------------------+
    |   Category and Type   | Creation or Reestablishment | Rehabilitation Only | Enhancement Only |
    |      of Wetland       |                             |                     |                  |
    +-----------------------+-----------------------------+---------------------+------------------+
    | Category IV           | 1.5:1                       | 3:1                 | 6:1              |
    +-----------------------+-----------------------------+---------------------+------------------+
    | Category III          | 2:1                         | 4:1                 | 8:1              |
    +-----------------------+-----------------------------+---------------------+------------------+
    | Category II           | 3:1                         | 6:1                 | 12:1             |
    +-----------------------+-----------------------------+---------------------+------------------+
    | Category I:           | 4:1                         | 8:1                 | 16:1             |
    | Based on functions    |                             |                     |                  |
    +-----------------------+-----------------------------+---------------------+------------------+
    | Category I:           | 6:1                         | 12:1                | 24:1             |
    | Mature and old-growth |                             |                     |                  |
    | forest                |                             |                     |                  |
    +-----------------------+-----------------------------+---------------------+------------------+
    | Category I:           | Not considered possible     | Case-by-case        | Case-by-case     |
    | High conservation     |                             |                     |                  |
    | value/bog             |                             |                     |                  |
    +-----------------------+-----------------------------+---------------------+------------------+
        a. As an alternative to mitigation ratios, mitigation requirements may also be determined using the credit/debit tool described in Calculating Credits and Debits for Compensatory Mitigation in Wetlands of Western Washington: Final Report (Ecology Publication No. 10-06-011, Olympia, WA, March 2012, or as revised) if approved by the Planning Director.
E. Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation Areas. 
    1. The provisions of SMC 14.280.010 through 14.280.040 shall apply to the shoreline jurisdiction. The provisions of SMC 14.280.050 through14.280.060 shall not apply in the shoreline jurisdiction and are replaced by the following provisions:
    2. Substantive Requirements. 
        a. No plant, wildlife, or fish species not indigenous to the region shall be introduced into a habitat conservation area, except with approval of a state or federal agency with expertise.
        b. Preference in mitigation shall be given to contiguous wildlife habitat corridors.
        c. In reviewing development proposals, the City shall seek opportunities to restore degraded riparian fish and wildlife functions such as breeding, rearing, migration, and feeding.
        d. The City shall require buffers of undisturbed native vegetation adjacent to habitat conservation areas in accordance with SMC 14.250.330(E)(3). Buffer widths shall reflect the sensitivity of the habitat and may reflect the intensity of nearby human activity.
        e. When a species is more sensitive to human activity during a specific season of the year, the City may establish an extra outer buffer from which human activity is excluded during said season.
        f. No development shall be allowed within a habitat conservation area or buffer with which state or federal endangered, threatened, or sensitive species have a primary association, except in exchange for restoration as approved by the Planning Director or as provided in a management plan approved by a state or federal agency with appropriate expertise.
        g. No development shall be permitted which degrades the functions or values of anadromous fish habitat, including structures or fills which impact migration or spawning, except in exchange for restoration.
        h. Construction and other activities within streams shall be seasonally restricted as necessary to protect the resource. Activities shall be timed to occur during work windows designated by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife for applicable fish species and shall be consistent with the required state and federal approvals. It shall be the applicants’ responsibility to obtain the required state and federal approvals.
        i. Shoreline erosion control shall use bioengineering methods or soft armoring in accordance with an approved critical area report.
        j. Relocation of streams is not permitted unless it is part of a stream restoration project and it will result in equal or better habitat and water quality, and will not diminish the flow capacity of the stream. It shall be the applicants’ responsibility to obtain the required state and federal approvals.
        k. The following requirements shall apply to culverts:
            i. Culverts may be allowed in streams only if they are necessary for the development to occur, if they are designed according to the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife criteria for fish passage, and if a state hydraulic project approval has been issued.
            ii. The applicant or property owner shall keep every culvert free of debris and sediment at all times to allow free passage of water and, if applicable, fish.
            iii. The City may require that a stream be removed from an existing culvert as a condition of approval, unless the culvert is not detrimental to fish habitat or water quality, or removal and/or replacement would be detrimental to fish or wildlife habitat or water quality on a long-term basis.
            iv. It shall be the applicants’ responsibility to obtain the required state and federal approvals.
        l. Clearing and grading, when permitted as part of an authorized development activity or as otherwise allowed in these standards, shall comply with the following:
            i. Grading shall be allowed only during the designated dry season, beginning April 1st and ending October 31st of each year; provided, that the City may extend or shorten the designated dry season on a case-by-case basis to reflect actual weather conditions and the incorporation of best management practices to control stormwater.
            ii. The soil duff layer shall remain undisturbed to the maximum extent possible. Where feasible, any soil disturbed shall be redistributed to other areas of the site; provided, that such redistribution shall not constitute authorized fill.
            iii. The moisture-holding capacity of the topsoil layer shall be maintained by minimizing soil compaction or re-establishing natural soil structure and infiltrative capacity on all areas of the project area not covered by impervious surfaces.
        m. To the extent facilities are allowed in habitat conservation areas, the following regulations shall apply:
            i. Trails shall be on the outer twenty-five (25) percent edge of the stream buffer except for limited viewing platforms and crossings. Trails and platforms shall be of pervious materials.
            ii. Road bridges and culverts shall be designed according to the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife Fish Passage Design at Road Culverts, 1999, and the National Marine Fisheries Service Guidelines for Salmonid Passage at Stream Crossings, 2000.
            iii. Utility lines shall be accomplished by boring beneath the scour depth and hyporheic zone (the saturated zone beneath and adjacent to streams that filters nutrients and maintains water quality). Utilities shall avoid paralleling streams or changing the natural rate of shore or channel migration.
            iv. New and expanded public flood protection measures shall require a biological assessment approved by the agency responsible for protecting federally listed species.
            v. In-stream structures such as high-flow bypasses, sediment ponds, in-stream ponds, retention and detention facilities, tide gates, dams, and weirs shall be allowed only as part of an approved restoration project. It shall be the applicants’ responsibility to obtain the required state and federal approvals.
            vi. Stormwater conveyance structures shall incorporate fish habitat features and the sides of open channels and ponds shall be vegetated to retard erosion, filter sediments, and shade the water.
            vii. Watercourse alterations shall be in accordance with SMC 14.270.060(G).
    3. Habitat Conservation Area Buffers. 
        a. Table 6 below establishes the standard width of required stream buffers (also known as riparian habitat areas):
        +--------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
        |                River/Stream                |            Habitat Buffer Width             |
        +--------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
        | • Snohomish River                          | 100 feet; provided, that:                   |
        | • Pilchuck River                           |                                             |
        |                                            | • Limited public access is allowed          |
        |                                            | in the 50 feet nearer the river,            |
        |                                            | and                                         |
        |                                            | • Water-dependent and water-related         |
        |                                            | uses are allowed in the 50 feet further     |
        |                                            | from the river, if mitigation measures      |
        |                                            | result in the uses contributing toward      |
        |                                            | projects that enhance salmonid rearing      |
        |                                            | habitat as identified in the Snohomish      |
        |                                            | ESA Strategy and if, as further mitigation, |
        |                                            | public access is permitted across           |
        |                                            | the waterfront portion of the site          |
        |                                            | when such a mitigation measure is           |
        |                                            | supported by the particular circumstances   |
        |                                            | and the purposes of the Critical            |
        |                                            | Areas Code.                                 |
        |                                            | • The buffer shall not extend landward      |
        |                                            | of the Riverfront Trail, where the          |
        |                                            | trail acts as a permanent interruption      |
        |                                            | in the Historic Riverfront SED.             |
        +--------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
        | • Cemetery Creek downstream of Fobes       | 100 feet; provided, that limited public     |
        | Road, Bunk Foss Creek, and any tributaries | access is allowed in the first 50           |
        | thereof containing salmonids               | feet of buffer.                             |
        | • All streams flowing into Blackmans       |                                             |
        | Lake, including that part of Swifty        |                                             |
        | Creek above Blackmans Lake                 |                                             |
        +--------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
        | • Swifty Creek below Blackmans Lake        | 50 feet; provided, that limited public      |
        | • Myrick’s Fork in the Cemetery Creek      | access is allowed in the first 25           |
        | basin                                      | feet of buffer.                             |
        | • Collins Creek in the Bunk Foss Creek     |                                             |
        | basin (upstream of salmon spawning         |                                             |
        | and rearing areas)                         |                                             |
        +--------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
        b. If Table 6 does not cover a particular stream, the following Table 7 shall apply:
        +------------------------------------+-----------------------+
        |            Stream Type             | Standard Buffer Width |
        +------------------------------------+-----------------------+
        | Type F (fish-bearing other than S) | 75 feet               |
        +------------------------------------+-----------------------+
        | Type Np (non-fish, perennial)      | 50 feet               |
        +------------------------------------+-----------------------+
        | Type Ns (non-fish, seasonal)       | 35 feet               |
        +------------------------------------+-----------------------+
        c. Widths shall be measured perpendicular outward in each direction, on the horizontal plane, from the ordinary high water mark, or from the top of bank if the ordinary high water mark cannot be identified, or from the outer edge of the channel migration zone when present. Upon the presence of one (1) or more types of critical areas and buffers, the buffer shall be measured from the delineated critical area boundary as determined by a qualified professional as defined by WAC 365-195-905(4).
        d. The Planning Director may modify the buffer widths in the above tables in accordance with the following:
            i. Buffer widths may be increased as necessary to fully protect riparian functions. For example, the buffer may be extended to the outer edge of the floodplain or windward into an area of high tree blow-down potential.
            ii. If the stream enters an underground culvert or pipe, and is unlikely to ever be restored aboveground, the Planning Director may waive the buffer along the under grounded stream; provided, that where the stream enters and emerges from the pipe the opposite outer edges of the buffer shall be joined by a radius equal to the buffer width, with said radius projecting over the piped stream.
F. Uses in Buffer Areas. 
    1. The following table establishes the allowed uses in buffer areas:
    +----------------------------+----------------------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
    |      Uses That May Be      | Habitat Conservation |              Wetland Buffer               |
    |      Permitted (P) in      |     Area Buffer      |                                           |
    |      Buffer, Provided      |                      |                                           |
    |      There Is No Net       |                      |                                           |
    |     Loss of Ecological     |                      |                                           |
    |          Function          |                      |                                           |
    +----------------------------+----------------------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
    | "                          |    All Shorelines    | Category | Category | Category | Category |
    |                            |                      |    IV    |   III    |    II    |    I     |
    +----------------------------+----------------------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
    | Water-dependent            | P                    |          |          |          |          |
    | and water-related          |                      |          |          |          |          |
    | uses                       |                      |          |          |          |          |
    +----------------------------+----------------------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
    | Public parks and           | P                    |          |          |          |          |
    | public water enjoyment     |                      |          |          |          |          |
    | uses                       |                      |          |          |          |          |
    +----------------------------+----------------------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
    | Bio-retention facilities,  | P                    | P1       | P1       |          |          |
    | percolation trenches,      |                      |          |          |          |          |
    | and similar non-structural |                      |          |          |          |          |
    | stormwater facilities,     |                      |          |          |          |          |
    | excluding detention        |                      |          |          |          |          |
    | ponds                      |                      |          |          |          |          |
    +----------------------------+----------------------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
    | Utility poles, lines,      | P                    | P        | P        | P        | P        |
    | and other facilities       |                      |          |          |          |          |
    | that do not require        |                      |          |          |          |          |
    | clearing and cannot        |                      |          |          |          |          |
    | be placed in another       |                      |          |          |          |          |
    | location due to            |                      |          |          |          |          |
    | the function of            |                      |          |          |          |          |
    | the utility                |                      |          |          |          |          |
    +----------------------------+----------------------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
    | Pedestrian trails,         | P2                   | P2       | P2       | P2       | P2       |
    | minimal wildlife           |                      |          |          |          |          |
    | viewing structures,        |                      |          |          |          |          |
    | and other limited          |                      |          |          |          |          |
    | public access              |                      |          |          |          |          |
    +----------------------------+----------------------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
1Stormwater outfalls/dispersion facilities may only be located in the outer twenty-five (25) percent of the standard buffers for Category III and Category IV wetlands. Such facilities shall not be allowed in the buffers for Category I and Category II wetlands.
2Pedestrian trails must:
aBe located in the outer twenty-five (25) percent of the buffer area;
bHave a permeable surface; and
cBe no more than five (5) feet in width.
G. Vegetation Management in Shoreline Jurisdiction. 
    1. Vegetation and vegetated areas within designated critical areas and their required buffers shall be preserved, enhanced, and restored in compliance with this chapter so as to protect or improve shoreline ecological processes and functions. Such measures shall be as prescribed herein and/or by a critical areas report prepared pursuant to Chapter 14.255 SMC.
    2. Except as specifically permitted by this chapter, no disturbance to vegetation within a prescribed buffer or a buffer approved pursuant to this chapter shall occur without prior written approval of the City.
        a. Where unapproved disturbance occurs, the property owner, if private land, or responsible party, if public land, shall provide a critical area report and vegetation management plan to determine whether and what restoration steps shall be implemented and maintained to restore prior ecological functions.
        b. The restoration plan must be approved by the Planning Director and implemented by the property owner/responsible party.
    3. Invasive species and state-recognized noxious weeds, as designated by the Planning Director, may be removed from critical area buffers without a permit as part of a buffer restoration or enhancement project if such activities are performed without increasing sediment transport to a water body and if replacement plantings will provide greater benefit to shoreline ecological processes.
        a. Buffer restoration projects shall not reduce the existing buffer width.
        b. Unless plans are approved by the City for alternative methods, plant removal shall consist of physical uprooting by hand or light equipment, chemical treatment of individual plants, or shallow excavation of no more than one thousand (1,000) square feet of dense infestations.
    4. In the absence of a development proposal, existing, lawfully established residential landscaping and gardens within a shoreline buffer may be retained, replaced, and maintained to continue the condition, appearance, and extent of such areas as they existed prior to the adoption of this code. However, this exception does not apply to unmaintained buffer areas, native growth protection areas, mitigation sites, or other areas protected by conservation easements or similar restrictions, and as further provided in this chapter.
    5. Trees in excess of six (6) inches in diameter measured four (4) feet above surrounding grade shall only be removed from a critical area or critical area buffer within the shoreline jurisdiction with justification of improvement to ecological functions and processes and with prior written approval of the Planning Director.
        a. Any tree within a critical area or buffer deemed by a certified arborist to be a hazard to structures or public safety may be pruned or removed to protect public health and safety consistent with a plan prepared by a certified arborist.
        b. Trees that pose an immediate threat to property or safety may be removed if a report with photographic documentation from a certified arborist justifying such removal is submitted and approved by the Planning Director within thirty (30) days following removal.
        c. Trees removed from buffer areas shall be replaced at a two-to-one (2:1) ratio.
            i. Proposals for replacement trees shall be approved prior to tree removal unless emergency removal is justified due to an imminent threat posed by a hazard tree, in which case the tree replacement plan shall be submitted within thirty (30) days following removal.
            ii. Replacement trees in a shoreline buffer shall be planted within thirty (30) feet of the OHWM and should be selected to thrive in a shoreline environment.
        d. Portions of dead or dying trees not representing a risk to public health and safety shall be retained as snags for wildlife. Cut portions of trees shall be left in the critical area or its buffer unless removal is recommended as determined by a qualified professional as defined by WAC 365-195-905(4).
            e. Trees may be selectively pruned for safety and view maintenance where pruning is conducted in a manner that does not harm the health of the trees. Pruning shall only occur according to a plan prepared by a certified arborist and approved by the Planning Director.
    6. Vegetation management plans shall be provided as part of a critical area report for required shoreline buffer areas.
        a. Vegetation management plans shall be prepared by a qualified professional as defined by WAC 365-195-905(4).
        b. Vegetation management plans shall evaluate the ecological value of existing vegetation in the buffer and propose actions to ensure that buffer areas provide ecological functions equivalent to a dense native vegetation community to the extent possible. Required vegetation shall be maintained over the life of the development.
        c. For private development, recording of a conservation easement or similar legal restriction may be required to ensure preservation of vegetation within the buffer.
        d. Where consistent with the intent of buffer functions, vegetation management plans shall minimize impairment of views of the water body or shoreline from public streets, parks, overlooks, and other adjacent public places.
    7. Alternative Restoration Plan. 
        a. Proposals to implement an alternative restoration plan may be requested by an applicant:
            i. Where mitigation of ecological impacts is required; or
            ii. Where a critical area report or other information demonstrates buffer enhancements consistent with this chapter would be ineffective or pose a greater ecological risk than preserving existing conditions.
        b. Proposals for alternative habitat restoration shall focus on restoring the most critical ecological functions and shall include plans for some habitat restoration or enhancement. In approving an alternative habitat restoration plan, the Planning Director shall consider factors such as changes in surface water runoff rates and water quality, current vegetative conditions, and imposing conditions to limit negative impacts including, but not limited to, ambient noise, light and glare, and activity levels.
        c. Habitat enhancements should:
            i. First focus on offsetting the project’s negative impacts on habitats;
            ii. But, if that is not possible, may focus on restoring other critical ecological functions in the shoreline that have been lost or diminished.
        d. Habitat enhancements can include, but are not limited to:
            i. Placement of large woody debris in water;
            ii. Off-site buffer vegetation management;
            iii. Or implementation of other projects identified in the shoreline restoration plan.
        e. Where a restoration project is proposed as alternative mitigation, the critical areas report shall evaluate ecological value provided by the proposed improvements relative to the impact of the encroachment.
        f. Alternative restoration plans shall be approved at the Planning Director’s discretion. In approving an alternative restoration plan, the Planning Director must determine the mitigation measures proposed will provide broad ecological benefits over a wider area than would a mitigation plan that would only offset the impacts of an individual development. (Ord. 2336, 2018)

Chapter 14.252 ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESOURCES

Sections:
14.252.010   Purpose and applicability
14.252.020   Applicability of zoning requirements
14.252.030   Archaeology site report
14.252.040   Project or permit approval for property on state register as an archaeological resource
14.252.050   Inadvertent discovery of archaeological resources
14.252.060   Inadvertent discovery of human remains
14.252.070   Appeals
14.252.080   Severability

14.252.010 Purpose and applicability.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to protect archaeological and cultural resources within the City of Snohomish for future generations, in order to:
    1. Safeguard the heritage of the City as represented by those sites and objects which reflect significant elements of City history;
    2. Foster civic pride and a sense of identity with City history;
    3. Promote and facilitate the early identification and resolution of conflicts between preservation of archaeological and historic resources and land uses; and
    4. Comply with all federal and state laws related to regulation of archaeological and cultural sites.
B. In Washington State, archaeology sites and Native American grave sites are protected by both federal and state laws. This chapter does not repeal, modify, or waive any provision of federal or state law currently enacted, or as enacted in the future, that regulates archaeological sites including, but not limited to: the Archaeological Resource Protection Act of 1979 (16 U.S.C. 470(aa) through (mm)); the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (25 U.S.C. 3001 et seq.); the National Historic Preservation Act (16 U.S.C. 470 et seq.); Chapter 27.44 RCW titled “Indian Graves and Records”; Chapter 27.53 RCW titled “Archaeological Sites and Resources”; Chapter 68.50 RCW titled “Human Remains”; and Chapter 68.60 RCW titled “Abandoned and Historic Cemeteries and Historic Graves.”
C. This chapter applies to:
    1. Properties and sites with a known or suspected presence of archaeological or cultural resources.
    2. Properties listed on the Washington Information System for Architectural and Archaeological Records Data (WISAARD). (Ord. 2369, 2019)

14.252.020 Applicability of zoning requirements.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as repealing, modifying, or waiving any other provision of this title. (Ord. 2369, 2019)

14.252.030 Archaeology site report.
A. Known archaeological sites are recorded on the Washington Information System for Architectural and Archaeological Records Data (WISAARD).
The City shall establish and maintain a data sharing memorandum of understanding with the Washington State Department of Archaeology and Historic Preservation (DAHP). The data supplied by the DAHP shall be securely implemented on the City’s computer system and used to determine potential conflicts with archaeological sites and historic properties.
B. An archaeological site may cover only a portion of a property, parcel, or lot and may extend onto more than one (1) property, parcel, or lot.
C. Completion of a professional archeological survey shall be required for any development application for construction, earth movement, clearing, or other site disturbance of a known or suspected archaeological site. An archaeological survey may also be required based on information provided by tribes or county and/or state professional archaeologists that the project location has a high probability for containing archaeological resources.
    1. Archaeological reporting shall take place through the Washington State Department of Archaeology and Historic Preservation’s online WISAARD application.
D. An archaeology survey report required under subsection C of this section shall:
    1. Be written by a professional archaeologist as defined in RCW 27.53.030(11).
    2. Meet state and professional standards for cultural resources reporting.
    3. Be submitted to the Department by the property owner or project proponent.
    4. Include the location and extent of the archaeological resources located on site.
    5. Include recommendations for avoidance or minimization of impacts on archaeological resources if present, and recommendations for additional archaeological work and/or permitting to comply with state or federal laws for the protection and preservation of archaeological resources. When ground disturbance impacts on archaeological resources are unavoidable, the project proponent shall apply for an archaeological excavation permit through the Washington State Department of Archaeology and Historic Preservation.
    6. Include the results of consultation with any affected Indian tribe.
E. The Department shall provide a copy of the archaeology site report to any affected Indian tribe and the Washington State Department of Archaeology and Historic Preservation. (Ord. 2369, 2019)

14.252.040 Project or permit approval for property on state register as an archaeological resource.
A. The City approving authority shall not issue a permit for any development activity or project approval requiring an archaeology site report pursuant to SMC 14.252.030 without considering the archaeology site report and any comments on the report submitted by an affected Indian tribe and any additional archaeological work and permitting required under Chapter 27.53 RCW.
B. Based on the information contained in the archaeology survey report and any comments submitted by the affected Indian tribe(s) obtained during the consultation process, the City approving authority will condition the permit or project approval to comply with any permitting and/or additional archaeological work required under federal and state laws for the protection of archaeological resources. (Ord. 2369, 2019)

14.252.050 Inadvertent discovery of archaeological resources.
A. If, during the course of construction, earth movement, clearing, or other site disturbance, archaeological resources are encountered, all work shall cease immediately. Under these circumstances, the Department may issue a stop work order pursuant to Chapter 14.85 SMC.
B. The applicant shall immediately notify the Planning Director and promptly notify any affected Indian tribe, the Snohomish County Archaeologist and the Washington State Department of Archaeology and Historic Preservation (DAHP).
C. Ground disturbance may not proceed until consultation with any affected Indian tribe, the Snohomish County Archaeologist, and DAHP is completed.
D. No ground disturbance shall proceed until the Department and the applicant have reached an agreement in consultation with the DAHP and any affected Indian tribe regarding a plan for mitigation or preservation of archaeological resources. (Ord. 2369, 2019)

14.252.060 Inadvertent discovery of human remains.
A. If, during the course of construction, earth movement, clearing, or other site disturbance, human remains are encountered, all work shall cease immediately in an area large enough to protect the find. Under these circumstances, the Department may issue a stop work order pursuant to Chapter 14.85 SMC. The applicant shall immediately notify the Planning Director and promptly notify any affected Indian tribe, the Snohomish County Archaeologist and the Washington State Department of Archaeology and Historic Preservation (DAHP).
B. The finding of human skeletal remains will be reported to the county medical examiner/coroner and local law enforcement in the most expeditious manner possible. The remains will not be touched, moved, or further disturbed. The Snohomish County medical examiner/coroner will assume jurisdiction over the human skeletal remains and make a determination of whether those remains are forensic or nonforensic. If the Snohomish County medical examiner/coroner determines the remains are nonforensic, then they will report that finding to the Department of Archaeology and Historic Preservation (DAHP) who will then take jurisdiction over the remains. The DAHP will notify any appropriate cemeteries and all affected tribes of the find. The State Physical Anthropologist will make a determination of whether the remains are Indian or non-Indian and report that finding to any appropriate cemeteries and the affected tribes. The DAHP will then handle all consultation with the affected parties as to the future preservation, excavation, and disposition of the remains. (Ord. 2369, 2019)

14.252.070 Appeals.
Any permit or land use decision issued with conditions imposed pursuant to this chapter may be appealed under the provisions of Chapter 14.20 SMC relating to the specific permit classification that was issued. (Ord. 2369, 2019)

14.252.080 Severability.
If any one (1) or more sections, subsections, or sentences of this chapter are held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decisions shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code, and the same shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 2369, 2019)

Chapter 14.255 CRITICAL AREAS – GENERAL

Sections:
14.255.010   Findings
14.255.020   Purpose
14.255.030   Critical Areas Code
14.255.035   Best Available Science (BAS)
14.255.040   Fees
14.255.050   Applicability
14.255.060   Exemptions
14.255.070   Review Process
14.255.080   Critical Area Reports
14.255.090   Previous Studies
14.255.100   Mitigation Plan Requirements
14.255.110   Independent Review of Critical Area Report
14.255.120   Substantive Requirements
14.255.130   Variances
14.255.140   Enforcement and Inspections

14.255.010 Findings.
The City Council of Snohomish finds as follows:
A. Critical areas contain valuable natural resources, provide natural scenic qualities important to the character of the community, perform important ecological functions and processes, and/or present a hazard to life and property. Identification, management, and protection of these areas are, therefore, necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare of citizens.
B. Beneficial biological and physical functions that critical areas provide include, but are not limited to: water quality protection and enhancement; fish and wildlife habitat; food chain support; flood storage; stormwater conveyance and attenuation; ground water recharge and discharge; erosion control; protection from hazards; historical and archaeological and aesthetic value protection; and recreation.
C. The City’s critical areas regulations, as set forth in the critical areas code, are designed to implement the comprehensive plan’s environmental protection element policies, regarding protecting functions and values of critical areas.
D. The critical areas code is based on the best available science as set forth in the Steward & Associates Study (May, 2004), prepared for the City by a team of qualified scientific professionals, as well as such state agency publications as the Example Code Provisions for Designating and Protecting Critical Areas, prepared by the Washington Department of Community, Trade, and Economic Development (CTED), and the Guidance Document for the Establishment of Critical Aquifer Recharge Areas Ordinances, prepared by the Washington Department of Ecology (DOE).
E. The City deems it particularly important for the critical areas code to give special consideration to preserve or enhance anadromous fisheries, as supported by the City’s best available science study.
F. In addition to the best available scientific information, the Growth Management Act (GMA) also requires the City to consider various growth management policies in promulgating development regulations such as the critical areas code. In the City of Snohomish, the availability of affordable, developable lots will be considerably diminished, if certain regulations in the CTED and DOE recommendations are not modified to be less restrictive in such matters as wetland or stream buffer widths. Accordingly, where the critical areas code’s buffer widths differ from those in the Example Code Provisions for Designating and Protecting Critical Areas or in the recommendations of the Department of Ecology, the City finds that such deviations are necessary in order to implement the GMA’s policies in support of encouraging economic development, protecting property rights, reducing urban sprawl, increasing affordable housing, and accommodating urban growth. Additionally, the City finds that the best available science identifies no substantial risk to critical areas in enacting these alternative substantive requirements.

14.255.020 Purpose.
The City of Snohomish is required by the Washington State Growth Management Act (Chapter 36.70A RCW) to designate environmentally critical areas and to adopt development regulations to assure the conservation of such areas. In compliance with this mandate, the City finds that environmentally critical areas characterize certain portions of Snohomish and its urban growth area. These critical areas include wetlands, habitat conservation areas, critical aquifer recharge areas, geologically hazardous areas, and frequently flooded areas. Accordingly, it is the purpose of the Critical Areas Code to:
A. Protect the functions and values of ecologically sensitive areas, while allowing for reasonable use of private property, through the application of the best available science.
B. Implement the Growth Management Act and the natural environment goals of the Comprehensive Plan.
C. Protect members of the public and public resources and facilities from injury, loss of life, or property damage due to landslides, steep slope failures, erosion, seismic events, or flooding.
D. Protect citizens and the unique, fragile, and valuable elements of the environment, including ground and surface waters, wetlands, anadromous fish species, and other fish and wildlife, and their habitats.
E. Prevent adverse and cumulative environmental impacts to critical areas, direct activities not dependent on critical area resources to less ecologically sensitive sites, and mitigate unavoidable impacts to critical areas by regulating alterations in and adjacent to critical areas and requiring specific mitigation measures to compensate for unavoidable impacts.
F. Protect species listed as threatened or endangered under the Federal Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 USC 1531 – 1534) and their habitats.

14.255.030 Critical Areas Code.
Chapters 14.255 through 14.280 SMC shall collectively be known as the “Critical Areas Code”. Chapter 14.255 SMC shall establish the general framework for Chapters 14.260 through 14.280 SMC. The City Planner shall administer and interpret the Critical Areas Code.

14.255.035 Best Available Science (BAS).
A. The City of Snohomish shall implement the use of best available science (BAS) in the application of the Critical Areas Code
B. “Best available science” means information from research, inventory, monitoring, surveys, modeling and an assessment, which are used to designate, protect, or restore critical areas.
C. As defined by WAC 365-195-900 through 365-195-925, best available science is derived from a process that includes peer reviewed literature, standard methods, quantitative analysis and documented references to produce reliable information.
D. The use of best available science pursuant to the critical area code shall be consistent with the following:
    1. Protection for functions and values and anadromous fish. Critical area reports and decisions to alter critical areas shall rely on the best available science to protect the functions and values of critical areas and must give special consideration to conservation or protection measures necessary to preserve or enhance anadromous fish and their habitat, such as salmon and bull trout.
    2. Best available science to be used must be consistent with criteria. The best available science is that scientific information applicable to the critical area prepared by local, state or federal natural resource agencies, a qualified scientific professional or team of qualified scientific professionals, which is consistent with criteria established in WAC 365-195-900 through WAC 365-195-925
    3. Characteristics of a valid scientific process. In the context of critical areas protection, a valid scientific process is one that produces reliable information useful in understanding the consequences of a local government’s regulatory decisions and in developing critical areas policies and development regulations that will be effective in protecting the functions and values of critical areas. The specific characteristics of a valid scientific process are as follows:
        i. Peer review. The information has been critically reviewed by other persons who are qualified scientific experts in that scientific discipline.
        ii. Methods. The methods used to obtain the information are clearly stated and reproducible. The methods are standardized in the pertinent scientific discipline or, if not, the methods have been appropriately peer-reviewed to assure their reliability and validity.
        iii. Logical conclusions and reasonable inferences. The conclusions presented are based on reasonable assumptions supported by other studies and consistent with the general theory underlying the assumptions. The conclusions are logically and reasonably derived from the assumptions and supported by the data presented.
        iv. Quantitative analysis. The data have been analyzed using appropriate statistical or quantitative methods.
        v. Context. The information is placed in proper context. The assumptions, analytical techniques, data, and conclusions are appropriately framed with respect to the prevailing body of pertinent scientific knowledge.
        vi. References. The assumptions, analytical techniques, and conclusions are well referenced with citations to relevant, credible literature and other pertinent existing information.
E. Nonscientific information. Nonscientific information may supplement scientific information, but it is not an adequate substitute for valid and available scientific information.

14.255.040 Fees.
The City shall establish fees to recover its cost of reviewing development proposals, including the cost of engineering review, planning review, inspections, and administration. In addition to the payment of said fees, the applicant shall be responsible for all required reports, assessments, studies, and plans.

14.255.050 Applicability.
Unless exempted in SMC 14.255.060, the Critical Areas Code shall apply to all developments within one or more of the following critical areas or their associated buffers or building setback areas, regardless of whether the site has been previously identified as a critical area:
A. Wetlands as designated in Chapter 14.260 SMC;
B. Critical aquifer recharge areas as designated in Chapter 14.265 SMC;
C. Floodplains as designated in Chapter 14.270 SMC;
D. Geologically hazardous areas as designated in Chapter 14.275 SMC; and
E. Habitat conservation areas as designated in Chapter 14.280 SMC.

14.255.060 Exemptions.
The following activities when occurring in critical areas shall be exempt from the Critical Areas Code, provided that the activity must first be reviewed by the City Planner to confirm that the exemption applies:
A. Emergency actions immediately necessary to prevent injury or property damage, provided that the action minimizes impact to critical areas and buffers. The person undertaking the action shall notify the City Planner within one (1) working day following commencement of the emergency action. The City Planner shall determine if the action was allowable under this subsection and commence enforcement if not. Within one year of the date of the emergency, the person undertaking the action shall fully mitigate any resulting impacts to the critical area and buffers in accordance with an approved critical area report and mitigation plan.
B. Normal operation, maintenance, or repair of existing structures, utilities, roads, levees, drainage systems, or similar improvements, including vegetation management, if the action does not alter or increase the impact to or encroach upon the critical area or buffer, and if the action accords with best management practices and maintenance and does not impact an endangered or threatened species.
C. Passive outdoor activities, such as recreation, education, and scientific research, that do not degrade the critical area.
D. Forest practices in accordance with Chapter 76.09 RCW and Title 222 WAC, other than forest practice conversions.
E. Structural modifications of, additions to, or replacements of, existing legal structures without increasing the impact to the critical area, provided that the City’s regulations regarding legal non-conforming uses are complied with and such structural modifications shall not extend further into the critical area or buffer.
F. Within improved public rights-of-way or private street easements, construction, replacement, or modification of streets, utilities, lines, mains, equipment, or appurtenances, excluding electrical substations, are exempt from the first two “sequencing” methods stated in SMC 14.255.120(E), provided that actions that alter a wetland or watercourse, such as culverts or bridges, or that result in the transport of sediment or increased stormwater shall be subject to the following requirements wherever possible:
    1. Critical area and/or buffer widths shall be increased equal to the width of the right-of-way improvement, including disturbed areas; and
    2. Native vegetation shall be retained and/or replanted, per the City of Snohomish plant material list, along the right-of-way improvement.
G. Minor utility projects, such as placement of a utility pole, street sign, anchor, or vault, which do not significantly impact critical areas function or values, if constructed using best management practices.
H. Removal with hand labor and light equipment of invasive or State recognized noxious weeds or plants, as designated by the City Planner and including but not limited to:
    1. English Ivy (Hedera helix);
    2. Himalayan blackberry (Rubus discolor, R. procerus); and
    3. Evergreen blackberry (Rubus laciniatus).
I. Removal of trees, which a qualified arborist, landscape architect, or forester has documented as posing a threat to public safety and which do not provide critical habitat such as eagle perches, provided that removed trees are left on-site.
J. Measures to control fire or halt the spread of disease or damaging insects, consistent with the State Forest Practices Act, Chapter 76.09 RCW, provided that the removed vegetation shall be replaced with the same or similar species within one year or species in accordance with City of Snohomish plant material list and an approved plan.
K. Application of herbicides, pesticides, or fertilizers, if necessary, provided that their use shall conform to Department of Fish and Wildlife Management Recommendations and the regulations of the Department of Agriculture and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and that written approval has been obtained from the City Planner.
L. Minor clearing or digging necessary for surveys, soil logs, percolation tests, and similar activities, provided that critical area impacts are minimized and disturbed areas are immediately restored.
M. Navigational aids and boundary markers.
N. Proposed developments that have undergone critical area review at a previous stage of permit review, provided that the earlier permit has not expired and the proposed development has not significantly changed (in order to avoid duplicate review).
O. Harvesting of wild crops without injuring their natural reproduction, tilling the soil, planting crops, applying chemicals, or altering the critical area.
P. Conservation measures of soil, water, vegetation, fish, and other wildlife that do not adversely impact ecosystems.
Q. Required environmental impact remediation.
R. Existing and ongoing agricultural activities, where the land has not lain idle so long that modifications to the hydrological regime are necessary to resume operations; and
S. Development within isolated Category III and IV wetlands less than 1,000 square feet in size.
T. Development within isolated Category III and IV wetlands between 1,000 square feet and 3,000 square feet in area shall be exempt from the normal sequencing process but shall be fully mitigated as required elsewhere in the critical area requirements.

14.255.070 Review Process.
The City Planner’s general sequence for administering this Critical Areas Code shall be per the following table, which shows questions the City Planner shall answer, and actions he or she shall take depending on the answer.
+--------+------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| Step 1 | Is the development proposal in a critical area or its buffer?    |
|        | The City Planner shall check maps, review the environmental      |
|        | checklist, visit the site, and require scientific determinations |
|        | as necessary to make this determination.                         |
+--------+------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| "      | Yes                    | No                                      |
+--------+------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| "      | Go to step 2.          | Go to step 4.                           |
+--------+------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| Step 2 | Is the development proposal exempt per SMC 14.255.060?           |
+--------+------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| "      | Yes                    | No                                      |
+--------+------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| "      | Go to step 4.          | Require a critical area report. Don’t   |
|        |                        | issue Determination of Completeness     |
|        |                        | until critical area report is received. |
|        |                        | Reference critical area report in any   |
|        |                        | public notice.                          |
+--------+------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| Step 3 | Does the proposal, with conditions of approval as necessary,     |
|        | conform to SMC 14.255.120, Substantive Requirements?             |
+--------+------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| "      | Yes                    | No                                      |
+--------+------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| "      | Go to step 4.          | Go to step 4.                           |
+--------+------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| Step 4 | Document the review process in a manner appropriate to,          |
|        | and filed with, the permit(s) required for the proposed          |
|        | development, and act on the permit application in accordance     |
|        | with the findings.                                               |
+--------+------------------------+-----------------------------------------+

14.255.080 Critical Area Reports.
Unless waived by the City Planner on the grounds that the specific information required in this section does not apply to the development in question, critical area reports shall be prepared for non-exempt proposed developments located within critical areas or their buffers. Said critical area reports shall:
A. Be prepared by qualified professionals as defined in WAC 365-195-905(4). The following list shows the type of critical area report and the related professional discipline.
    1. Wetlands: wetland biologist.
    2. Critical aquifer recharge areas: hydro-geologist, geologist, or engineer.
    3. Floodplains: hydrologist or engineer.
    4. Geologically hazardous areas: engineer or geologist.
    5. Fish and wildlife habitats: biologist.
B. Incorporate best available science.
C. Cover a study area large enough to understand relationships with important off-site factors and identify any off-site critical area so near that its required buffer covers part of the project site.
D. Contain the following:
    1. Name and contact information of the applicant, description of the proposed development, and identification of required permits;
    2. Site plan drawn to scale showing critical areas, buffers, existing structures, and proposed structures, clearing, grading, and stormwater management;
    3. Characterization of critical areas and buffers;
    4. Assessment of the probable impact to critical areas;
    5. Analysis of site development alternatives;
    6. Description of efforts to avoid, minimize, and mitigate impacts to critical areas pursuant to SMC 14.255.120.E (“sequencing”);
    7. Mitigation plans as needed, in accordance with SMC 14.255.100;
    8. Evaluation of compliance with this Critical Areas Code’s substantive requirements applicable to the proposed development;
    9. Financial guarantees to ensure compliance, such as a performance bond or deposit, if necessary;
    10. Additional information as required in the chapter corresponding to the type of critical area;
    11. Documentation of who prepared the report and when, with fieldwork and data sheets;
    12. Statement specifying the accuracy of the report and assumptions relied upon, and
    13. Additional information as required by the City Planner.

14.255.090 Previous Studies.
Critical area reports may rely upon, without duplication of effort, valid previous studies prepared for the site, taking into account any change in the site, the proposed development, or the surrounding area.

14.255.100 Mitigation Plan Requirements.
If the City allows conformance with this Critical Areas Code’s substantive requirements to be achieved by mitigation pursuant to Step 3 of SMC 14.255.070, the critical area report shall include a mitigation plan consisting of:
A. An analysis of the anticipated impacts;
B. A strategy for mitigating the impacts, including site selection factors;
C. An analysis of the anticipated functions and values that will result from the mitigation, including an assessment of risks;
D. A review of the best available science relative to the proposed mitigation;
E. Specific standards for evaluating whether the mitigation is successful;
F. Detailed construction plans, including:
    1. Construction timing;
    2. Grading and excavation details;
    3. Erosion and sediment control features;
    4. Planting plan; and
    5. Measures to protect plants until established;
G. A program for monitoring the mitigation over at least five (5) years, provided that ten (10) years of monitoring are required to ensure successful establishment of all trees and woody shrubs; and
H. Potential corrective measures should the monitoring indicate standards are not being met.

14.255.110 Independent Review of Critical Area Report.
The City Planner may have the critical area report evaluated by an independent qualified professional and/or request consultation from a government agency with expertise. If the report and evaluations disagree, the City Planner shall determine which to utilize, based on which is most consistent with the best available science.

14.255.120 Substantive Requirements.
A. All treatment of critical area shall be in accordance with best available science as defined in WAC 365-195-900 through 365-195-925, which is hereby adopted by reference, along with the Washington State Department of Community Development’s Citations of Recommended Sources of Best Available Science for Designating and Protecting Critical Areas.
B. Critical areas and their buffers shall be left undisturbed, except that the following may be permitted if best management practices are used:
    1. Authorized functional restoration or enhancement, including native vegetation associated with low impact development facilities, removal of invasive species, and trimming of significant trees in a manner consistent with best horticultural practices, that does not negatively impact the trees’ health and survivability;
    2. In buffers: utility poles and utility lines which do not require excavation or clearing;
    3. In the outer 50 percent of buffers: permeable-surfaced walkways, trails, and minimal wildlife viewing structures;
    4. Developments for which mitigation is allowed per subsection (E) of this section; and
    5. Other uses specifically authorized by the Critical Areas Code.
C. No development shall occur which results in a net loss of the functions or values of any critical area except reasonable use variances per SMC 14.255.130(B). The pre- and post-development functional comparison shall be on a per function basis unless otherwise authorized by the Critical Areas Code.
D. No development shall occur in critical areas and their buffers which results in an unreasonable hazard to the public health and safety.
E. These substantive requirements shall be met via one or more of the following methods, listed in preferential sequence (commonly known as “sequencing”). The methods used shall be those which are highest on the list yet consistent with the objectives of the proposed development:
    1. Avoiding the impact altogether by not taking a certain action or parts of an action;
    2. Minimizing impacts by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action and its implementation, by using appropriate technology, or by taking affirmative steps, such as project redesign, relocation, or timing, to avoid or reduce impacts;
    3. Rectifying the impact to wetlands, critical aquifer recharge areas, frequently flooded areas, and habitat conservation areas by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the affected environment to the historical conditions or the conditions existing at the time of the initiation of the project;
    4. Minimizing or eliminating the hazard by restoring or stabilizing the hazard area through engineered or other methods;
    5. Reducing or eliminating the impact or hazard over time by preservation and maintenance operations during the life of the action;
    6. Compensating for the impact to wetlands, critical aquifer recharge areas, frequently flooded areas, and habitat conservation areas by replacing, enhancing, or providing substitute resources or environments; and
    7. Monitoring the hazard or other required mitigation and taking remedial action when necessary. Mitigation for individual actions may include a combination of the above measures.
F. As a condition of any permit approval, the City may require that:
    1. The outer edge of the critical area or buffer be marked, signed, or fenced to protect the resource. Such protection may be temporary, during construction, or permanent such as to protect the resource from livestock or people. The City Planner shall specify the design and sign message, if applicable, of such markers, signs, and fencing.
    2. The applicant file a notice with the county records and elections division stating the presence of the critical area or buffer and the application of this Critical Areas Code to the property, in order to inform subsequent purchasers of the property.
    3. The critical area and/or buffer be placed in a critical area tract or conservation easement, the purpose of which is to set aside and protect the critical area. The critical area tract or conservation easement shall be:
        a. Held by the City, a homeowners’ association, a land trust or similar conservation organization, or by each lot owner within the development in an undivided interest;
        b. Recorded on all documents of title of record for the affected parcels;
        c. Noted on the face of any plat or recorded drawing; and
        d. Delineated on the ground with permanent markers and/or signs in accordance with local survey standards.
G. The City may allow averaging of buffer widths, if a qualified professional demonstrates that:
    1. Functions and values are not adversely affected;
    2. The total buffer area is not reduced; and
    3. At no location is the buffer width reduced more than 40 percent.
H. Unless otherwise provided, buildings and other structures shall be set back a distance of 10 feet from the edges of all critical areas and critical area buffers. The same protrusions into this setback area shall be allowed as the development code allows into property line setback areas.
I. Critical areas and buffers shall not be allowed within any lot of a subdivision and/or short plats unless the plat was vested prior to the effective date and implementation of the ordinance codified in this chapter. Subdivision and/or short plats shall show, on their face, any applicable critical area limitations.
J. When any existing regulation, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflicts with this Critical Areas Code, the one which provides more protection to the critical areas shall apply.
K. When critical areas of two or more types coincide, the more restrictive buffer and requirements shall apply.
L. Subject to approval through the planned residential development process, or approval by the City Planner, depending on who is the applicable decision-maker, in calculating allowable residential units per acre, up to 100 percent of the acreage of critical areas and buffers may be counted and this density transferred to buildable portions of the site.
M. The substantive requirements unique to the type of critical area shall also be complied with, as set forth in the applicable chapter of the Critical Areas Code. (Ord. 2315, 2016)

14.255.130 Variances.
The City may grant variances from the Critical Areas Code’s substantive regulations in accordance with Chapter 14.70 SMC, if the criteria in A or B below are met.
A. The variance conforms to the variance criteria stated in SMC 14.70.040, plus the variance:
    1. Conforms with the purpose of the Critical Areas Code,
    2. Does not impact anadromous fish habitat; and
    3. Is justifiable in light of the best available science and the GMA policies referenced in SMC 14.255.010(F).
B. The variance is determined to be a reasonable use (conformance with the SMC 14.70.040 criteria not required) in accordance with the following:
    1. The application of the Critical Areas Code would otherwise deny all reasonable economic use of the property;
    2. The City does not offer to compensate the owner for the denial of reasonable economic use;
    3. No other reasonable economic use of the property or development design has less impact on the critical area;
    4. The proposal does not pose an unreasonable threat to the public health, safety, or welfare;
    5. The proposal conforms to other applicable regulations;
    6. Impacts to critical areas are mitigated; and
    7. The application is sufficiently documented (for example, critical area report, mitigation plan, permit applications, and environmental documents) to make a determination regarding these criteria.

14.255.140 Enforcement and Inspections.
A. In enforcing violations of the Critical Areas Code per Chapter 14.85 SMC, the City Planner may require a restoration plan prepared by a qualified professional. Historic functions and values, soil configurations, and native vegetation shall be used as a guide for restoration. Flood and geological hazards shall be reduced to the pre-development level.
B. Reasonable access to the development shall be provided to agents of the City for critical area inspections, monitoring, restoration, or emergency action. (Ord. 2083, 2005)

Chapter 14.260 WETLANDS

Sections:
14.260.010   Purpose and Intent
14.260.020   Rating and Designation
14.260.030   Critical Area Reports
14.260.040   Substantive Requirements
14.260.050   Mitigation

14.260.010 Purpose and Intent.
A. Wetlands perform numerous important functions, including but not limited to provision of wildlife and fish habitat, water quality enhancement, flood and erosion control, ground water recharge and discharge, shoreline stabilization, research and education opportunity, and recreation. Protection of these systems is necessary to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
B. To achieve the goal of “no net loss” of wetland functions and values within the City, the regulations of this chapter are intended to discourage or prohibit:
    1. Activities that block water flows, or damage or destroy flood storage areas or storm barriers, thereby resulting in greater potential flood damages;
    2. Disposal of wastewater or solid wastes, or creation of unstable fills inappropriate to the function of wetlands, which may result in water pollution;
    3. Application of pesticides, herbicides and algaecides on wetlands unless warranted to protect the ecological functions of the wetland;
    4. Activities that limit the function of a wetland to control erosion or runoff; provide water storage; or provide wildlife breeding, spawning, nesting, wintering, or feeding grounds;
    5. Activities that detract from a wetland’s value in providing educational experiences, recreational uses, and/or open space.

14.260.020 Rating and Designation.
A. Rating categories. Wetlands shall be rated Category I, II, III, or IV according to the Department of Ecology’s Washington State Wetland Rating System for Western Washington (Ecology Publication #04-06-025). (See WAC 365-190-080(1)(a).) Wetland categories shall apply to the wetland as it exists on the date the City adopts the rating system, as the wetland naturally changes thereafter, or as the wetland changes in accordance with permitted activities. Wetland rating categories shall not change due to illegal modifications. The City will conduct an analysis of new wetlands rating systems as proposed by the State on an annual basis for consideration as an amendment to this chapter.
B. Designating Wetlands. 
    1. As set forth in RCW 36.70A.030(20), wetlands are those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. Wetlands do not include those artificial wetlands intentionally created from non-wetland sites, including, but not limited to, irrigation and drainage ditches, grass-lined swales, canals, detention facilities, wastewater treatment facilities, farm ponds, and landscape amenities, or those wetlands created after July 1, 1990, that were unintentionally created as a result of the construction of a road, street, or highway. Wetlands may include those artificial wetlands intentionally created from non-wetland areas to mitigate conversion of wetlands.
    2. Pursuant to RCW 36.70A.175, wetlands are designated in accordance with the Washington State Wetland Identification and Delineation Manual (Ecology Publication #96-94).
    3. The City has maps showing the approximate location and extent of wetlands. However, these maps are only a guide and will be updated as critical areas become better known. The exact location of a wetland’s boundary shall be determined in accordance with the above-referenced manual.
C. Rating wetlands. Wetlands shall be rated according to the Department of Ecology wetland rating system, as set forth in the Washington State Wetland Rating System for Western Washington (Ecology Publication #04-06-025, or as revised and approved by DOE). These documents contain the definitions and methods for determining if the criteria below are met.
    1. Category I. Category I wetlands are those wetlands that meet any of the following criteria:
        a. Wetlands that are identified by scientists of the Washington Natural Heritage Program/DNR as high quality wetlands;
        b. Bogs larger than a half acre;
        c. Mature and old growth forested wetlands larger than one acre;
        d. Wetlands that perform many functions well (score at least 70 points); or
        e. Wetlands that:
            i. represent a unique or rare wetland type; or
            ii. are more sensitive to disturbance than most wetlands; or
            iii. are relatively undisturbed and contain ecological attributes that are impossible to replace within a human lifetime; or
            iv. provide a high level of functions.
    2. Category II. Category II wetlands are those wetlands that meet any of the following criteria:
        a. A wetland identified by the Washington State Department of Natural Resources as containing “sensitive” plant species;
        b. A bog between one-quarter and one-half acre in size; or
        c. Wetlands with a moderately high level of functions (score between 51 and 69 points).
    3. Category III. Category III wetlands are wetlands with a moderate level of functions (score between 30 and 50 points), which generally have been disturbed in some way and which are often less diverse or more isolated from other natural resources in the landscape than Category II wetlands.
    4. Category IV. Category IV wetlands have the lowest levels of functions(score less than 30 points) and are often heavily disturbed. These are wetlands that should be replaceable and in some cases improvable. However, experience has shown that replacement cannot be guaranteed in any specific case. These wetlands may provide some important functions and should be protected to some degree.
D. Date of wetland rating. Wetland rating categories shall be applied as the wetland exists on the date of adoption of the rating system by the local government, as the wetland naturally changes thereafter, or as the wetland changes in accordance with permitted activities. Wetland rating categories shall not change due to illegal modifications.

14.260.030 Critical Area Reports.
In addition to the requirements of SMC 14.255.080, critical area reports for wetlands shall include the following:
A. Wetland delineation map as surveyed and flagged in the field.
B. Assessment of wetlands, including acreage, category, required buffers, evidence of past alterations, soil, topography, hydrology, ecology, and functional evaluation using a recognized method.
C. Discussion of measures to preserve wetland functions and values, including the “sequencing” set forth in SMC 14.255.120(E).
D. If mitigation is proposed, a mitigation plan including the existing and proposed status of:
    1. Wetland acreage;
    2. Vegetation and fauna;
    3. Surface and subsurface hydrology;
    4. Soils, substrate, and topography;
    5. Required wetland buffers; and
    6. Property ownership.
E. Proposed wetland management and monitoring.

14.260.040 Substantive Requirements.
In addition to the substantive requirements of SMC 14.255.120, the requirements of this section shall apply to developments in wetlands, except as exempted above.
A. The higher the wetland category (Category I is highest), the greater shall be the emphasis on higher-priority “sequencing” methods per SMC 14.255.120(E).
B. The following buffer width requirements are established as the minimum wetland buffer widths:
    1. The standard buffer widths in this section are based on the fact that most impacts adjacent to wetlands in the City of Snohomish will be high intensity impacts characteristic of an urban area. Accordingly, one baseline buffer will generally apply to each category of wetland, as provided in subsection (B)(2) of this section, unless the habitat function score requires increasing the buffer width, as provided in subsection (B)(3) of this section, or unless the buffer width is increased, decreased, and/or averaged, as provided in subsections (D), (E), (F), and (G) of this section.
    2. Standard/baseline buffer widths shall be:
    +----------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
    | Category I                             | 150 feet                              |
    +----------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
    | Category II                            | 100 feet                              |
    +----------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
    | Category III                           | 50 feet                               |
    +----------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
    | (exempt if smaller than 1,000 square feet: see SMC 14.255.060(S); between      |
    | 1,000 square feet and 3,000 square feet in area shall be exempt from the       |
    | normal sequencing process but shall be fully mitigated: see SMC 14.255.060(T)) |
    +----------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
    | Category IV                            | 50 feet                               |
    +----------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
    | (exempt if smaller than 1,000 square feet: see SMC 14.255.060(S); between      |
    | 1,000 square feet and 3,000 square feet in area shall be exempt from the       |
    | normal sequencing process but shall be fully mitigated: see SMC 14.255.060(T)  |
    +----------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
    3. The standard/baseline buffer widths shall be increased for each category of wetland to the following wetland buffer widths, if the habitat function scores (derived from the 2004 Wetland Rating System for Western Washington) meet the following thresholds:
    +-------------------------+-------------------------+
    | Category I              | 200 feet, if            |
    +-------------------------+-------------------------+
    |  habitat function score is at least 28            |
    +-------------------------+-------------------------+
    | Category II             | 150 feet, if            |
    +-------------------------+-------------------------+
    |  habitat function score is at least 28            |
    +-------------------------+-------------------------+
    | Category III            | 100 feet, if            |
    +-------------------------+-------------------------+
    |  habitat function score is at least 20            |
    +-------------------------+-------------------------+
    | Category IV             | 50 feet, i.e.,          |
    +-------------------------+-------------------------+
    | no increase regardless of habitat function score. |
    +-------------------------+-------------------------+
C. Buffers shall be measured from the wetland boundary as surveyed in the field. If wetland enhancement is proposed, the requirements for the category of the wetland after enhancement shall apply.
D. The above standard buffer widths presume the following:
    1. The buffer is at least moderately endowed with healthy native vegetation (i.e., 75 percent ground cover) and other factors affecting its ability to protect the wetland, such as favorable topography.
    2. The City Planner may increase the required buffer width or require buffer enhancement if the buffer is poorly endowed with healthy native vegetation or is otherwise handicapped in its ability to protect the wetland as specified in subsection (E) of this section.
    3. The City Planner may reduce the required buffer width if the buffer is, or after enhancement will be, well-endowed with healthy native vegetation or otherwise unusually able to protect the wetland as specified in subsection (E) of this section.
E. The City Planner may increase or reduce the standard buffer width if the function(s) served by the particular wetland need(s) more or less buffer width, as indicated by a wetland functional analysis. Buffer widths may be reduced not more than 25 percent of the standard/baseline buffer width and only if restoration or enhancement occurs within the remaining buffer such that no net loss of function is realized.
F. The City Planner shall have the authority to average buffer widths on a case-by-case basis, where a qualified professional demonstrates to the City Planner’s satisfaction that all the following criteria are met:
    1. The total area contained in the buffer area after averaging is no less than that which would be contained within the standard buffer.
    2. The buffer averaging does not reduce the functions or values of the wetland.
    3. The wetland contains variations in sensitivity due to existing physical characteristics or the character of the buffer varies in slope, soils, or vegetation.
    4. The director shall have the authority to increase the minimum width of the standard buffer on a case-by-case basis when such increase is necessary.
    5. Buffer width averaging does not reduce the original buffer width by more 50 percent at any one point.
G. The City Planner may combine the use of buffer restoration or enhancement to reduce buffer width, as provided in subsection (E) of this section, with the use of buffer width averaging, as provided in subsection (F) of this section; provided, that there is no net loss of function and the original buffer width is not reduced by more than 50 percent at any one point.
H. Except as provided elsewhere in the Critical Areas Code, all existing native vegetation in wetland buffers shall be retained without disturbance, mowing, or hard surfacing, nor shall any action be taken to inhibit volunteer regrowth of native vegetation. Invasive weeds shall be removed for the duration of the monitoring period. Stormwater management facilities, bioswales, low impact development facilities, and treated-water outfalls are permitted in the outer 50 percent of the buffer of Category II, III or IV wetlands; provided, that wetland functions and values are not significantly lost through fluctuations in wetland hydrology and construction integrates best management practices. (Ord. 2315, 2016)

14.260.050 Mitigation.
A. All significant adverse impacts to wetlands and buffers as determined by the City Planner shall be fully mitigated in accordance with the standards in this section and a mitigation plan consistent with this section. Mitigation measures to be addressed in the mitigation plan shall include, in order of preference, avoidance, minimization, restoration, rehabilitation, and compensation.
B. Mitigation for alterations to wetlands may be by restoring former wetlands, creating wetlands, or enhancing degraded wetlands, consistent with the Department of Ecology Guidance on Wetland Mitigation in Washington State, Part 2 (Ecology Publication #04-06-013B).
C. Mitigation shall generally replace wetland functions lost from the altered wetland except that the City may permit out-of-kind replacement when the lost functions are minimal or less important to the drainage basin than the functions that the mitigation action seeks to augment.
D. Mitigation shall be in the same drainage basin or sub-basin as the altered wetland, unless a higher level of ecological functioning would result from an alternate approach.
E. Mitigation projects shall be completed as quickly as possible, consistent with such factors as rainfall and seasonal sensitivity of fish, wildlife, and flora, and shall be completed no later than the first year following completion of the development project.
F. Mitigation projects shall be designed with reference to the Department of Ecology’s Guidance on Wetland Mitigation in Washington State, Part 2 (Ecology Publication #04-06013B) and Appendix 8-C of the Department of Ecology’s Wetlands in Washington - Volume 2: Guidance for Protecting and Managing Wetlands (Ecology Publication #04-06-024).
G. Mitigation for alterations to wetlands shall achieve equivalent or greater biologic functions and shall provide similar wetland functions as those lost, except when:
    1. The lost wetland provides minimal functions as determined by a site-specific function assessment and the proposed mitigation action(s) will provide equal or greater functions or will provide functions shown to be limiting within a watershed through a watershed assessment plan or protocol; or
    2. Out-of-kind replacement will best meet formally identified regional goals such as replacement of historically diminished wetland types.
H. Compensation in the form of wetland creation, restoration or enhancement is required when a wetland is altered permanently as a result of an approved project. Alterations shall not result in net loss of wetland area, except when compensation for wetland alterations is provided in the following order of preference:
    1. Wetlands are restored on upland sites that were formerly wetlands.
    2. Wetlands are created on disturbed upland sites such as those with vegetative cover consisting primarily of exotic introduced species.
I. Mitigation actions shall be conducted within the same sub-drainage basin and on the same site as the alteration except when all of the following apply:
    1. Either there are no reasonable on-site or in-sub-drainage basin opportunities, or on-site and in-sub-drainage basin opportunities do not have a high likelihood of success due to development pressures, adjacent land uses, or on-site buffers or connectivity are inadequate.
    2. Off-site mitigation has a greater likelihood of providing equal or improved wetland functions than the altered wetland.
    3. Where feasible, mitigation projects shall be completed prior to activities that will disturb wetlands. In all other cases, mitigation shall be completed immediately following disturbance and prior to use or occupancy of the activity or development.
    4. Construction of mitigation projects shall be timed to reduce impacts to existing wildlife and vegetation.
    5. The applicant shall develop a mitigation plan that provides for construction, maintenance, monitoring, contingencies and adaptive management of the wetland compensation projects, as required by conditions of approval and consistent with the requirements of this chapter.
J. Wetland mitigation – Replacement ratios
    1. When an applicant proposes to alter or eliminate a regulated wetland, the functions and values of the affected wetland and buffer shall be replaced through wetland creation, restoration, or enhancement, according to the minimum ratios established in the table in this section. The ratios shall apply to wetland creation, restoration, or enhancement, which is in-kind, on-site, of the same category, timed prior to or concurrent with alteration, and has a high probability of success.
    2. Ratios for out-of-kind or off-site mitigation may be greater than set forth in the table, if the City Planner determines that additional mitigation is warranted to mitigate impacts. Ratios for remedial actions resulting from unauthorized alterations shall be greater than set forth in the table, provided that the extent of the increase shall be as determined by the City Planner to be appropriate in the circumstances.
    3. Replacement ratios may be decreased by up to 25 percent by the City Planner, if the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the City Planner that all of the following criteria are met:
        a. Documentation by a qualified professional demonstrates that the proposed mitigation actions have a very high likelihood of success;
        b. Documentation by a qualified professional demonstrates that the proposed mitigation actions will provide functions and values that are significantly greater than the wetland being altered;
        c. The proposed mitigation actions are conducted in advance of the impact and shown to be successful through post-construction monitoring and function assessment.
    4. The mitigation ratios in the following table are based on Appendix 8-C of the Department of Ecology’s Wetlands in Washington - Volume 2: Guidance for Protecting and Managing Wetlands (Ecology Publication #04-06-024):
    +------------------+-----------------+----------------+--------------------------+--------------+
    | Affected Wetland |                         Mitigation Type and Ratio                          |
    +------------------+-----------------+----------------+--------------------------+--------------+
    |     Category     | Reestablishment | Rehabilitation |     Reestablishment      | Enhancement  |
    |                  |   or Wetland    |                |    or Creation (R/C)     |     Only     |
    |                  |    Creation     |                |     and Enhancement      |              |
    |                  |                 |                |           (E)            |              |
    +------------------+-----------------+----------------+--------------------------+--------------+
    | Category IV      | 1.5:1           | 3:1            | 1:1 R/C and 2:1          | 6:1          |
    |                  |                 |                | E                        |              |
    +------------------+-----------------+----------------+--------------------------+--------------+
    | Category III     | 2:1             | 4:1            | 1:1 R/C and 2:1          | 8:1          |
    |                  |                 |                | E                        |              |
    +------------------+-----------------+----------------+--------------------------+--------------+
    | Category II      | 3:1             | 6:1            | 1:1 R/C and 4:1          | 12:1         |
    |                  |                 |                | E                        |              |
    +------------------+-----------------+----------------+--------------------------+--------------+
    | Category I -     | 6:1-            | 12:1           | 1:1 R/C                  | 24:1         |
    | Forested         |                 |                | 10:1 Enhancement         |              |
    +------------------+-----------------+----------------+--------------------------+--------------+
    | Category I -     | 4:1-            | 8:1            | 1:1 R/C 10:1 Enhancement | 16:1         |
    | Score Based      |                 |                |                          |              |
    +------------------+-----------------+----------------+--------------------------+--------------+
    | Category I -     | Not considered  | 6:1            | Case by Case             | Case by Case |
    | Bog              | possible        |                |                          |              |
    +------------------+-----------------+----------------+--------------------------+--------------+
K. Definitions specific to Wetland Mitigation. 
    1. Restoration. The manipulation of the physical, chemical, or biological characteristics of a site with the goal of returning natural or historic functions to a former or degraded wetland. For the purpose of tracking net gains in wetland acres, restoration is divided into reestablishment and rehabilitation, as follows:
        a. Reestablishment. The manipulation of the physical, chemical, or biological characteristics of a site with the goal of returning natural or historic functions to a former wetland. Activities could include removing fill material, plugging ditches, or breaking drain tiles. Reestablishment results in a gain in wetland acres.
        b. Rehabilitation. The manipulation of the physical, chemical, or biological characteristics of a site with the goal of repairing natural or historic functions of a degraded wetland. Activities could involve breaching a dike to reconnect wetlands to a floodplain or return tidal influence to a wetland. Rehabilitation results in a gain in wetland function but does not result in a gain in wetland acres.
    2. Creation. The manipulation of the physical, chemical, or biological characteristics present to develop a wetland on an upland or deepwater site, where a wetland did not previously exist. Activities typically involve excavation of upland soils to elevations that will produce a wetland hydroperiod, create hydric soils, and support the growth of hydrophytic plant species. Creation results in a gain in wetland acres.
    3. Enhancement. The manipulation of the physical, chemical, or biological characteristics of a wetland site to heighten, intensify or improve specific function(s) or to change the growth stage or composition of the vegetation present. Enhancement is undertaken for specified purposes such as water quality improvement, flood water retention or wildlife habitat. Activities typically consist of planting vegetation, controlling non-native or invasive species, modifying site elevations or the proportion of open water to influence hydroperiods, or some combination of these. Enhancement results in a change in some wetland functions and can lead to a decline in other wetland functions, but does not result in a gain in wetland acres.
    4. The distinction between rehabilitation and enhancement for the purposes of the rating system is further explained as follows:
        a. Rehabilitation includes:
            i. Actions that restore the original hydrogeomorphic (HGM) class, or subclass, to a wetland whose current HGM class, or subclass, has been changed as a result of human activities; and
            ii. Actions that restore the water regime that was present and maintained the wetland before human activities changed it.
        b. Enhancement includes:
            i. Any other actions taken in existing wetlands.
            ii. For example, a wetland that was once a forested riverine wetland was changed to a depressional, emergent wetland by the construction of a dike and through grazing. Rehabilitating the wetland would involve breaching the dike so the wetland becomes a riverine wetland again, removing the grazing, and reforesting the area. Removing the grazing and reforesting the wetland without reestablishing the links to the riverine system would be considered as enhancement. (Ord. 2083, 2005)

Chapter 14.265 CRITICAL AQUIFER RECHARGE AREAS

Sections:
14.265.010   Designation
14.265.020   Exemptions
14.265.030   Critical Area Reports
14.265.040   Substantive Requirements
14.265.050   Prohibited Activities and Uses

14.265.010 Designation.
A. Areas with a critical recharging effect on aquifers used for potable water as defined by WAC 365-190-030(2) are hereby designated critical areas and shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter.
B. The city is not currently aware of any critical aquifer recharge area in its jurisdiction. However, upon discovery of scientific data attesting to the existence of a critical aquifer recharge area, the City will apply the Critical Areas Code to said area.

14.265.020 Exemptions.
In addition to the developments listed in SMC 14.255.060, the following developments shall be exempt from this chapter:
A. Construction of structures, improvements, and additions of less than 2,500 square feet of total site impervious surface area, which do not increase the risk to the critical area from hazardous substances.
B. Development of parks, recreation facilities, or conservation areas that do not increase the risk to the critical area from hazardous substances.

14.265.030 Critical Area Reports.
A. In addition to the requirements of SMC 14.255.120, critical area reports for critical aquifer recharge areas shall include a hydro geologic assessment.
B. Level 1 (basic) hydro geologic assessments shall be prepared for all critical aquifer recharge areas and shall include the following information:
    1. Available information regarding geology and hydrogeology of the site, including permeability of the unsaturated zone;
    2. Ground water depth, flow direction, and gradient based on available information;
    3. Available data on wells and springs within 1,300 feet;
    4. Location of other critical areas, including surface waters, within 1,300 feet; and
    5. Best management practices proposed to be utilized.
C. A Level 2 (more detailed) hydro geologic assessment shall be prepared in compliance with the following:
    1. A Level 2 hydro geologic assessment shall be prepared for the following activities:
        a. Activities that divert, alter, or reduce the flow of surface or ground waters, or otherwise reduce the recharging of the aquifer;
        b. The use of hazardous substances, other than household chemicals used according to the directions specified on the packaging;
        c. Injection wells; and
        d. Any other activity determined by the City Planner as being likely to have an adverse impact on ground water quality or quantity.
    2. A Level 2 Hydro geologic assessment shall include the following information:
        a. Historic water quality data for the area to be affected by the proposed development;
        b. Ground water monitoring plan;
        c. Potential effects on water quality and quantity of nearby wells and water bodies; and
        d. Analysis of equipment or structures that could fail and regular inspection, repair, and replacement necessary to prevent such failure.

14.265.040 Substantive Requirements.
In addition to the substantive requirements of SMC 14.255.120, the following requirements shall apply to critical aquifer recharge areas:
A. Proposed developments shall not cause contaminants to enter the aquifer or significantly reduce the recharging of the aquifer and shall comply with the water source protection requirements and recommendations of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Washington State Department of Health, and county health department.
B. Underground facilities for storing hazardous substances shall be designed to prevent releases due to corrosion or structural failure for the operational life of the tank.
C. Above-ground facilities for storing hazardous substances shall be designed to prevent accidental release, shall have a primary containment enclosing or underlying the tank, and shall have a secondary containment built into the tank structure or consisting of an external dike.
D. Vehicle repair and servicing shall be conducted over impermeable pads, within a covered structure capable of withstanding normal weather conditions. Chemicals shall be stored in a manner that protects them from weather and provides containment should leaks occur. Dry wells are prohibited.
E. Application of household pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers shall not exceed times and rates specified on the packaging.
F. Surface percolation or injection of reclaimed water shall conform to adopted water and sewer comprehensive plans, pursuant to RCW 90.46.080(1), RCW 90.46.010(10), and RCW 90.46.042.
G. The uses listed below shall be conditioned as necessary to protect critical aquifer recharge areas in accordance with the applicable state and federal regulations and to the extent that a City approval is required for said uses.
+-----------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------+
|                Activity                 |          Statute – Regulation – Guidance           |
+-----------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------+
| Above Ground Storage Tanks              | Chapter 173-303-640 WAC                            |
+-----------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------+
| Animal Feedlots                         | Chapter 173-216 WAC, Chapter 173-220 WAC           |
+-----------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------+
| Automobile Washers                      | Chapter 173-216 WAC, Best Management Practices     |
|                                         | for Vehicle and Equipment Discharges (Washington   |
|                                         | Department of Ecology WQ-R-95-56)                  |
+-----------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------+
| Below Ground Storage Tanks              | Chapter 173-360 WAC                                |
+-----------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------+
| Chemical Treatment Storage and Disposal | Chapter 173-303-182 WAC                            |
| Facilities                              |                                                    |
+-----------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------+
| Hazardous Waste Generator               | Chapter 173-303 WAC (Boat Repair Shops, Biological |
|                                         | Research Facility, Dry Cleaners, Furniture         |
|                                         | Stripping, Motor Vehicle Service Garages,          |
|                                         | Photographic Processing, Printing and Publishing   |
|                                         | Shops, etc.)                                       |
+-----------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------+
| Injection Wells                         | Federal 40 CFR Parts 144 and 146, Chapter          |
|                                         | 173-218 WAC                                        |
+-----------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------+
| Junk Yards and Salvage Yards            | Chapter 173-304 WAC, Best Management Practices     |
|                                         | to Prevent Stormwater Pollution at Vehicles        |
|                                         | Recycler Facilities (Washington Department         |
|                                         | of Ecology 94-146)                                 |
+-----------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------+
| Oil and Gas Drilling                    | Chapter 332-12-450 WAC, Chapter 173-218 WAC        |
+-----------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------+
| On-Site Sewage Systems (Large Scale)    | Chapter 173-240 WAC                                |
+-----------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------+
| On-Site Sewage Systems (< 14,500        | Chapter 246-272 WAC, Local Health Ordinances       |
| gal/day)                                |                                                    |
+-----------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------+
| Pesticide Storage and Use               | Chapter 15.54 RCW, Chapter 17.21 RCW               |
+-----------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------+
| Sawmills                                | Chapter 173-303 WAC, Chapter 173-304 WAC,          |
|                                         | Best Management Practices to Prevent Stormwater    |
|                                         | Pollution at Log Yards (Washington Department      |
|                                         | of Ecology, 95-53)                                 |
+-----------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------+
| Solid Waste Handling and Recycling      | Chapter 173-304 WAC                                |
| Facilities                              |                                                    |
+-----------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------+
| Surface Mining                          | Chapter 332-18-015 WAC                             |
+-----------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------+
| Waste Water Application to Land         | Chapter 173-216 WAC, Chapter 173-200 WAC,          |
| Surface                                 | Washington Department of Ecology Land Application  |
|                                         | Guidelines, Best Management Practices for          |
|                                         | Irrigated Agriculture                              |
+-----------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------+

14.265.050 Prohibited Activities and Uses.
The following activities and uses are prohibited in critical aquifer recharge areas (based on Guidance Document for the Establishment of Critical Aquifer Recharge Area Ordinances, by WDOE, Publication #97-30):
A. Landfills and solid waste transfer stations, including landfills for hazardous waste, municipal solid waste, special waste, wood waste and inert and demolition waste;
B. Underground injection wells. Class I, III, and IV wells and subclasses 5F01, 5D03, 5F04, 5W09, 5W10, 5W11, 5W31, 5X13, 5X14, 5X15, 5W20, 5X28, and 5N24 of Class V wells;
C. Mining of metals, hard rock, sand, and gravel;
D. Wood treatment facilities that allow any portion of the treatment process to occur over permeable surfaces;
E. Creosote or asphalt manufacturing;
F. Storage, processing, or disposal of hazardous, chemical, or radioactive substances;
G. Electroplating;
H. Class 1A or 1B flammable liquids manufacturing as defined by the Uniform Fire Code;
I. Conversion of heating systems to fuel oil;
J. New petroleum product pipelines;
K. Activities that would significantly reduce the recharge to aquifers currently or potentially used for potable water; and
L. Activities that would significantly reduce base flow to a regulated stream. (Ord. 2083, 2005)

Chapter 14.270 FLOOD HAZARD AREAS

Sections:
14.270.010   Authority
14.270.020   Findings of Fact
14.270.030   Purpose and Methods
14.270.040   Definitions (44 CFR 59.1).
14.270.050   General Provisions (44 CFR 59.22 (a))
14.270.060   Administration
14.270.070   General Standards for Flood Hazard Reduction
14.270.080   Specific Standards for Flood Hazard Reduction (44 CFR 60.3(c)(1))
14.270.090   Determination of Flood Insurance Risk
14.270.100   Floodplains as Critical Areas
14.270.110   Recordation

14.270.010 Authority.
The Constitution and Legislature of the State of Washington have delegated the responsibility to city governments to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of their citizenry.

14.270.020 Findings of Fact.
A. The flood hazard areas of the City of Snohomish are subject to periodic inundation, which may result in loss of life and property, health, and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities, and when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses that are inadequately flood proofed, elevated, or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.

14.270.030 Purpose and Methods.
A. Statement of Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, reduce the cost of flood insurance, and minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
    1. To protect human life and health;
    2. To minimize expenditure of public money and costly flood control projects;
    3. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
    4. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
    5. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas main, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;
    6. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard to minimize future flood blight areas;
    7. To help ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and
    8. To help ensure that those who occupy areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions.
B. Methods of Reducing Flood Losses. In order to accomplish its purposes and to be consistent with the criteria set forth in Section 60 of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations (NFIPR), this chapter includes methods and provisions for:
    1. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
    2. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
    3. Controlling the alteration of natural flood plains, stream channels, and protective barriers that help accommodate or channel floodwaters;
    4. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development that may increase flood damage; and
    5. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers that unnaturally divert floodwaters or may increase flood hazards in other areas.

14.270.040 Definitions (44 CFR 59.1).
Unless specifically defined below, terms or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
Appeal: means a request for a review of the interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
Area of Shallow Flooding: designated as AO, or AH Zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). AO zones have base flood depths that range from one to three feet above the natural ground; a clearly defined channel does exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and, velocity flow may be evident. AO is characterized as sheet flow; AH indicates ponding, and is shown with standard base flood elevations.
Area of Special Flood Hazard: is the land in the flood plain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Designation on maps always includes the letters A or V.
Base Flood: means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also referred to as the “100-year flood" Designated on Flood Insurance Rate Maps by the letters A or V.)
Basement: means any area of the building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides.
Breakaway Wall: means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
Critical Facility: means a facility for which even a slight chance of flooding might be too great. Critical facilities include (but are not limited to) schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire and emergency response installations, and installations which produce, use, or store hazardous materials or hazardous waste.
Development: means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood hazard.
Elevation Certificate: means the official form (FEMA Form 81-31) used to track development and provide elevation information necessary to ensure compliance with state and federal floodplain management ordinances.
Elevated Building: means for insurance purposes, a non-basement building that has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, post, piers, pilings, or columns.
Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) and is completed before the effective date of the adopted floodplain management regulations.
Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
Flood or Flooding: means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
    1. The overflow on inland or tidal waters and/or
    2. The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM): means the official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
Flood Insurance Study (FIS): means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Maps, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
Floodway: means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
Lowest Floor: means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this Chapter. (i.e. provided there are adequate flood ventilation openings).
Manufactured Home: means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term “manufactured home” does not include a "recreational vehicle."
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
New Construction: means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of this Chapter.
New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of adopted floodplain management regulations.
Recreational Vehicle: means a vehicle,
    1. Built on a single chassis;
    2. 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
    3. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
    4. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Start of Construction: includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
Structure: means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
Substantial Damage: means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial Improvement: means any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure;
    1. Before the improvement or repair is started; or
    2. If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of the definition “substantial improvement” is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.
The term can exclude:
    1. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct pre-cited existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been previously identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
    2. Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
Variance: means a grant of relief from the requirements of this ordinance that permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this ordinance.
Water Dependent: means a structure for commerce or industry that cannot exist in any other location and is dependent on the water because of the intrinsic nature of its operations.

14.270.050 General Provisions (44 CFR 59.22 (a)).
A. Lands to which this chapter applies:
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards and flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the City of Snohomish.
B. Basis for Establishing the Areas of Flood Hazard. The areas of flood hazard and special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled “The Flood Insurance Study for Snohomish County” dated September 16, 2005, and any revisions thereto, with an accompanying Flood Insurance Rated Map (FIRM), and any revisions thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this ordinance. The flood Insurance Study and the FIRM are on file at City Hall, 116 Union Street, Snohomish, WA 98290.
C. Penalties for Noncompliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this Chapter and other applicable regulations.
D. Interpretation
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
    1. Considered as minimum requirements;
    2. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
    3. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State statutes.
E. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. However, larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions, and flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of Snohomish, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.

14.270.060 Administration.
A. Development Permit Required (44 CFR 60.3 (b) (1)). A development permit is required before construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard. The permit shall be for all structures including manufactured homes, as set forth in the “Definitions,” and for all development including fill and other activities, also as set forth in the “Definitions.”
B. Application for Development Permit. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the City of Snohomish and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:
    1. Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures recorded on a current elevation certificate (FF 81-31) with Section B completed by the local official;
    2. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been flood proofed;
    3. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the flood proofing methods for any non-residential structure meet FEMA flood proofing criteria; and
    4. Description of the extent to which a watercourse will be altered or relocated in the proposed development.
C. Designation of the Local Administrator (44 CFR 59.22(b)(1)). The City Planner is the designated local administrator to administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions.
D. Permit Review. 
    1. The City Planner shall review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
    2. The City Planner shall review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits required in this chapter have been obtained from those Federal, State, or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required. (44 CFR 60.3(a)(2))
    3. The City Planner shall review all development permits to determine if the proposed development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway, assure that the encroachment provisions of this chapter are met.
E. Use of Other Base Flood Data (In A and V Zones) (44 CFR 60.3 (b) (4)). When base flood elevation data has not been provided (in A or V Zones) in accordance with Section 14.270.050 B, Basis for Establishing the Areas of Flood Hazard, the City Planner shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, State or other source, in order to administer Sections 14.270.080 A through F of this Chapter.
F. Information to be Obtained and Maintained. 
    1. Where base flood elevation data is provided through the Flood Insurance Study, FIRM, or required as in SMC 14.270.060 E, the City Planner shall obtain and record the actual (as-built) elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure contains a basement. (44 CFR 60.3(b)(5)(i)) (The information shall be recorded on a current elevation certificate (FF 81-31) with Section B completed by the City Planner.)
    2. For all new or substantially improved flood proofed nonresidential structures where base flood elevation data is provided through the FIS, FIRM, or as required in SMC 14.270.060 E, The City Planner shall:
        i. Obtain and record the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure was flood proofed (44 CFR 60.3(b)(5)(ii))
        ii. Maintain the flood proofing certifications required by FEMA (44 CFR 60.3(b)(5)(iii)).
    3. The City Planner shall maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter. (44 CFR 60.3(b)(5)(iii) )
G. Alteration of Watercourses (44 CFR 60.3(b)(6))
    1. The City Planner shall notify adjacent communities and the Department of Ecology prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
    2. The City Planner shall require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished.
H. Interpretation of FIRM Boundaries. The City Planner shall provide interpretations where needed, as to exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (e.g. where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation. Such appeals shall be granted consistent with the standards of Section 60.6 of the Rules and Regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program (44 CFR 59-76).
I. Conditions for Variances. 
    1. Generally, the only condition under which a variance from the elevation standard be issued is for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a small or irregularly shaped lot contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level. As the lot size increases the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
    2. Variances shall not be issued within a designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
    3. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
    4. Variances shall only be issued upon:
        i. A Showing of good and sufficient cause;
        ii. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
        iii. A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
    5. Variances as interpreted in the National Flood Insurance Program are based on the general zoning law principle that they pertain to a physical piece of property; they are not personal in nature, and they do not pertain to the structure, its inhabitants, economic or financial circumstances. They primarily address small lots in densely populated residential neighborhoods. As such, variances from flood elevations should be quite rare.
    6. Variances may be issued for nonresidential buildings in very limited circumstances to allow a lesser degree of flood proofing than watertight or dry-flood proofing, where it can be determined that such action will have low damage potential, complies with all other variance criteria and otherwise complies with recommended FEMA General Standards.
    7. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the permitted structure will be built with its lowest floor below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk.
    8. In the case of a conflict between the application of the variance provisions of this section and SMC 14.255.130, this section shall control.

14.270.070 General Standards for Flood Hazard Reduction.
In all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards are required:
A. Anchoring (44 CFR 60.3(a)(b)). 
    1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure. (44 CFR 60.3(a)(3)(i))
    2. All manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement, and shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. Anchoring methods may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. (44 CFR 60.3(b)(8)). For more detailed information in application of this chapter, reference will be made to guidebook, FEMA-85, “Manufactured Home Installation in Flood Hazard Areas.”
B. Construction Materials and Methods. 
    1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
    2. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
    3. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or otherwise elevated or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. Locating such equipment below the base flood elevation may cause annual flood insurance premiums to be increased.
C. Utilities (44 CFR 60.3(a)(5)(6))
    1. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems;
    2. Water wells shall be located on high ground that is not in the floodway*
    3. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters;
    4. Onsite waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding identified WAC 173-160-171.
D. Subdivision Proposals (44 CFR 60.3(A)(4)(B)(3))
    1. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
    2. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage;
    3. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage;
    4. Where base flood elevation data has not been provided or is not available from another authoritative source, it shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments which contain at least 50 lots or 5 acres (whichever is less).
E. Review of Building Permits (44 CFR 60.3(a)(3))
Where elevation data is not available either through the Flood Insurance Study, FIRM, or from another authoritative source (SMC 14.270.060(E)), applications for building permits shall be reviewed to assure that proposed construction will be reasonably safe from flooding. The test of reasonableness is a local judgment and includes use of historical data, high water marks, photographs of past flooding, etc., where available. Failure to elevate at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade in these zones may result in higher insurance rates.

14.270.080 Specific Standards for Flood Hazard Reduction (44 CFR 60.3(c)(1)).
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in this chapter, the following standards are required:
A. Residential Construction. 
    1. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated one foot or more* above the base flood elevation. (BFE)
    *Minimum FEMA standards require the lowest floor to be elevated “to or above” the BFE; however, adding an additional foot of freeboard increases safety and can reduce insurance premiums by as much as 39 percent.
    2. Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding are prohibited, or shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
        i. A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed areas subject to flooding shall be provided.
        ii. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.
        iii. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices if they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. Foundation vent standards required by the IBC/IRC outside the floodplain do not meet this standard and are subject to the City Building Official’s review.
B. Nonresidential Construction (44 CFR 60.3(c)(3)(4))
All new construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated one foot or more above the base flood elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:
    1. Be flood proofed so that below one foot or more above the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
    2. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic load and effects of buoyancy;
    3. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting provisions of this subsection based on their development and/or review of the structural design, specifications, and plans. Such certifications shall be provided as set forth in Section 14.270.060 F(2);
    4. Nonresidential structures that are elevated, not flood proofed, must meet the same standards for space below the lowest floor as described in 14.270.080 A(2);
    5. Applicants who are flood proofing nonresidential buildings should be notified that flood insurance premiums will be based on rates that are one foot below the flood proofed level (e.g. a building flood proofed to the base flood level will be rated as one foot below). Flood proofing the building an additional foot will reduce insurance premiums significantly.
C. Manufactured Homes (44 CFR 60.3(c)(6)(12))
All manufactured homes in the floodplain to be placed or substantially improved on sites shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated one foot or more above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
D. Recreational Vehicles (44 CFR 60.3(c)(14))
All recreational vehicles placed on sites are required to either:
    1. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or
    2. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and have no permanently attached additions; or
    3. Meet the requirements of SMC 14.270.080 C and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes.
E. AE and A1-30 Zones with Base Flood Elevations but No Floodways (44 CFR 60.3(c)(10))
In all areas with base flood elevations (but for which a regulatory floodway has not been designated), no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the City’s FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the City.
F. Floodways
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 14.270.050 B are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters that can carry debris and increase erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
    1. Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improve-ments, and other development are prohibited, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided, demonstrating through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge, in which case all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable standards for flood hazard reductions set forth in Sections 14.270.070 and 14.270.080. (44 CFR 60.3(d)(3))
    2. Construction or reconstruction of residential structures is prohibited within designated floodways, except for (i) repairs, reconstruction, or improvements to a structure which do not increase the ground floor area; and (ii) repairs, reconstruction or improvements to a structure, the cost of which does not exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure either, (A) before the repair or reconstruction is started, or (B) if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or to structures identified as historic places, may be excluded from the 50 percent limitation. (WAC 173-158-070)
G. Critical Facilities Construction. Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent possible, located outside the limits of the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) (100-year floodplain). Construction of new critical facilities shall be permissible within the SFHA, if no feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the lowest floor elevated three feet above BFE or to the height of the 500-year flood, whichever is higher. Access to and from the critical facility should also be protected to the height utilized above. Flood proofing and sealing measures are required to ensure that toxic substances not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation are required for all critical facilities to the maximum extent possible.

14.270.090 Determination of Flood Insurance Risk.
For the purpose of the determination of applicable flood insurance risk within Zone A on Snohomish’s Flood Hazard Boundary Map, the City Planner shall:
A. Require the applicant to furnish the elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest habitable floor including basement of all new or substantially improved structures, and whether or not such structures contain a basement.
B. Require the applicant to furnish if the structure has been flood proofed, the elevation in relation to mean sea level to which the structure was flood proofed through a certified professional engineer or architect.
C. Maintain a record of all such information in the City’s address file system.

14.270.100 Floodplains as Critical Areas.
A. For the purpose of the City’s Critical Areas regulations, as set forth in SMC 14.255, Floodplains are those areas that provide important flood storage, conveyance and attenuation functions and include all land within such areas that are subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
B. Floodplains shall be designated by the City Planner in accordance with WAC 365-190-080(3).
    1. The City Planner shall use the “areas of special flood hazard” as identified on the Federal Emergency Management Administration’s most current Flood Insurance Rate Map for the City as the indicator of where floodplains exist, useless more detailed, current, and convincing evidence indicates otherwise.
    2. Floodplains shall include, at a minimum, the 100-year floodplain designations of the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the National Flood Insurance Program.
C. The City Planner may waive the critical areas report required by SMC 14.255.080 for developments proposed in the floodplain, if the applicable permit application contains sufficient data to verify compliance with the substantive requirements, except for the following developments:
    1. Developments in the floodway, which is the area shown in the illustration that accompanies the definition of “floodplain” in SMC 14.100.020; and
    2. Developments that result in watercourse alteration.
D. In addition to the requirements of SMC 14.255.050 and this chapter, the following requirements shall apply to floodplains:
    1. To the extent possible consistent with the development objective, all improvements shall be located on the non-floodplain portion of the site, if any, or on the highest ground on the site, as far as possible from the flood source.
    2. Alteration of natural watercourses, including side channels, tributaries, and channel migration zones, is to be avoided when feasible. If unavoidable, the City Planner shall notify adjacent communities, the Department of Ecology, the State Department of Fish and Wildlife, and FEMA prior to alteration. Any stream-bank stabilization shall consider the use soft armoring or best available armoring science.

14.270.110 Recordation.
The City Planner shall record:
A. The as-built elevation above mean sea level of the lowest habitable floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures, and whether the structure contains a basement;
B. Certificates of flood-proofing and flood elevation; and
C. Permits and variances issued in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 2090, 2005)

Chapter 14.275 GEOLOGICALLY HAZARDOUS AREAS

Sections:
14.275.010   Designation
14.275.020   Mapping
14.275.030   Exemptions
14.275.040   Critical Area Reports
14.275.050   Substantive Requirements
14.275.060   Decisions

14.275.010 Designation.
A. Geologically hazardous areas include areas in the City that are designated by the City Planner as potentially not suited to development based on public health, safety or environmental standards, because of such areas’ susceptibility to erosion, sliding, earthquake, or other geological processes as designated by WAC 365-190-080(4).
B. The City Planner may designate areas as geologically hazardous, including erosion, landslide, and seismic hazard areas, consistent with the following:
    1. Erosion hazard areas are areas identified by the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Natural Resources Conservation Service as having a moderate-to-severe, severe, or very severe rill and inter-rill (sheet wash) erosion hazard.
    2. Landslide hazard areas are areas subject to landslides based on geology, soils, topography, and hydrology, including:
        a. Areas delineated by the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Natural Resources Conservation Service as having a severe limitation for building site development;
        b. Areas mapped by the Washington Department of Ecology (Coastal Zone Atlas) or the Washington State Department of Natural Resources (slope stability mapping) as unstable (U or class 3), unstable old slides (UOS or class 4), or unstable recent slides (URS or class 5);
        c. Areas designated as quaternary slumps, earthflows, mudflows, lahars, or landslides on maps published by the U.S. Geological Survey or Washington State Department of Natural Resources;
        d. Areas where the following coincide: slopes steeper than fifteen percent, relatively permeable sediment overlying a relatively impermeable sediment or bedrock, and ground water seepage;
        e. Areas that have shown movement in the past ten thousand years or that are underlain or covered by mass wastage debris of that time frame;
        f. Slopes that are parallel or sub-parallel to planes of weakness (such as bedding planes, joint systems, and fault planes) in subsurface materials;
        g. Slopes steeper than eighty percent subject to rock fall during seismic shaking;
        h. Areas potentially unstable because of rapid stream incision, stream bank erosion, and undercutting by wave action;
        i. Areas at risk from snow avalanches;
        j. Canyons or active alluvial fans subject to debris flows or catastrophic flooding; and
        k. Slopes of forty percent or steeper with a vertical relief of ten or more feet except areas composed of consolidated rock.
    3. Seismic hazard areas are areas subject to severe risk of damage as a result of earthquake induced ground shaking, slope failure, settlement, soil liquefaction, lateral spreading, or surface faulting. One indicator of potential earthquake damage is a record of past earthquake damage. Settlement and soil liquefaction occur in areas underlain by cohesionless, loose, or soft-saturated soils of low density, typically in association with a shallow ground water table.
    4. Mine hazard, volcanic, and tsunami hazard areas (none known to be present in the City: see WAC 365-190-080).
    5. Other geologically hazardous areas including areas susceptible to mass wasting, debris flows, rock falls, and differential settlement.

14.275.020 Mapping.
The following maps, which may be continuously updated, may be used as a guide for locating geologically hazardous areas.
A. U.S. Geological Survey landslide hazard, seismic hazard, and volcano hazard maps;
B. Washington State Department of Natural Resources seismic hazard maps for Western Washington;
C. Washington State Department of Natural Resources slope stability maps; and
D. Locally adopted maps.

14.275.030 Exemptions.
In addition to those listed in SMC 14.255.060, the following developments shall be exempt from this chapter:
A. Additions of fewer than 250 square feet to single-story residences, provided that the City Engineer determines the addition will not increase the risk to the residence or adjacent development;
B. Fences; and
C. Other minor developments as determined by the City Planner consistent with the purposes of the Critical Areas Code.

14.275.040 Critical Area Reports.
In addition to the requirements of SMC 14.255.080, critical area reports for geologically hazardous areas shall include, where applicable:
A. Site history regarding landslides, erosion, and prior grading;
B. Topography in suitable contour intervals;
C. Height of slope, slope gradient, slope stability, and slope retreat rate recognizing potential catastrophic events;
D. Description of the geology (including faults), hydrology (including springs, seeps, and surface runoff features), soils (including, in seismic hazard areas, thickness of unconsolidated deposits and liquefaction potential), and vegetation;
E. Type, extent, and severity of geologic hazard(s);
F. Analysis of the proposal’s risk from the geologic hazard and the proposal’s potential for exacerbating off-site hazards or depositing sediment in wetlands or habitat areas;
G. Recommended buffers and other conditions of approval. In areas of erosion or landslide hazard, the recommended conditions may include:
    1. Clearing, fill, and hard-surfacing limits, slope stabilization measures, and vegetation management plan;
    2. Limitation on clearing during the rainy season, generally from October 1 to May 1;
    3. Design parameters of foundations and retaining structures; and
    4. Drainage plan and erosion and sediment control plan in compliance with City stormwater management regulations.
H. Overview of field investigations, measurements, references, and past assessments of the site.

14.275.050 Substantive Requirements.
In addition to the substantive requirements of SMC 14.255.120, the following requirements shall apply to geologic hazard areas:
A. Alteration of geologically hazardous areas and buffers shall be prohibited except as expressly allowed in this chapter;
B. Proposed developments shall not increase the long-term risk of or exposure to a geologic hazard on-site or off-site;
C. Hazard mitigation shall not rely on actions that require extensive maintenance;
D. Development near an erosion or landslide hazard area shall:
    1. Observe a buffer from the edges thereof, of adequate width to comply with the substantive requirements;
    2. Not decrease the factor of safety for landslides below the limits of 1.5 for static conditions and 1.2 for dynamic conditions. Analysis of dynamic conditions may be based on a minimum horizontal acceleration as established by the International Building Code;
    3. Cluster structures and improvements as necessary to avoid hazard areas;
    4. Use retaining walls that allow the retention of existing natural slopes when possible rather than graded artificial slopes;
    5. Place utility lines and pipes in erosion and landslide hazard areas only when no other alternative is available and when the line or pipe can be installed above ground in such a manner as to remain intact without leaks in the event of a slide;
    6. Discharge water from surface water facilities and roof drains onto or upstream from an erosion or landslide hazard area only if:
        a. Discharged at flow durations matching pre-developed conditions, with adequate energy dissipation, into existing channels; or
        b. Dispersed upslope of the steep slope onto a low-gradient undisturbed buffer of adequate infiltrate capacity without increasing saturation of the slope.
    7. Locate any on-site sewage drain fields outside the hazard area and related buffers.

14.275.060 Decisions.
A. The City may approve, condition or deny development proposals in geologically hazardous areas based on the degree to which risks to public and private property and to health and safety can be mitigated.
B. Conditions may include limitations of or on proposed uses, density modification, alteration of site layout and other changes to the proposal determined appropriate by the City Planner.
C. Where the City Planner determines that potential adverse impacts cannot be effectively mitigated, or where the risk to public health, safety and welfare, property, or important natural resources is significant notwithstanding mitigation, the proposal shall be denied. (Ord. 2083, 2005)

Chapter 14.280 HABITAT CONSERVATION AREAS

Sections:
14.280.010   Designation of Habitat Conservation Areas
14.280.020   Designation of Habitats and Species of Local Importance
14.280.030   Mapping
14.280.040   Critical Area Reports
14.280.050   Substantive Requirements
14.280.060   Habitat Conservation Area Buffers

14.280.010 Designation of Habitat Conservation Areas.
Habitat conservation areas shall be designated by the City Planner to include the following:
A. Areas having a primary association with fish and wildlife species identified by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and the National Marine Fisheries Service as being in danger of extinction or threatened to become endangered;
B. Areas having a primary association with fish and wildlife species identified by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife as being in danger of extinction, threatened to become endangered, vulnerable, or declining and likely to become endangered or threatened in a significant portion of their range within the state without cooperative management or removal of threats. See WAC 232-12-014 (state endangered species) and WAC 232-12-011 (state threatened and sensitive species);
C. State priority habitats as identified by the state Department of Fish and Wildlife;
D. Habitats and species of local importance as identified by the City in accordance with SMC 14.280.020;
E. Waters of the state, including lakes, rivers, ponds, streams, inland waters, underground waters, salt waters, and all other surface waters and watercourses within the jurisdiction of the state of Washington, as classified in WAC 222-16-031;
F. Ponds under twenty acres that provide fish or wildlife habitat, except artificial ponds created for a non-wildlife purpose such as stormwater detention facilities, wastewater treatment facilities, farm ponds, and temporary construction ponds;
G. Lakes, ponds, streams, and rivers planted with game fish by a governmental or tribal entity;
H. Natural area preserves and natural resource conservation areas as defined by the Washington State Department of Natural Resources;
I. Areas of rare plant species and high quality ecosystems as identified by the Washington State Department of Natural Resources through the Natural Heritage Program (see Chapter 79.70 RCW); and
J. Land useful or essential for preserving connections between habitat blocks and open spaces.

14.280.020 Designation of Habitats and Species of Local Importance.
A. Habitats and species of local importance are those identified by the City, including but not limited to those habitats and species that, due to their population status or sensitivity to habitat manipulation, warrant protection. Habitats may include a seasonal range or habitat element with which a species has a primary association, and which, if altered, may reduce the likelihood that the species will maintain and reproduce over the long term.
B. The City shall accept and consider nomination for habitat areas and species to be designated as locally important on an annual basis.
C. Habitats and species to be designated shall exhibit at least one of the criteria in subsections C.1 through C.3 and shall meet criteria C.4 and C.5.
    1. Local populations of native species are in danger of extirpation based on existing trends, including:
        a. Local populations of native species that are likely to become endangered; or
        b. Local populations of native species that are vulnerable or declining; or
    2. The species or habitat has recreation, commercial, game, tribal, or other special value; or
    3. Long-term persistence of a species is dependent on the protection, maintenance, and/or restoration of the nominated habitat; and
    4. Protection by other county, state, or federal policies, laws, regulations, or nonregulatory tools is not adequate to prevent degradation of the species or habitat in the City; and
    5. Without protection, there is a likelihood that the species or habitat will be diminished over the long term.
D. Areas nominated to protect a particular habitat or species must represent high-quality native habitat or habitat that either has a high potential to recover to a suitable condition and is of limited availability or provides landscape connectivity which contributes to the designated species or habitat’s preservation.
E. Habitats and species may be nominated for designation by any resident of Snohomish.
F. The petition to nominate an area or a species to this category shall contain all of the following:
    1. A completed SEPA environmental checklist;
    2. A written statement using best available science to show that nomination criteria are met;
    3. A written proposal including specific and relevant protection regulations that meet the goals of this Chapter. Management strategies must be supported by the best available science, and where restoration of habitat is proposed, a specific plan for restoration must be provided;
    4. Demonstration of relevant, feasible, management strategies that are effective and within the scope of this Chapter;
    5. Provision of species habitat location(s) on a map that works in concert with other City maps;
    6. A financial report identifying the cost of implementing a mitigation or protection plan and the financial impact of the requested designation upon affected properties;
    7. Documentation of public notice methods that the petitioner(s) have used. Examples of reasonable methods are:
        a. Posting the property.
        b. Publishing a paid advertisement in a newspaper or newsletter of circulation in the general area of the proposal, where interested persons may review information on the proposal. Information in the notice must contain a description of the proposal, general location of the affected area and where comments on the proposal may be sent.
        c. Notification to public or private groups in the affected area that may have an interest in the petition.
        d. News media articles that have been published concerning the proposal.
        e. Notices placed at public buildings or bulletin boards in the affected area.
        f. Mailing of informational flyers to property owners within the affected area; and
    8. Signatures of all petitioners.
G. The City Planner shall determine whether the nomination proposal is complete, and if complete, shall evaluate it according to the characteristics enumerated in subsection C and make a recommendation to the Planning Commission based on those findings.
H. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing for proposals found to be complete and make a recommendation to the City Council based on the characteristics enumerated in subsection C.
I. Following the recommendation of the Planning Commission, the City Council may hold an additional public hearing and shall determine whether to designate a Habitat or Species of Local Importance.
J. Approved nominations will be subject to the provisions of this Title.

14.280.030 Mapping.
The following maps, which may be continuously updated, may be used as a guide for locating habitat conservation areas:
A. Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife Priority Habitat and Species maps;
B. Washington State Department of Natural Resources, Official Water Type Reference maps;
C. Washington State Department of Natural Resources Shorezone Inventory;
D. Washington State Department of Natural Resources Natural Heritage Program mapping data;
E. Anadromous and resident salmonid distribution maps contained in the Habitat Limiting Factors reports published by the Washington Conservation Commission; and
F. Washington State Department of Natural Resources State Natural Area Preserves and Natural Resource Conservation Area maps.

14.280.040 Critical Area Reports.
In addition to the general critical area report requirements of SMC 14.255.080, critical area reports for habitat conservation areas shall include, where applicable:
A. Vegetation assessment; and
B. Discussion of any federal, state, or local special management recommendations for species or habitats on or near the site.

14.280.050 Substantive Requirements.
In addition to the substantive requirements of SMC 14.255.120, the following requirements shall apply to habitat conservation areas:
A. No plant, wildlife, or fish species not indigenous to the region shall be introduced into a habitat conservation area, except with approval of a state or federal agency with expertise.
B. Preference in mitigation shall be given to contiguous wildlife habitat corridors.
C. In reviewing development proposals, the City shall seek opportunities to restore degraded riparian fish and wildlife functions such as breeding, rearing, migration, and feeding.
D. The City shall require buffers of undisturbed native vegetation adjacent to habitat conservation areas in accordance with SMC 14.280.060. Buffer widths shall reflect the sensitivity of the habitat and may reflect the intensity of nearby human activity.
E. When a species is more sensitive to human activity during a specific season of the year, the City may establish an extra outer buffer from which human activity is excluded during said season.
F. No development shall be allowed within a habitat conservation area or buffer with which state or federal endangered, threatened, or sensitive species have a primary association, except in exchange for restoration as approved by the City Planner or as provided in a management plan approved by a state or federal agency with appropriate expertise.
G. When a development permit is applied for on land containing or adjacent to a bald eagle nest or communal roost, the City shall notify the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife and otherwise comply with WAC 232-12-292.
H. No development shall be permitted which degrades the functions or values of anadromous fish habitat, including structures or fills which impact migration or spawning, except in exchange for restoration.
I. Construction and other activities within streams shall be seasonally restricted as necessary to protect the resource. Activities shall be timed to occur during work windows designated by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife for applicable fish species.
J. Shoreline erosion control shall use bioengineering methods or soft armoring in accordance with an approved critical area report.
K. Relocation of streams is not permitted unless it is part of a stream restoration project and it will result in equal or better habitat and water quality, and will not diminish the flow capacity of the stream.
L. The following requirements shall apply to culverts:
    1. Culverts may be allowed in streams only if they are necessary for the development to occur, if they are designed according to the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife criteria for fish passage and if a state hydraulic project approval has been issued.
    2. The applicant or property owner shall keep every culvert free of debris and sediment at all times to allow free passage of water and, if applicable, fish.
    3. The City may require that a stream be removed from an existing culvert as a condition of approval, unless the culvert is not detrimental to fish habitat or water quality, or removal and/or replacement would be detrimental to fish or wildlife habitat or water quality on a long-term basis.
M. Clearing and grading, when permitted as part of an authorized development activity or as otherwise allowed in these standards, shall comply with the following:
    1. Grading shall be allowed only during the designated dry season, which is typically regarded as beginning April 1st and ending October 31st of each year; provided that the City may extend or shorten the designated dry season on a case-by-case basis to reflect actual weather conditions and the incorporation of best management practices to control stormwater.
    2. The soil duff layer shall remain undisturbed to the maximum extent possible. Where feasible, any soil disturbed shall be redistributed to other areas of the site, provided that such redistribution shall not constitute authorized fill.
    3. The moisture-holding capacity of the topsoil layer shall be maintained by minimizing soil compaction or reestablishing natural soil structure and infiltrative capacity on all areas of the project area not covered by impervious surfaces.
N. To the extent facilities are allowed in habitat conservation areas, the following regulations shall apply.
    1. Trails shall be on the outer edge of the stream buffer except for limited viewing platforms and crossings. Trails and platforms shall be of pervious materials as far as possible.
    2. Road bridges and culverts shall be designed according to the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife Fish Passage Design at Road Culverts, 1999, and the National Marine Fisheries Service Guidelines for Salmonid Passage at Stream Crossings, 2000.
    3. Utility lines shall be accomplished by boring beneath the scour depth and hyporheic zone (the saturated zone beneath and adjacent to streams that filters nutrients and maintains water quality). Utilities shall avoid paralleling streams or changing the natural rate of shore or channel migration.
    4. New and expanded public flood protection measures shall require a biological assessment approved by the agency responsible for protecting federally listed species.
    5. In-stream structures such as high-flow bypasses, sediment ponds, instream ponds, retention and detention facilities, tide gates, dams, and weirs shall be allowed only as part of an approved restoration project.
    6. Stormwater conveyance structures shall incorporate fish habitat features and the sides of open channels and ponds shall be vegetated to retard erosion, filter sediments, and shade the water.
    7. Watercourse alterations shall be in accordance with SMC 14.270.030.H.

14.280.060 Habitat Conservation Area Buffers.
A. The following table establishes the standard width of required stream buffers (also known as riparian habitat areas):
+--------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
|                Stream type                 |            Habitat buffer width             |
+--------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| • Snohomish River                          | 100 feet, provided that                     |
| • Pilchuck River                           | 1) limited public access is allowed in      |
|                                            | the 50 feet nearer the river, and           |
|                                            | 2) water-dependent and water-related        |
|                                            | uses are allowed in the 50 feet further     |
|                                            | from the river, if mitigation measures      |
|                                            | result in the uses contributing toward      |
|                                            | projects that enhance salmonid rearing      |
|                                            | habitat as identified in the Snohomish      |
|                                            | ESA Strategy and if, as further mitigation, |
|                                            | public access is permitted across the       |
|                                            | waterfront portion of the site when         |
|                                            | such a mitigation measure is supported      |
|                                            | by the particular circumstances and         |
|                                            | the purposes of the Critical Areas Code.    |
+--------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| • Cemetery Creek downstream of Fobes       | 100 feet, provided that limited public      |
| Road, Bunk Foss Creek, and any tributaries | access is allowed in the first 50 feet      |
| thereof containing salmonids               | of buffer.                                  |
| • All streams flowing into Blackman’s      | 50 feet.                                    |
| Lake, including that part of Swifty        |                                             |
| Creek above Blackman’s Lake                |                                             |
+--------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| • Swifty Creek below Blackman’s Lake       | 50 feet, provided that limited public       |
| • Myrick’s Fork in the Cemetery Creek      | access is allowed in the 25 feet of         |
| basin                                      | buffer.                                     |
| • Collins Creek in the Bunk Foss Creek     |                                             |
| basin (upstream of salmon spawning         |                                             |
| and rearing areas)                         |                                             |
+--------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------+
|             Stream type             | Standard buffer width |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| Type S (shorelines of the state per | 100 feet              |
| Shorelines Management Act)          |                       |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| Type F (fish-bearing other than S)  | 75 feet               |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| Type Np (non-fish, perennial)       | 50 feet               |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| Type Ns (non-fish, seasonal)        | 35 feet               |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------+
B. Widths shall be measured outward in each direction, on the horizontal plane, from the ordinary high water mark, or from the top of bank if the ordinary high water mark cannot be identified, or from the outer edge of the channel migration zone when present.
C. The City Planner may modify the buffer widths in the above tables in accordance with the following:
    1. Buffer widths may be increased as necessary to fully protect riparian functions. For example, the buffer may be extended to the outer edge of the floodplain or windward into an area of high tree blow-down potential.
    2. Buffer widths may be reduced in exchange for restoration of degraded areas in accordance with an approved plan, or for buffer averaging in accordance with SMC 14.255.120.(G).
    3. If the stream enters an underground culvert or pipe, and is unlikely to ever be restored aboveground, the City Planner may waive the buffer along the under grounded stream, provided that where the stream enters and emerges from the pipe the opposite outer edges of the buffer shall be joined by a radius equal to the buffer width, with said radius projecting over the piped stream.
D. The shoreline master program, not the Critical Areas Code, shall determine allowable uses along and setbacks from lakes, provided that the Critical Areas Code shall govern wetlands, streams, and other critical areas lying within areas of shoreline management jurisdiction. (Ord. 2083, 2005; Ord. 2092, 2006)

Chapter 14.285 LOW-INCOME HOUSING INCENTIVES

Sections:
14.285.010   Purpose
14.285.020   Eligibility
14.285.040   Procedure for Review and Approval
14.285.050   General Low-Income Density Incentive
14.285.060   Low-Income Senior Housing Density Incentive

14.285.010 Purpose.
The intent of this chapter is to encourage development of low-income housing within the City of Snohomish in order to meet the housing needs of all economic segments of the community and to meet the goals and objectives of Washington’s Growth Management Act, Chapter 17, Laws of 1990, while maintaining high standards of design. This chapter provides for density incentives, which may be granted by the City when certain ownership, management, and occupancy criteria are met by the proposed low-income development. Additionally, in order to further encourage the development of low-income housing within the City of Snohomish, this chapter will provide for relaxed parking requirements upon a showing by the project proponent that parking impacts of the project will be less than would be required by Chapter 14.235 SMC. (Ord. 2143, 2008)

14.285.020 Eligibility.
This chapter allows for two types of low-income density incentives. A general low-income housing density incentive may be granted to multi-family projects being developed within the Low Density Multi-Family Residential, Medium Multi-Family Residential, and High Density Multi-Family Residential designations. A low-income senior housing density incentive may be granted to multi-family projects proposed in the Low Density Multi-Family Residential, Medium Density Multi-Family Residential, High Density Multi-family Residential, Commercial, and Mixed Use designations. The incentives shall be mutually exclusive. A project may use either the general low-income density incentive or low-income senior density incentive, depending on eligibility.
A. Projects eligible for the general low-income housing density incentive shall meet all of the following criteria:
    1. The property owner will manage the development of the project to meet the housing needs of low-income persons whose total household income does not exceed the Housing and Urban Development (HUD) thresholds for a low-income household at sixty (60) percent of the annual median income, adjusted for family size, in the Seattle-Bellevue-Everett Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area.
    2. The owner as grantor shall execute a covenant to run with the land to the City of Snohomish as grantee. The City shall record the covenant with the County Auditor at the owner’s expense. The covenant shall state the density and parking standards that the City has approved, the age and income-level occupancy requirements, and any other applicable conditions of approval. The covenant shall also state that the right to maintain the approved standards is dependent on the continued status of the project as an eligible project under this chapter and conformance with the conditions and limitations stated in the covenant. The covenant shall further state that the project must comply with the normal zoning and parking requirements if it ceases to be eligible under this chapter, and that the City may enforce the covenant through any legal means.
    3. The density incentive will not be permitted for projects with a pre-incentive development containing more than forty units upon any given site or within any given development. To qualify for a density incentive, a development must be no more than forty units, and any development shall be separated from other developments qualifying for a density incentive by an unrelated land use, under separate ownership, other than a public or private street, easement, or buffer strip. However, where a 10 percent density bonus is requested for projects between twenty and forty units, the 10 percent density bonus may be denied or reduced, if shopping opportunities are not available within reasonable proximity and if neighborhood parks are not within reasonable proximity or recreational opportunities are not provided on site.
    4. The project proponent will demonstrate through occupancy studies that the increase in density will not result in a significant increase in the on-street parking, traffic, park, and utility impacts in the neighborhood over those which would be expected by a project developed at the pre-incentive density.
B. Projects eligible for the low-income senior housing density incentive shall meet all of the following criteria:
    1. All eligibility criteria in SMC 14.285.020(A); and
    2. Occupancy of each unit is restricted to one or more persons fifty-five (55) years of age or older and one other person for whom no age restriction shall be imposed. (Ord. 2143, 2008)

14.285.040 Procedure for Review and Approval.
Density incentives and any relaxation of parking requirements shall be granted only upon review of the application and binding covenant as specified in Chapter 14.285 SMC by the City Planner and review under the City’s Design Standards. The City Planner shall approve or deny the application and binding covenant. A low-income development that receives a density incentive and/or a relaxation of parking requirements under SMC 14.235.055 shall not receive building, construction, or other permits until the binding covenant has been executed. (Ord. 2143, 2008)

14.285.050 General Low-Income Density Incentive.
A multi-family project meeting the eligibility criteria contained within SMC 14.285.020(A) may be granted a 10 percent density incentive. Fractional units shall be rounded up to the next whole unit. All other dimensional standards in Chapter 14.210 SMC shall be met. (Ord. 2082, 2005; Ord. 2143, 2008)

14.285.060 Low-Income Senior Housing Density Incentive.
A. A multi-family project meeting the eligibility criteria in SMC 14.285.020(B)                                                                may be granted density incentives to achieve the maximum densities in the following table. Fractional units shall be rounded up to the next whole unit:
+----------------------------+--------------------------------+
|    Land Use Designation    | Maximum Density with Incentive |
+----------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Low Density Residential    | 16 units/acre                  |
+----------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Medium Density Residential | 24 units/acre                  |
+----------------------------+--------------------------------+
| High Density Residential   | 30 units/acre                  |
+----------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Commercial                 | 24 units/acre                  |
+----------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Mixed Use                  | 24 units/acre                  |
+----------------------------+--------------------------------+
B. All other dimensional standards in Chapter 14.210 SMC shall be met. (Ord. 2143, 2008)

Chapter 14.290 SCHOOL IMPACT FEES

Sections:
14.290.010   Purpose
14.290.020   Applicability
14.290.030   Incorporation of School District Capital Facilities Plan as a Sub-Element of the City Capital Facilities Plan
14.290.040   Establishment of Impact Fees
14.290.050   Exemptions from Impact Fees
14.290.060   Procedure for Determining Mitigation Impacts
14.290.070   Method for Calculating Impact Fees
14.290.080   Administrative Adjustment of Fee Amount
14.290.090   School District Impact Area
14.290.100   Comparable In-Kind Mitigation Option
14.290.110   Credit for Payment or Obligation Previously Incurred
14.290.120   Time of Performance for Mitigation of Impact
14.290.125   Single-Family Residential Deferral Program
14.290.130   Use of Impact Mitigation Funds
14.290.140   Unacceptable Impact Levels
14.290.150   Impact Fee Schedule Exemptions
14.290.160   Impact Fee Limitations
14.290.170   Revision of School District CFP
14.290.180   Annual Report
14.290.190   Appeals

14.290.010 Purpose.
The regulations contained in this chapter are necessary for the protection and preservation of the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Snohomish. The public school system which serves City residents is unable to provide the services required to meet the educational needs of the growing community. The purposes of this chapter are (1) to ensure that adequate school facilities are available to serve new growth and development; and (2) to require that new growth and development pay a proportionate share of the costs of new school facilities needed to serve new growth and development.

14.290.020 Applicability.
The terms of this title shall apply to all residential development as defined herein for which a complete application for approval has been submitted on or after the effective date of this chapter.

14.290.030 Incorporation of School District Capital Facilities Plan as a Sub-Element of the City Capital Facilities Plan.
By separate ordinance, the City Council has adopted and incorporated by reference the Capital Facilities Plan of the Snohomish School District as a sub-element of the Capital Facilities Element of the City’s Comprehensive Plan. The necessary school facilities and the methodology and schedule of school impact fees set forth in the School District’s Capital Facilities Plan shall constitute the basis for the school impact fees established in SMC 14.290.040.

14.290.040 Establishment of Impact Fees.
As a condition of approval of all development or development activity, as defined herein, or as a condition of issuance of a building permit for existing undeveloped lots, the City will require mitigation of adverse impacts on school services pursuant to the State Growth Management Act, RCW 36.70A, RCW 82.02 and this chapter. School impact fee amounts shall be based on the Snohomish School District’s adopted Capital Facilities Plan in the amounts shown in the adopted fee resolution No. 1340 as it now reads or is hereafter amended. (Ord. 2196, 2010; Ord. 2242, 2012; Ord. 2299, 2016)

14.290.050 Exemptions from Impact Fees.
Accessory dwelling units, as defined in this title, are exempt from the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2196, 2010)

14.290.060 Procedure for Determining Mitigation Impacts.
Approval of residential development by the City shall be contingent upon the project proponents documenting to the satisfaction of the City the projects adverse impacts on existing primary and secondary public educational improvements identified by this chapter and the School District’s Capital Facilities Program. Documentation shall consist of a letter from the Snohomish School District stating that monetary, land, or comparable in-kind mitigation which meets the requirements of this chapter have been made by the project proponent.

14.290.070 Method for Calculating Impact Fees.
The method and formula for determining any required school impact mitigation shall be as established by the Snohomish School District in its capital facilities plan and as adopted by the City of Snohomish in its Comprehensive Plan and this chapter. The school impact fees shall be in conformance with the schedule set forth in SMC 14.290.040.

14.290.080 Administrative Adjustment of Fee Amount.
A. Within 14 days of acceptance by the City of a building permit application a developer or school district may appeal to the Planner for an adjustment to the fees imposed by this title. The City Planner may adjust the amount of the fee, in consideration of studies and data submitted by the developer and any affected district, if one of the following circumstances exists:
    1. It can be demonstrated that the school impact fee assessment was incorrectly calculated;
    2. Unusual circumstances of the development demonstrate that application of the school impact fee to the development would be unfair or unjust;
    3. A credit for in-kind contributions by the developer is warranted; or
    4. Any other credit specified in RCW 82.02.060(1)(b) may be warranted.
B. To avoid delay pending resolution of the appeal, school impact fees may be paid under protest in order to obtain development approval.
C. Failure to exhaust this administrative remedy shall preclude appeals of the school impact fee pursuant to SMC 14.290.190 below.

14.290.090 School District Impact Area.
The service area for which a subdivision or residential development shall be considered to have impacted, shall be the entire Snohomish School District. The District encompasses a geographic area in excess of that of the City of Snohomish; therefore, impact fees cannot be directly attributable to a specific geographic area at all times. This is particularly true for junior and senior high schools. The School District shall, however, attempt to designate impact mitigation for elementary schools, as much as possible, to the general geographic area in which the subdivision or residential development is located, especially in such cases where the school population for the subdivision or residential development is within what is considered normal walking distances between home and an elementary school or school site.

14.290.100 Comparable In-Kind Mitigation Option.
The Snohomish School District and the proponent of the project may consider in-kind options to satisfy the mitigation obligation. Land dedication, site preparation, provision of portable units, equipment purchases, and other in-kind mitigation options equivalent in value to the dollar amount required for mitigation may be utilized if acceptable to the School District, so long as the mitigation is found by the School District to be equal to the impact fees otherwise due under this chapter.

14.290.110 Credit for Payment or Obligation Previously Incurred.
The dollar value of comparable in-kind mitigation shall be credited against the dollar amount of mitigation required pursuant to this chapter. If the dollar value of comparable in-kind mitigation or any impact element exceeds the dollar amount required for mitigation for that element, the project proponent shall be reimbursed from impact mitigation monies collected for the same or similar mitigation for subsequent projects. Any process or schedule for reimbursement shall be negotiated between the project proponent and the School District, a copy of which will be forwarded to the City of Snohomish to be included in the file for the project, prior to final development approval.

14.290.120 Time of Performance for Mitigation of Impact.
Payment of any required school impact fees or in-kind contribution shall be made prior to the issuance of a building permit unless the project proponent elects to defer payment utilizing the process outlined in 14.290.125. A project proponent may elect to pay before the final plat is approved for the lots within a subdivision or residential development. Such election to pay shall be noted by a covenant placed on the deed for each affected lot within the subdivision or residential development. When a subdivision or residential development is conditioned upon the performance of a comparable in-kind mitigation, a final plat shall not be recorded, and no building permit for any individual lot shall be issued until the School District indicates in writing to the City that such in-kind mitigation has been satisfactorily completed. (Ord. 2313, 2016)

14.290.125 Single-Family Residential Deferral Program.
An applicant for a building permit for a single-family detached or attached residence may request a deferral of the full impact fee payment until final inspection or 18 months from the date of original building permit issuance, whichever occurs first. Deferral of impact fees are considered under the following conditions:
A. An applicant for deferral must request the deferral no later than the time of application for a building permit.
B. To receive a deferral, an applicant must:
    1. Submit a deferred impact fee application and acknowledgment form for each single-family attached or detached residence for which the applicant wishes to defer payment of the impact fees on a form to be provided by the city;
    2. Pay the applicable administrative fee as established by resolution or ordinance of the city;
    3. Grant and record at the applicant’s expense a deferred impact fee lien in a form approved by the city against the property in favor of the city in the amount of the deferred impact fee that:
        a. Includes the legal description, tax account number, and address of the property;
        b. Requires payment of the impact fees to the city prior to final inspection or 18 months from the date of original building permit issuance, whichever occurs first;
        c. Is signed by all owners of the property, with all signatures acknowledged as required for a deed recorded in Snohomish County;
        d. Binds all successors in title after the recordation; and
        e. Is junior and subordinate to one mortgage for the purpose of construction upon the same real property granted by the person who applied for the deferral of impact fees.
    4. The amount of impact fees deferred shall be determined by the fees in effect at the time the applicant applies for a deferral.
    5. The city shall withhold final inspection until the impact fees have been paid in full. Upon receipt of final payment of impact fees deferred under this subsection, the city shall execute a release of deferred impact fee lien for each single-family attached or detached residence for which the impact fees have been received. The applicant, or property owner at the time of release, shall be responsible for recording the lien release at his or her expense.
    6. The extinguishment of a deferred impact fee lien by the foreclosure of a lien having priority does not affect the obligation to pay the impact fees as a condition of final inspection.
    7. If impact fees are not paid in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and in accordance with the term provisions established herein, the city may institute foreclosure proceedings in accordance with RCW 61.12.
    8. Each applicant for a single-family attached or detached residential construction permit, in accordance with his or her contractor registration number or other unique identification number, is entitled to annually receive deferrals under this section for the first 20 single-family residential construction building permits. (Ord. 2313, 2016)

14.290.130 Use of Impact Mitigation Funds.
The Snohomish School District shall use mitigation impact funds received under this chapter to meet its Capital Facilities Plan, so long as said mitigation funds received are used in the same manner as mitigation funds received from subdivisions and residential developments from outside of the City limits of the City of Snohomish; and further provided the use of said mitigation funds results in improvements to district-wide student housing.

14.290.140 Unacceptable Impact Levels.
A. The City shall review residential development proposals pursuant to all applicable state and local laws and regulations, including the State Environmental Policy Act (Chapter 43.21C RCW), the State Subdivision Law (Chapter 58.17 RCW), and the applicable sections of the Snohomish Municipal Code. Following such review, the City may condition or deny development approval as necessary or appropriate to mitigate or avoid significant adverse impacts to school facilities, to assure that appropriate provisions are made for schools, school grounds, and safe student walking conditions, and to ensure that development is compatible and consistent with each district’s services, facilities, and capital facilities plan.
B. Impact fees required by this chapter for development, together with compliance with development regulations and other mitigation measures offered or imposed at the time of development review, shall constitute adequate mitigation for all of a development’s specific adverse environmental impacts on the school system for the purposes of Chapter 14.90 SMC. Nothing in this chapter prevents a determination of significance from being issued, the application of new or different development regulations, and/or requirements for additional environmental analysis, protection and mitigation measures to the extent required by applicable law.

14.290.150 Impact Fee Schedule Exemptions.
The Council may, on a case-by-case basis, grant exemptions to the application of the fee schedule for low-income or senior housing that achieves broad public purposes as defined in Chapter 14.05.020 SMC, and authorized by and in accordance with the conditions specified under RCW 82.02.060(2). To qualify for the exemption, the developer of such housing shall submit a petition to the Planner for consideration by the Council prior to application for building permit. Conditions for such approvals shall be established by the Council at the time of approval that, at a minimum, meet the requirements of RCW 82.02.060(2), and which shall also include a requirement for a covenant to assure the project’s continued use for low-income or senior housing. The covenant entered into by and between the developer and the City shall be an obligation that runs with the land, and shall be recorded against the title of the real property upon which such housing is located in the real property records of the City of Snohomish. The covenant shall be reviewed and approved as to form by the City Attorney.

14.290.160 Impact Fee Limitations.
A. School impact fees shall be imposed for District capital facilities that are reasonably related to the development under consideration, shall not exceed a proportionate share of the costs of system improvements that are reasonably related to the development, and shall be used for system improvements that will reasonably benefit the new development.
B. School impact fees must be expended or encumbered for a permissible use within six years of receipt by the District.
C. To the extent permitted by law, school impact fees may be collected for capital facilities costs previously incurred to the extent that new growth and development will be served by the previously constructed capital facilities, provided that school impact fees shall not be imposed to make up for any existing system deficiencies.
D. A developer required to pay a fee pursuant to RCW 43.21C.060 for capital facilities shall not be required to pay a school impact fee pursuant to RCW 82.02.050 - .090 and this title for the same capital facilities.

14.290.170 Revision of School District CFP.
The Snohomish School District must review and update its CFP biennially in order for this ordinance to remain in effect. The CFP must be submitted in reasonable time for City review in advance of the expiration of the current CFP. The City will accept the updated CFP by adopting the Snohomish School District CFP as part of the City CFP in the City Comprehensive Plan and the biennial budget and/or related budget amendment(s). (Ord. 2196, 2010; Ord. 2354, 2018)

14.290.180 Annual Report.
The Snohomish School District must submit to the City annually a report in accordance with the requirements of RCW 82.02.070 showing the system improvements that were financed in whole or in part by impact fees and the amount of funds collected, expended and held for future improvements. The annual report shall be sent to the City on or before April 1 of each year for the preceding calendar year.

14.290.190 Appeals.
Appeals of mitigation requirements imposed pursuant to this title shall be as provided in Chapter 14.20 of the Snohomish Municipal Code.

Chapter 14.295 TRAFFIC IMPACT FEES AND MITIGATION

Sections:
14.295.010   Findings
14.295.020   Declaration of Purpose
14.295.030   Relationship to Environmental Impacts
14.295.040   Definitions
14.295.050   Street System Policy-General Provisions
14.295.060   Traffic Study
14.295.070   Determination of Street System Obligations
14.295.080   Street System Capacity Requirements
14.295.090   Traffic Impact Fee
14.295.095   Traffic Impact Fee Exemption
14.295.100   Level-of-Service Requirements and Concurrency Determinations
14.295.110   Inadequate Street Condition Requirements
14.295.120   Special Circumstances
14.295.130   Administration of Traffic Impact Fee Payments
14.295.135   Single-Family Residential Deferral Program
14.295.140   Administrative Appeals
14.295.150   Severability
14.295.160   No Special Duty

14.295.010 Findings.
The City Council finds as follows:
A. The acquisition, construction, and improvement of streets to serve new developments in the City of Snohomish is a major burden upon City government; the City is experiencing a rapid, large-scale increase in intensity of land use and in population growth; rapid growth creates large “front-end” demands for City services, including streets, and causes increased street usage; existing and projected City funds are not adequate to meet the public’s projected street needs; failure to ensure that street improvements are made as traffic increases cause severe safety problems, impedes commerce, and interferes with the comfort and repose of the public; and the provisions of this Chapter are necessary to preserve the State Legislature’s intent that the City, in the exercise of reasonable discretion, retains ultimate responsibility for City services and the City’s financial integrity.
B. The City has the power under existing law to condition development and require street improvements reasonably related to the traffic impact of a proposed development, and it is appropriate and desirable to set out in this Chapter what will be required of developments and to establish a uniform method of treatment for similar development impacts on the City street system.
C. The Growth Management Act (GMA), RCW 36.70A.070(6)(b), requires that “local jurisdictions must adopt and enforce ordinances which prohibit development approval if the development causes the level-of-service on a transportation facility to decline below the standards adopted in the transportation element of the comprehensive plan, unless transportation improvements or strategies to accommodate the impacts of development are made concurrent with the development” and that: “For the purposes of this subsection (6) ‘concurrent with development’ shall mean that improvements or strategies are in place at the time of development, or that a financial commitment is in place to complete the improvements or strategies within six years.”
D. This Chapter is consistent with and implements the City’s Comprehensive Plan adopted pursuant to Chapter 36.70A RCW.
E. The total benefits of certain transportation demand management measures in reducing marginal trips are projected to significantly outweigh the total costs.
F. The regulations contained in this Chapter are necessary for the protection and preservation of the public health, safety and general welfare.

14.295.020 Declaration of Purpose.
A. The purpose of this Chapter is to ensure that the public health, safety and welfare will be preserved by having safe and efficient streets serving new and existing developments by requiring development to mitigate traffic impacts, which may include a proportionate share payment reasonably related to the traffic impact of the proposed development and construction of street improvements and dedication of right-of-way reasonably necessary as a result of the direct traffic impact of proposed developments.
B. Chapter 14.295 SMC is intended to ensure that City policy for the provision of safe and adequate access and the allocation of responsibility for immediate or future street improvements necessitated by new development is fairly and consistently applied to all developments.
C. This Chapter requires the analysis and mitigation of a development’s traffic impact on the City street system. In order to quantify the continuing need for street improvements on the City street system anticipated by projected growth, the Public Works Department is authorized to develop and update the Transportation Facilities Plan based on and consistent with the Comprehensive Plan’s Transportation Element. The Transportation Facilities Plan shall be used in evaluating the traffic impact of developments and determining necessary mitigation of such impacts.

14.295.030 Relationship to Environmental Impacts.
A. The requirements of this Chapter, together with the Comprehensive Plan and the City’s other development regulations and policies adopted pursuant thereto, shall constitute the policies of the City under the GMA and the State Environmental Policy Act, Ch. 43.21C RCW, (SEPA) for the review of development and the determination of significant adverse environmental impacts and imposition of mitigation requirements due to the impacts of development on the transportation system.
B. Measures required by this Chapter shall constitute adequate mitigation of adverse or significant adverse environmental impacts on the street system for the purposes of SEPA, to the extent that the City determines the specific impacts of the development are adequately addressed by this Chapter in accordance with SEPA.
C. In accordance with RCW 43.21C.065 and RCW 82.02.100, a person required to make a proportionate share mitigating payment under a SEPA payment program or pay a traffic impact fee under this Chapter shall be required to make a payment or pay a fee pursuant to either SEPA or the GMA, but not both, for the same system improvements.

14.295.040 Definitions.
A. Approving authority. "Approving authority" means the City employee, agency or official having authority to issue the approval or permit for the development involved.
B. Arterial unit. "Arterial unit" means a street, segment of a street, or portion of a street or a system of streets, including an intersection, consistent with the level-of-service methodology adopted in the City Comprehensive Plan and consistent with the criteria established by the Director, for the purpose of making level-of-service concurrency determinations.
C. Arterial Unit in arrears. "Arterial unit in arrears" means any arterial unit operating below the adopted level-of-service standard adopted in the Comprehensive Plan, except where improvements to such a unit have been programmed in the City six-year Transportation Improvement Program adopted pursuant to RCW 36.81.121. with funding identified that would remedy the deficiency within six years.
D. Capacity improvements. "Capacity improvements" means any improvements that increase the vehicle and/or people moving capacity of the street system.
E. Comprehensive Plan. "Comprehensive Plan" means the generalized, coordinated land use policy statement of the City adopted pursuant to Chapter 36.70A RCW, which may include a land use plan, a capital facilities plan, a Transportation Element, subarea plans, and any such other documents or portions of documents identified as constituting part of the Comprehensive Plan under Chapter 36.70A RCW.
F. Dedication. "Dedication" means conveyance of land to the City for street purposes by deed or some other instrument of conveyance or by dedication on a duly filed and recorded plat or short plat.
G. Department. "Department" means the City of Snohomish Public Works Department.
H. Developer. "Developer" means the person applying for or receiving a permit or approval for a development.
I. Development. "Development" means all activities that require the following types of City permits or approvals: subdivisions, short subdivisions, industrial or commercial building permits, conditional use permits, recorded development plans, or building permits (including building permits for multi-family and duplex residential structures, and all similar uses), changes in occupancy and other applications pertaining to land uses; provided that “development” does not include building permits for single-family residential dwellings, attached or detached accessory apartments, or duplex conversions, on existing tax lots.
J. Direct traffic impact. “Direct traffic impact” means any new vehicular trip added by new development to the City street system.
K. Director. “Director” means the City of Snohomish Department of Public Works Director or his/her authorized designee.
L. Frontage improvements. “Frontage improvements” means improvements on streets abutting a development and tapers thereto required as a result of a development. Generally, frontage improvements shall consist of appropriate base materials, curb, gutter, sidewalk, storm drainage improvements, bus pullouts and waiting areas where necessary, bicycle lanes and bicycle paths where applicable, and lane improvements.
M. Highway capacity manual. “Highway capacity manual” means the Highway Capacity Manual, Special Report 209, Transportation Research Board, National Research Council, 1985, 2101 Constitution Avenue, Washington, D.C., amendments thereto, and any supplemental editions or documents published by the transportation research board adopted by the U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration.
N. Inadequate street condition. “Inadequate street condition” means any street condition, whether existing on the street system or created by a new development’s access or impact on the street system, which jeopardizes the safety of street users, including no automotive users, as determined by the City engineer in accordance with the Department policy and procedure for the determination of inadequate street conditions.
O. Level-of-service. “Level-of-service” or “LOS” means a qualitative measure describing operational conditions within a traffic stream and the perception thereof by street users. Level-of-service standards may be evaluated in terms such as speed and travel time, freedom to maneuver, traffic interruptions, comfort, convenience, geographic accessibility, and safety. The highway capacity manual defines six levels of service for each type of facility for which analysis procedures are available. They are given letter designations, LOS A to F, with LOS A representing the best operating condition, and LOS F the worst. For the purposes of this Chapter, level-of-service will be measured only on arterial units.
P. Offsite street or street improvement. “Offsite street or street improvement” means an improvement, except a frontage improvement, to an existing or proposed City street, which improvement is required or recommended in accordance with this Chapter.
Q. Public agency. “Public agency” means any school district, public water, sewer or utility district, fire district, airport district, public transportation benefit area, or local government agency, seeking a land use permit or approval reviewed under this Chapter.
R. Street. “Street” means an open, public way for the passage of vehicles, that where appropriate, may include pedestrian, equestrian and bicycle facilities. Limits include the outside edge of sidewalks, or curbs and gutters, paths, walkways, or side ditches, including the appertaining shoulder and all slopes, ditches, channels, waterways, and other features necessary for proper drainage and structural stability within the right-of-way or access easement.
S. Street system. “Street system” means those existing or proposed City streets within the transportation service area.
T. Transportation Element. “Transportation Element” means the element of the City’s Comprehensive Plan that consists of transportation goals and policies, an inventory of transportation facilities and services, adopted level of service standards for the street system, an analysis of the street system’s deficiencies and needs, prioritized street system improvements and management strategies, and a multiyear financial plan, adopted pursuant to Ch. 36.70A RCW.
U. Transportation Facilities Plan. “Transportation Facilities Plan” means the City approved document containing the prioritized improvements and projects designated by the City to implement the six-year Transportation Improvement Program.
V. Transportation service area. “Transportation service area” means the entire geographic area of the City, as identified and utilized in the Transportation Element for the purpose of evaluating the transportation impacts of development, determining proportionate shares of needed transportation improvements, and allocating revenue to transportation improvement projects.

14.295.050 Street System Policy-General Provisions.
A. Applicability to development. Any application for approval of a permit for a development in the City of Snohomish is subject to the provisions of this Chapter.
B. Director’s recommendation: approval. 
    1. In approving or permitting a development, the approval authority shall consider the Director’s recommendations and act in conformity with this Chapter.
    2. The Director shall only recommend approval of a development, if, in the Director’s opinion, adequate provisions for City streets, access, and mitigation of the transportation impacts of the development are made as provided in the City’s development regulations, SEPA, and this Chapter.
    3. The Director shall only recommend approval of a development if the development is deemed to be concurrent in accordance with this Chapter.
C. Excessive expenditure of public funds. If the location, nature, and/or timing of a proposed development necessitates the expenditure of public funds in excess of those currently available for the necessary street improvement or is inconsistent with priorities established to serve the general public benefit, and if provision has not otherwise been made to meet the mitigation requirements as provided in this Chapter, the City may refuse to approve or grant a permit for development. As an alternative, the City may allow the developer to alter the proposal so that the need for street improvement is lessened or may provide the developer with the option of bearing all or more than the development’s proportionate share of the required street improvement costs.
D. Development mitigation obligations. Any application for approval of a permit for a development shall be reviewed to determine any requirements or mitigation obligations that may be applicable for the following:
    1. Impact on street system capacity;
    2. Impact on specific level-of-service deficiencies;
    3. Impact on specific inadequate street condition locations;
    4. Frontage improvements requirements;
    5. Access and transportation system circulation requirements;
    6. Dedication or deeding of right-of-way requirements;
    7. Transportation demand management measures.
E. Street system capacity requirements. The direct traffic impacts of any development on the capacity of all intersections, arterials and non-arterials in the street system identified as needing future capacity improvements in the currently adopted Transportation Element will be mitigated either by constructing street improvements which offset the traffic impact of the development or by paying the development’s share of the cost of the future capacity improvements.
F. Level-of service standards. 
    1. As required by RCW 36.70A.070(6)(a), standards for levels of service on City arterials have been adopted by the City in the Comprehensive Plan. The Department will plan, program and construct transportation system capacity improvements for the purpose of maintaining these adopted level-of-service standards in order to facilitate new development that is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan.
    2. In accordance with RCW 36.70A.070(6)(b), no development will be approved which would cause the level-of-service on any arterial unit or intersection to fall below the adopted level-of-service standards unless improvements are programmed and funding identified which would remedy the deficiency within six years.
    3. When the City Council determines that excessive expenditure of public funds is not warranted for the purpose of maintaining adopted level-of-service standards on an intersection or arterial unit, the City Council may designate by motion such intersection or arterial unit as being at ultimate capacity. Improvements needed to address operational and safety issues may be identified in conjunction with such ultimate capacity designation.
G. Inadequate pre-existing street condition. 
    1. Mitigation of impacts on inadequate pre-existing street conditions is required in order to improve inadequate streets in accordance with adopted standards, prior to dealing with the impacts of traffic from new development. If such inadequate conditions are found to be existing in the street system at the time of development application review and the development will put three or more p.m. peak-hour trips through the identified locations, the development may be approved only if provisions are made in accordance with this Chapter for improving the inadequate street conditions.
    2. The Public Works Director shall make determinations of street inadequacy in accordance with Department policies, standards, and procedures, as adopted pursuant to this Chapter.
H. Frontage improvements. All developments will be required to make frontage improvements in accordance with City standards, except where determined untimely by the City Engineer due to the absence of street frontage improvements in the vicinity or to scheduled public improvement projects.
I. Access and transportation circulation requirements. All developments shall be required to provide for access and transportation circulation in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan and the development regulations applicable to the particular development, to design and construct such access in accordance with the adopted engineering design and development standards, and to improve existing streets that provide access to the development in order to comply with adopted design standards.
J. Right-of-way requirements. As provided for by RCW 82.02.020, all developments, as a condition of approval, will be required to deed or dedicate property, as appropriate pursuant to City standards, when to do so is found by the Director or a City approval authority to be reasonably necessary as a direct result of the proposed development for improvement, use, or maintenance of the street system serving the proposed development.
K. Development permit application completeness. For purposes of this Chapter, permit applications for development shall be determined to be complete in accordance with the complete application provisions as defined in the applicable development regulations in accordance with Chapter 36.70B RCW. A development permit application shall not be considered complete until all traffic studies or data required in accordance with this Chapter and/or as specified in a preapplication meeting conducted pursuant to Title 14 SMC are received. Review periods and time limits shall be established in Title 14 SMC in accordance with Chapter 36.70B RCW.
L. Director authorization for administrative policies and technical standards and procedures. The Director is hereby authorized to produce and maintain administrative policies and technical standards and procedures in order to administer this Chapter. The policies, standards, and procedures shall cover the transportation-related aspects of processing land use applications and shall set forth any necessary procedural requirements for developers to follow in order for their applications to be processed by staff in an efficient manner. The Director shall produce administrative policies and technical standards and procedures on at least the following topics:
    1. Traffic studies: scoping, elements, processing.
    2. Level-of-service determination: methodology, data collection.
    3. Transit compatibility: transit supportive criteria.
    4. Inadequate street conditions: criteria for identification.
    5. Frontage improvements: standards, variables.
    6. Mitigation measures: extent, timing, agreements. (Ord. 2290, 2016)

14.295.060 Traffic Study.
A. When required. In order to provide sufficient information to assess a development’s impact on the street system, developments adding three or more p.m. peak-hour trips will be required to provide a traffic study when it has been determined that there is not sufficient information existing in the Department’s database to adequately assess the traffic impacts of the development. The traffic study will consist of at least a traffic generation and distribution analysis. The Director may require that additional information be provided on impacts of the development to level-of-service of affected streets, inadequate street conditions, adequacy of the proportionate share calculations of any voluntary payments required under this Chapter to reasonably or adequately mitigate impacts of the proposed development, and conformance with the Comprehensive Plan’s Transportation Element. The Director may determine at a pre-application conference the need for a study and the scope of analysis of any needed study.
B. Waiver. If, in the opinion of the Director, there is sufficient information known about a development’s street system impacts from previous traffic studies, the Director may waive the requirement for a traffic study and so state the waiver determination in the preapplication meeting. In such cases, the existing information will be used to establish any necessary traffic mitigation requirements to be recommended in the review of the development.

14.295.070 Determination of Street System Obligations.
A. Applications which have a prior SEPA threshold determination establishing developer obligation for the transportation impacts prior to the enactment of this Chapter shall be vested under the development obligation identified under SEPA.
B. A determination of developer obligation shall be made by the City before approval of preliminary plats, short subdivisions, and conditional use permits. For other development approvals, the determination of developer obligation shall be made prior to issuance of a building permit.
C. Mitigation measures imposed as conditions of a development approval shall remain valid until the expiration date of the concurrency determination for the development. Any building permit application submitted after the expiration date shall be subject to full reinvestigation of traffic impacts under this Chapter before the building permit can be issued. Determination of new or additional impact mitigation measures shall take into consideration, and may allow credit for, mitigation measures fully accomplished in connection with approval of the development or prior building permits pursuant to a recorded development plan, only where those mitigation measures addressed impacts of the current building permit application.
D. The Director, following review of any required traffic study and any other pertinent data, shall inform the developer in writing what the development’s impacts and mitigation obligations are under this Chapter. The developer shall make a written proposal for mitigation of the development’s traffic impact, except when such mitigation is by payment of any impact fee under the authority provided to the City under RCW 82.02.050(2). When the developer’s written proposal has been reviewed for accuracy and completeness by the Director, the Director shall make a recommendation to the City approval authority, as to the concurrency determination and conditions of approval or reasons for recommending denial of the development application, citing the requirements of this Chapter.
E. Any request to revise a proposed development, following the determination of developer obligations and approval of the development, which causes an increase in the traffic generated by the development, or a change in points of access, shall be processed in the same manner as an original application except where the Director determines that such revision may be administratively approved.

14.295.080 Street System Capacity Requirements.
A. All developments must mitigate their impact upon the future capacity of the street system either by constructing offsite street improvements, which offset the traffic impacts of the development, or by paying the development’s proportionate share cost of the future capacity improvements.
B. Construction option.
    1. If a developer chooses to mitigate the development’s impact to the street system capacity by constructing offsite street improvements, the developer must investigate the impact, identify improvements, and offer a construction plan to the Director for construction of the offsite improvements.
    2. When two or more developers have agreed to fully fund a certain improvement, the proportionate sharing of the costs shall be on any basis that the developers agree among themselves would be equitable. Under such an arrangement, the terms of the agreement shall be binding on each development as a condition of approval.
    3. Any developer who volunteers to construct more than the development’s share of the cost of offsite improvements may apply for a reimbursement contract.
C. Payment option.
    1. If a developer chooses to mitigate the development’s impact by making a proportionate share mitigating payment, the development’s share of the cost of future capacity improvements will be calculated as set forth in SMC 14.295.090.
    2. Any developer who volunteers to pay more than the development’s share of the cost of offsite improvements may apply for a reimbursement contract.

14.295.090 Traffic Impact Fee.
A. The impact fee rate per net new PM peak hour trip, as calculated according to the provisions of this chapter, shall be as adopted in the most recent fee schedule resolution. The initial traffic impact fee rate shall be $1,603, which may be adjusted annually as described in Subsection B of this Section.
B. Commencing on the first anniversary of the effective date of the impact fee rate established in Subsection A of this Section, and at subsequent intervals of at least one year, the City Engineer may propose adjustment of the impact fee rate set out in the most recent fee schedule resolution by the same percentage change as in the most recent annual change of the Construction Cost Index published in the Engineering News-Record. The City Council and may adopt such increase in the impact fee rate or a reduced amount as an amendment to the fee resolution. In addition to published notice as required for the City Council resolution, the City Engineer shall cause notice of the adjusted impact fee to be posted at City Hall and the Public Works Engineering office. In all cases, the maximum amount of the impact fee shall be the initial traffic impact fee rate plus an amount equal to the initial impact fee rate multiplied times the change in Construction Cost Index since the effective date of the initial traffic impact fee rate. (Ord. 2290, 2016)

14.295.095 Traffic Impact Fee Exemption.
A. Application For Traffic Impact Fee Exemption. Any developer applying for or receiving a building permit, which meets the criteria set forth in Subsection B below, may apply to the City Planner for an exemption from the traffic impact fee established pursuant to SMC 14.295.090. Said application shall be on forms provided by the City and shall be accompanied by all information and data the City deems necessary to process the application. To the extent it is authorized by law, the City shall endeavor to keep all proprietary information submitted with said application confidential, provided, however, that this ordinance shall not create or establish a special duty to do so.
B. Exemption Criteria. To be eligible for the traffic impact fee exemption, the applicant shall meet each of the following criteria:
    1. The applicant must be a new commercial retail business within the Snohomish city limits that applies for a building permit or must be an existing commercial business that applies for a building permit for a major expansion of an existing building. For the purposes of this Section, “commercial retail business” shall mean any business, which sells retail goods and services that are subject to the retail sales tax provisions of Chapter 3.27 SMC and which is subject to payment of traffic impact fees pursuant to this Chapter.
    2. Based on similar retail business sales or other reliable data, as determined by the City, the applicant must demonstrate that it is likely to generate to the City of Snohomish the City’s portion of sales and use tax revenue in the average annual amount of at least $100,000, based upon the three year period commencing from the date of the applicant’s certificate of occupancy. In the case of a major expansion of an existing business, the applicant must demonstrate that the expansion is likely to generate an increase of at least $100,000 more in average annual sales and use tax to the City than is generated by the applicant’s existing business.
    3. The applicant must be a new retail business located within one of the following land use designations: Commercial, Historic Business District, Business Park, Industry, Airport Industry, and Mixed Use.
    4. For the purposes of this Section, the applicant shall not be allowed to aggregate sales and use tax revenue from more than one business that the applicant owns or operates within the City.
    5. At the time of application for the traffic impact fee exemption, the applicant shall not have paid, or have been obligated to have paid, the traffic impact fee required under this Chapter.
C. Administration of Traffic Impact Fee Exemption. 
    1. Upon the City’s acceptance of an application for exemption from traffic impact fees pursuant to Subsection A above, the applicant shall pay to the City the full amount of the traffic impact fees required pursuant to SMC 14.295.090. Following receipt of the traffic impact fees, the City shall deposit the fees in the Traffic Impact Fee Fund (124) and shall manage the traffic impact fees as set forth in this Chapter.
    2. At the expiration of a three year period commencing from the date of the applicant’s certificate of occupancy, the City Treasurer shall determine if the average annual amount of the City’s portion of sales and use tax revenue received from the applicant’s business by the City meets the minimum amount stated in Subsection B2 above. The determination shall be based upon the administration and collection requirements of Chapter 3.27 SMC as now or hereafter amended.
    3. In the event that the three year average annual amount of the City’s portion of sales and use tax revenue from the applicant’s business is at least $100,000, or in the case of a major expansion of an existing business the three year annual average is at least $100,000 more than the prior year, there shall be an exemption of 25% from the traffic impact fees otherwise due pursuant to SMC 14.295.090. In such case, 25% of the amount paid to the City pursuant to Subsection C1 above shall be refunded to the applicant, plus any accrued interest. The remainder of the funds deposited pursuant to Subsection C1 above shall belong to the City.
    4. In the event that the applicant’s three year annual average sales and use tax revenue to the City is at least $200,000, or in the case of a major expansion of an existing business the three year annual average is at least $200,000 more than the prior year, the applicant shall receive an exemption, which shall result in a refund of 50% of the amount paid to the City pursuant to Section C1 above, plus any accrued interest. The remainder of the funds deposited pursuant to Section C1 above shall belong to the City.
    5. In the event that the applicant’s three year annual average sales and use tax revenue to the City is at least $300,000, or in the case of a major expansion of an existing business the three year annual average is at least $300,000 more than the prior year, the applicant shall receive an exemption, which shall result in a refund of 75% of the amount paid to the City pursuant to Section C1 above, plus any accrued interest. The remainder of the funds deposited pursuant to Section C1 above shall belong to the City.
    6. In the event that the applicant does not generate at least a three year average annual sales and use tax revenue of $100,000, or in the case of a major expansion of an existing business at least a three year annual average of $100,000, the entire traffic impact fee required under SMC 14.295.090 shall belong to the City.
    7. Determinations of the amounts set forth in this Section shall be made by the City Treasurer, which determinations shall be appealable as set forth in Subsection E.
D. Deposits and Refunds of Sales and Use Tax Revenue. 
    1. Sales and use tax revenues in the amount annually required to meet the traffic impact fee exemption level for which the applicant qualifies under this Section shall be deposited in the Reserve for Traffic Impact Fee Fund (125), which is hereby created. All sales and use tax revenues in excess of the amount annually required to meet the traffic impact fee exemption level for which the applicant qualifies under this Section shall remain in the City’s General Fund (001) and may be expended for any lawful purpose as directed by the City Council.
    2. At the end of an applicant’s three year period, or in the case of a major expansion of an existing business at the end of an applicant’s three year period, the City Treasurer shall determine the amount of refund to be paid the applicant. Refunds shall be paid from the Reserve for Traffic Impact Fee Fund (125).
E. Appeals. Any applicant aggrieved by the determination of the City as to whether the exemption criteria of Subsection B have been met or as to the amount of a refund to which an applicant is entitled pursuant to Subsections C and D, may file a written appeal to the City’s Land Use Hearing Examiner, in the same manner as appeals of City Planner determinations as set forth in Chapters 14.20 and 14.95 SMC. The City Examiner is hereby specifically authorized to hear and decide such appeals, and the decision of the Hearing Examiner shall be final action of the City and shall be subject to appeal pursuant to Chapter 14.20 SMC. (Ord. 2085, 2005)

14.295.100 Level-of-Service Requirements and Concurrency Determinations.
A. The Department shall make a concurrency determination for each development application to ensure that the development will not impact an arterial unit where the level-of-service is below the adopted level-of-service standard or will not cause the level-of-service on an arterial unit to fall below the adopted level-of-service standard, unless improvements are programmed and funding identified which would remedy the deficiency within six years. The approval authority shall not approve any development that is not deemed concurrent under this section.
    1. The Department shall make a concurrency determination upon receipt of a development’s pre-application submittal. The determination may change based upon revisions in the application. Any change in the development after approval will be resubmitted to the Director, and the development will be reevaluated for concurrency purposes.
    2. The concurrency determination shall expire if the development for which the concurrency is reserved is not applied for within one hundred twenty (120) days of the concurrency determination. This determination is a prerequisite for a complete development application. The expiration date of the concurrency determination for a filed development application shall be six years after the date of the determination, except where the application is later withdrawn or approval is allowed to lapse.
    3. Building permits for a development must be issued prior to expiration of the concurrency determination for the development, except when the development is a residential subdivision or short subdivision in which case the subdivision or short subdivision must be recorded prior to expiration of the concurrency determination for the development, and except where no building permit will be associated with a conditional use permit, in which case the conditional use permit must be issued prior to expiration of the concurrency determination. No additional concurrency determination shall apply to residential dwellings within a subdivision or short subdivisions recorded in compliance with this section.
    4. If the concurrency determination expires prior to building permit issuance, except when the development is a residential subdivision or short subdivision, then prior to the recording of the subdivision or short subdivision, and except where no building permit will be associated with a conditional use permit, then prior to issuance of the conditional use permit, the Director shall at the request of the developer consider evidence that conditions have not significantly changed and make a new concurrency determination in accordance with this section.
    5. Building permit applications for development within a recorded development plan, non-residential subdivision or short subdivision, for which a concurrency determination has been made in accordance with this section shall be deemed concurrent, provided that the concurrency determination has not expired, the building permit will not cause the approved traffic generation of the prior approval to be exceeded, there is no change in points of access, and mitigation required pursuant to the recorded development plan, non-residential subdivision or short subdivision approval is performed as a condition of building permit issuance.
B. In determining whether or not to deem a proposed development as concurrent, the Department shall analyze likely street system impacts on arterial units based on the size and location of the development.
    1. A development shall be deemed concurrent for the period prior to the expiration date of the concurrency determination for the development.
    2. A development’s forecasted trip generation at full occupancy shall be the basis for determining the impacts of the development on the street system. The City will accept valid data from a traffic study prepared under this Chapter.
C. A concurrency determination made for a proposed development under this section will evaluate the development’s impacts on any intersections or arterial units in arrears. If a development which generates seven or more p.m. peak-hour trips, or a nonresidential development which generates five or more p.m. peak-hour trips, is proposed to affect an intersection or arterial unit in arrears, then the development may only be deemed concurrent based on a trip distribution analysis to determine the impacts of the development. Impacts shall be determined based on each of the following:
    1. If the trip distribution analysis indicates that the development will not place three or more p.m. peak-hour trips on any intersection or arterial units in arrears, then the development shall be deemed concurrent.
    2. If the trip distribution analysis indicates that the development will place three or more p.m. peak-hour trips on any intersection or arterial unit in arrears, then the development shall not be deemed concurrent except where the development is deemed concurrent in accordance with the options under SMC 14.295.100(E).
D. Any residential development that generates less than seven p.m. peak- hour trips or any nonresidential development that generates less than five p.m. peak-hour trips shall be considered to have only minor impact on City arterials for purposes of a concurrency determination on impacts to level-of- service on intersections and arterial units and shall accordingly be deemed concurrent.
E. Any development not deemed concurrent shall have options available to enable the development to be deemed concurrent as follows:
    1. A development which meets the Department’s criteria for transit compatibility, in accordance with the Director’s policy and procedure for transit compatibility, shall be deemed concurrent if the impacted intersection or arterial unit in arrears meets the criteria for transit supportive design in accordance with the Director’s policy and procedure for transit compatibility, and if the level-of-service on the impacted intersection or arterial unit in arrears meets the City’s adopted LOS standards, and provided that the development can be deemed concurrent in accordance with all other provisions of this section.
    2. A development may modify its proposal to lessen its impacts on the street system in such a way as to allow the City to deem the development concurrent under this section.
    3. The City may deem such development concurrent based upon a written proposal signed by the proponent of the development and attached to the Director’s recommendation under SMC 14.295.050(B), and referenced in the concurrency determination, as a condition of approval.
        a. Such proposal may include conditions which would defer construction of all or identified subsequent phases of a development until such time as the City has made or programmed capacity improvements which would remedy any intersection or arterial units in arrears.
        b. Such proposals may include conditions which would defer construction of all or identified subsequent phases of a development until such time as the developer constructs capacity improvements which would remedy any intersection or arterial units in arrears.
            i. If a developer chooses to mitigate the development’s impact by constructing offsite street improvements, the developer must investigate the impact, identify improvements, and offer a construction plan to the Director for construction of the offsite improvements. Construction of improvements shall be in accordance with the City’s engineering design and development standards.
            ii. In cases where two or more developers have agreed to fully fund a certain improvement, the proportionate sharing of the cost shall be on any basis that the developers agree among themselves would be equitable. Under such an arrangement, the terms of the agreement shall be binding on each development as conditions of approval.
            iii. Any developer who chooses to mitigate a development’s impact by constructing offsite improvements may propose to the City that a joint public/private partnership be established to jointly fund and/or construct the proposed improvements. The Director will determine whether or not such a partnership is to be established.
            iv. Construction of capacity improvements under this section must be complete or under contract prior to the issuance of any building permits and must be complete prior to approval for occupancy or final inspection; provided that where no building permit will be associated with a change in occupancy, then construction of improvements is required as a precondition to approval.
F. Adopted Level-of-Service. 
    1. The level of service for intersections shall be LOS E or better.
    2. The Transportation Element may designate intersections that are exempt from the level-of-service standard set forth in this subsection. (Ord. 2290, 2016)

14.295.110 Inadequate Street Condition Requirements.
A. Regardless of the existing level-of-service, development which adds three or more p.m. peak-hour trips to an inadequate street condition existing on the street system, at the time of determination under this Chapter, or development whose traffic will cause an inadequate street condition at the time of full occupancy of the development, will only be approved for occupancy or final inspection when provisions are made in accordance with this Chapter for elimination of the inadequate street condition. The improvements removing the inadequate street condition must be complete or under contract before a building permit on the development will be issued and the street improvement must be complete before any certificate of occupancy or final inspection will be issued; provided that where no building permit will be associated with a conditional use permit, then the improvements removing the inadequate street condition must be complete as a precondition to approval.
B. The Director shall determine whether or not a location constitutes an inadequate street condition. Any known inadequate street condition to which the development adds three or more p.m. peak-hour trips shall be identified as part of the Director’s recommendation under SMC 14.295.050(B).
C. A development’s access onto a City street shall be designed so as not to create an inadequate street condition. Developments shall be designed so that inadequate street conditions are not created.
D. Construction option – requirements. 
    1. If a developer chooses to eliminate an inadequate street condition by constructing offsite street improvements, the developer must investigate the impact, identify improvements, and offer a construction plan to the Director for construction of the offsite improvements.
    2. When two or more developers have agreed to fully fund a certain improvement, the proportionate sharing of the costs shall be on any basis that the developers agree among themselves would be equitable. Under such an arrangement, the terms of the agreement shall be binding on each development as conditions of approval.

14.295.120 Special Circumstances.
Where the only remedy to an arterial unit in arrears is the installation of a traffic signal, but signalization warrants contained in the current edition of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) are not met at present, developments impacting the arterial unit may be allowed to proceed without the installation of the traffic signal; provided that all other warranted level-of-service and transit related improvements are made on the arterial unit within the deficient level-of-service. Developments impacting such arterial units will not be issued building permits or occupancies (whichever comes first) until the improvements (not including the traffic signal) to the level-of-service deficient arterial unit are under contract or being performed. Such developments will be subject to all other obligations as specified in this Chapter.

14.295.130 Administration of Traffic Impact Fee Payments.
A. Any traffic impact fee payment made pursuant to this Chapter shall be subject to the following provisions:
    1. The payment is required prior to building permit issuance unless the project proponent elects to defer payment utilizing the process outlined in 14.295.135. Payment for a subdivision or short subdivision shall be made prior to the recording of the final plat, provided that if no building permit will be associated with a change in occupancy or conditional use permit, then payment is required prior to approval of occupancy.
    2. The payment shall be held in a reserve account and shall be expended to fund improvements on the street system.
    3. An appropriate and reasonable portion of payments collected may be used for administration of this Chapter.
    4. The fee payer may receive a refund of such fees, if the City fails to expend or encumber the impact fees within six (6) years of when the fees were paid or other such period of time established pursuant to RCW 82.02.070(3), for transportation facilities intended to benefit the development for which the transportation impact fees were paid, unless the City Council finds that there exists an extraordinary and compelling reason for fees to be held longer than six (6) years. Such findings shall be set forth in writing and approved by the City Council. In determining whether traffic impact fees have been encumbered, impact fees shall be considered encumbered on a first in/first out basis. The City shall notify potential claimants by first class mail deposited with the United States Postal Service at the last known address of claimants.
    5. A request for a refund must be submitted by the applicant to the City in writing within ninety (90) days of the date the right to claim the refund arises, or the date that notice is given, whichever is later. Any traffic impact fees that are not expended within these time limitations, and for which no application for a refund has been made within this ninety (90) day period, shall be retained and expended on projects identified in the Transportation Facilities Plan. Refunds of traffic impact fee payments under this subsection shall include interest earned on the impact fees.
B. Credit for offsite improvements.
    1. Offsite improvements include construction of improvements to mitigate an arterial unit in arrears and/or specific inadequate street condition locations.
    2. If a developer chooses to construct improvements to mitigate an arterial unit in arrears or inadequate street condition problem, and the improvements constructed are part of the cost basis of any traffic impact fee imposed under this Chapter to mitigate the development’s impact on the future capacity of City streets, the cost of these improvements will be credited against the traffic impact fee amount.

14.295.135 Single-Family Residential Deferral Program.
An applicant for a building permit for a single-family detached or attached residence may request a deferral of the full impact fee payment until final inspection or 18 months from the date of original building permit issuance, whichever occurs first. Deferral of impact fees are considered under the following conditions:
1. Submit a deferred impact fee application and acknowledgment form for each single-family attached or detached residence for which the applicant wishes to defer payment of the impact fees on a form to be provided by the city;
2. Pay the applicable administrative fee as established by resolution or ordinance of the city;
3. Grant and record at the applicant’s expense a deferred impact fee lien in a form approved by the city against the property in favor of the city in the amount of the deferred impact fee that:
    a. Includes the legal description, tax account number, and address of the property;
    b. Requires payment of the impact fees to the city prior to final inspection or 18 months from the date of original building permit issuance, whichever occurs first;
    c. Is signed by all owners of the property, with all signatures acknowledged as required for a deed recorded in Snohomish County;
    d. Binds all successors in title after the recordation; and
    e. Is junior and subordinate to one mortgage for the purpose of construction upon the same real property granted by the person who applied for the deferral of impact fees.
4. The amount of impact fees deferred shall be determined by the fees in effect at the time the applicant applies for a deferral.
5. The city shall withhold final inspection until the impact fees have been paid in full. Upon receipt of final payment of impact fees deferred under this subsection, the city shall execute a release of deferred impact fee lien for each single-family attached or detached residence for which the impact fees have been received. The applicant, or property owner at the time of release, shall be responsible for recording the lien release at his or her expense.
6. The extinguishment of a deferred impact fee lien by the foreclosure of a lien having priority does not affect the obligation to pay the impact fees as a condition of final inspection.
7. If impact fees are not paid in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and in accordance with the term provisions established herein, the city may institute foreclosure proceedings in accordance with RCW 61.12.
8. Each applicant for a single-family attached or detached residential construction permit, in accordance with his or her contractor registration number or other unique identification number, is entitled to annually receive deferrals under this section for the first 20 single-family residential construction building permits. (Ord. 2313, 2016)

14.295.140 Administrative Appeals.
Administrative interpretations and administrative approvals made pursuant to this Chapter may be appealed to the Hearing Examiner pursuant to Title 14 SMC.

14.295.150 Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this Chapter should be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality thereof shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of any other section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this Chapter.

14.295.160 No Special Duty.
It is the purpose of this Chapter to provide for the health, welfare and safety of the general public, and not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited by the terms of this Chapter. No provision or term used in this Chapter is intended to impose any duty whatsoever upon the City or any of its officers, agents or employees for whom the implementation or enforcement of this Chapter shall be discretionary and not mandatory.
Nothing contained in this Chapter is intended to be, nor shall be construed to create or form the basis for, any liability on the part of the City or its officers, agents and employees for any injury or damage resulting from the failure to comply with the provisions of this Chapter or be a reason or a consequence of any inspection, notice or order, in connection with the implementation or enforcement of this Chapter, or by reason of any action of the City related in any manner to enforcement of this Chapter by its officer, agents or employees. (Ord. 2067, 2005)

Chapter 14.300 PARK IMPACT FEES

Sections:
14.300.010   Purpose
14.300.020   Establishment of Impact Fees and Fund
14.300.030   Incorporation of Parks Capital Facilities Plan
14.300.040   Applicability
14.300.050   Impact Fee Schedule Exemptions
14.300.060   Impact Fee Collection and Assessment
14.300.065   Single-Family Residential Deferral Program
14.300.070   Schedule of Park Impact Fees
14.300.080   In-Kind Mitigation Option
14.300.090   Credit for Payment or Obligation Previously Incurred
14.300.100   Administrative Adjustment of Fee Amount – Payment under Protest
14.300.110   Appeals
14.300.120   Service Area Established
14.300.130   Use of Funds
14.300.140   Refunds
14.300.150   Use and Disposition of Land
14.300.160   Annual Report
14.300.170   Definitions
14.300.180   Severability
14.300.190   No Special Duty

14.300.010 Purpose.
The purposes of this chapter are to: (1) Ensure that parks, recreation, and trail facilities necessary to support development shall be adequate to serve the development at the time the development is available for occupancy and use without decreasing service levels below established minimum standards for the City; and (2) Establish standards and procedures so that new development pays a proportionate share of costs for facilities and services necessary to serve growth and does not pay arbitrary or duplicative fees for the same impact.

14.300.020 Establishment of Impact Fees and Fund.
As a condition of approval of all residential development or development activity, as defined herein, the City will require mitigation of adverse impacts on the park system pursuant to the State Growth Management Act, RCW 36.70A, RCW 82.02, and this chapter. Park impact fees collected by the City shall be deposited in a fund entitled “Park Impact Fee Fund.” The fund shall include deposits from payments made pursuant to this chapter and shall permit tracking and segregation of all mitigation payments.

14.300.030 Incorporation of Parks Capital Facilities Plan.
By separate ordinance, Ordinance 2135, the City Council has adopted the Parks Element of the Comprehensive Plan and the Parks, Recreation, and Open Space Long Range Plan (Parks Plan). The Parks Plan includes the 20-Year Parks and Recreation Capital Facilities Plan (Capital Facilities Plan) which identifies park facilities necessary to provide for growth, and the methodology used to calculate park impact fees. The Parks Plan as adopted and amended is hereby incorporated into this chapter by reference as if set forth in full.

14.300.040 Applicability.
A. Except as exempted by 14.300.050 SMC and subsection B below, the terms of this chapter shall apply to all residential development, including:
    1. The issuance of any building permit that increases the number of dwellings.
    2. The approval of a change in use or occupancy that increases the number of dwellings.
    3. Final plat approval for plats and short plats.
B. The terms of this chapter shall not apply to:
    1. Residential lots and dwellings for which the park impact or mitigation fee has been paid pursuant to a previous permit or approval.
    2. Complete applications for building permits or changes in use or occupancy received prior to the effective date of this chapter.
    3. Final plat approval and building permits related to a preliminary plat approved prior to the effective date of this chapter.

14.300.050 Impact Fee Schedule Exemptions.
A. A person required to pay a fee pursuant to RCW 43.21C.060 (SEPA) for system improvements shall not be required to pay an impact fee under RCW 82.02.050 through 82.02.090 (GMA) for those same system improvements.
B. The following development activities are exempt from paying park impact fees because they do not have a measurable impact on the City’s park facilities, or because the City has chosen to exempt them pursuant to RCW 82.02.060(2).
    1. Existing Dwelling Unit. Any alteration, expansion, reconstruction, remodeling, or replacement of existing single-family or multifamily dwelling units that does not result in the creation of one or more additional dwelling unit(s).
    2. Facilities for Long-Term Care. Any housing facility or long-term care facility exclusively providing any or all of the following services as defined in RCW 74.39A.009: “assisted living services,” “enhanced adult residential care,” or “nursing home;” provided that this exemption ceases if the housing facility is later converted to permanent use as a single-family or multifamily residence not providing such services, in which case park impact fees shall be imposed at that point; and provided further that where a housing facility provides a mixture of independent senior housing in combination with any of the above mentioned services, the exemption shall be limited to that portion of the facility providing such services and the impact fee shall be appropriately calculated on a per dwelling unit basis for that portion of the facility not providing such services.
    3. Temporary Accommodation. Any dwelling unit licensed and operated as transient accommodations under Chapter 70.62 RCW and WAC 248-144-026(26), such as hotels, motels, and resorts; provided that this exclusion ceases if the housing is later converted to permanent use as a single-family or multifamily residence not subject to such restrictions.
    4. Any accessory dwelling unit as that term is defined in SMC 14.100.
C. The City Council may, on a case-by-case basis, grant exemptions to the application of the fee schedule for low-income or senior housing that achieves broad public purposes as defined in Chapter 14.05.020 SMC, and authorized by and in accordance with the conditions specified under RCW 82.02.060(2), provided that the impact fees for such development activity shall be paid from public funds other than impact fee accounts. To qualify for the exemption, the developer of such housing shall submit a petition to the City Planner for consideration by the Council prior to application for building permit. Conditions for such approvals shall be established by the Council at the time of approval that, at a minimum, meet the requirements of RCW 82.02.060(2), and that include a requirement for a covenant to assure the project’s continued use for low-income or senior housing. The covenant entered into by and between the developer and the City shall be an obligation that runs with the land for no less than 25 years, and shall be recorded against the title of the real property upon which such housing is located in the real property records of the Snohomish County Auditor. The covenant shall be reviewed and approved as to form by the City Attorney

14.300.060 Impact Fee Collection and Assessment.
A. Impact fee collection shall occur prior to building permit issuance unless the project proponent elects to defer payment utilizing the process outlined in 14.300.065. Payment for a subdivision or short subdivision shall be made prior to approval of the final plat. If the scope of work does not require a building permit, then payment is required prior to approval of occupancy.
B. Assessment. City permit staff shall determine the total impact fee owed based on the fee schedule in effect at the time of permit issuance or, in the case of subdivisions, the fee schedule in effect at the time of final plat approval.

14.300.065 Single-Family Residential Deferral Program.
An applicant for a building permit for a single-family detached or attached residence may request a deferral of the full impact fee payment until final inspection or 18 months from the date of original building permit issuance, whichever occurs first. Deferral of impact fees are considered under the following conditions:
A. An applicant for deferral must request the deferral no later than the time of application for a building permit.
B. To receive a deferral, an applicant must:
    1. Submit a deferred impact fee application and acknowledgment form for each single-family attached or detached residence for which the applicant wishes to defer payment of the impact fees on a form to be provided by the city;
    2. Pay the applicable administrative fee as established by resolution or ordinance of the city;
    3. Grant and record at the applicant’s expense a deferred impact fee lien in a form approved by the city against the property in favor of the city in the amount of the deferred impact fee that:
        a. Includes the legal description, tax account number, and address of the property;
        b. Requires payment of the impact fees to the city prior to final inspection or 18 months from the date of original building permit issuance, whichever occurs first;
        c. Is signed by all owners of the property, with all signatures acknowledged as required for a deed recorded in Snohomish County;
        d. Binds all successors in title after the recordation; and
        e. Is junior and subordinate to one mortgage for the purpose of construction upon the same real property granted by the person who applied for the deferral of impact fees.
    4. The amount of impact fees deferred shall be determined by the fees in effect at the time the applicant applies for a deferral.
    5. The city shall withhold final inspection until the impact fees have been paid in full. Upon receipt of final payment of impact fees deferred under this subsection, the city shall execute a release of deferred impact fee lien for each single-family attached or detached residence for which the impact fees have been received. The applicant, or property owner at the time of release, shall be responsible for recording the lien release at his or her expense.
    6. The extinguishment of a deferred impact fee lien by the foreclosure of a lien having priority does not affect the obligation to pay the impact fees as a condition of final inspection.
    7. If impact fees are not paid in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and in accordance with the term provisions established herein, the city may institute foreclosure proceedings in accordance with RCW 61.12.
    8. Each applicant for a single-family attached or detached residential construction permit, in accordance with his or her contractor registration number or other unique identification number, is entitled to annually receive deferrals under this section for the first 20 single-family residential construction building permits. (Ord. 2313, 2016)

14.300.070 Schedule of Park Impact Fees.
The impact fee shall be set by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 2299, 2016)

14.300.080 In-Kind Mitigation Option.
A. The Public Works Director (Director) and the developer may consider in-kind options to satisfy all or part of the mitigation obligation. Land dedication, site preparation, and related public parks and trails system development, as well as other in-kind mitigation options, may be utilized if acceptable to the Director and the Parks and Recreation Board (Parks Board), and conforms to the 20-Year Parks and Recreation Capital Facilities Plan.
B. In approving or permitting a development, the approval authority shall consider the Director’s recommendations and act in conformity with this chapter.
C. Dedication of land and/or provision of improvements for public parks, recreation facilities, and open spaces may be accepted in lieu of payment of the park impact fees under this chapter. Credit shall be allowed only to the extent agreed between the applicant and the Director. If agreement cannot be reached, or is not appropriate, the park impact fees imposed by this chapter shall be paid.
D. The Director shall request Parks Board review of proposed dedication of land and improvements for parks, recreation facilities, and open spaces. The Parks Board recommendation shall be considered in determining the acceptability of the proposed dedication.
E. Some or all of a developer’s mitigation obligation may be satisfied by dedication or conveyance of land to the City for park and recreation facilities if, after review of an analysis of supply/demand data, the Parks Plan, and a recommendation by the Parks Board, the Director determines that the proposed land dedication or conveyance better meets the community’s need for park and recreation facilities than payment of park impact fees.
F. The following criteria shall be considered in determining the extent to which the proposed dedication or conveyance meets the requirements of this chapter:
    1. The land and its development shall result in an integral element of the Parks Capital Facilities Plan identified as serving growth;
    2. The land should be suitable for future active park and recreation facilities;
    3. The land should be of a size and horizontal and vertical configuration necessary to accommodate identified recreational uses;
    4. The land should have public access via a public street or an easement of an appropriate width and accessibility;
    5. The land should be located in or near areas designated by City park, trail, or land use plans for parks and recreation purposes;
    6. The land should provide linkage between City and/or other publicly owned recreation properties;
    7. The land shall be surveyed or adequately marked with survey monuments, or otherwise readily distinguishable from adjacent privately owned property;
    8. The land should have no known physical problems associated with it, such as problems with drainage, erosion, or the presence of hazardous waste, which the Director determines would cause inordinate demands on public resources for maintenance and operation;
    9. The land should be reasonably unencumbered with easements, utilities, and critical areas to be suitable for identified recreational uses and improvements.
G. Some or all of a developer’s mitigation obligation may be satisfied by the purchase, installation, and/or improvement of park and recreation facilities located on land owned by the City if:
    1. The City is responsible for permanent, continuing maintenance and operation of the facilities;
    2. The Director determines that the facilities correspond to the type(s) of park and recreation facilities designated as serving growth in the Parks Capital Facilities Plan; and
    3. A final plat may be approved or a building permit for an individual lot may be issued following the City’s determination that the specified in-kind mitigation has been completed in a satisfactory manner. The City may approve a final plat or a building permit for an individual lot with in-kind mitigation incomplete only when the provisions of SMC 14.215.060 are satisfied.

14.300.090 Credit for Payment or Obligation Previously Incurred.
A. The City may provide a credit for the value of any dedication of land for, improvement to, or new construction of any system improvements provided by the developer that are identified in the Capital Facilities Plan and that are required by the City as a condition of approving the development activity.
B. A developer may be entitled to a credit against the park impact fees collected under this chapter in any of the following situations:
    1. Where the applicant is required to provide park system improvements identified in the Capital Facilities Plan; or
    2. Where the applicant has agreed, pursuant to the terms of a voluntary agreement with the City, to provide land for system improvements identified in the Capital Facilities Plan; or
    3. Where the applicant has agreed, pursuant to the terms of a voluntary agreement with the City, to make system improvements to existing park facilities.
C. If applicable, improvements for which credit is requested must be identified prior to approval of a preliminary plat, conditional use permit, development plan, or other development permit.
D. For the purposes of calculating the credit, the land value or costs of construction shall be determined as follows:
    1. The amount of credit for land dedicated shall be the higher of either the most recent land valuation by the Snohomish County Assessor, or by an appraisal conducted by an independent professional appraiser chosen by the applicant and acceptable to the City. Either the fee payer or the City may request an appraisal, in which event the cost of the appraisal shall be borne by the requesting party. For the purposes of this section, the value shall be established as of the date the land is dedicated to the City.
    2. Credit for facilities constructed shall be based upon the actual cost of construction at the time of construction and shall apply only to approved park system improvements.
E. Applicants for credit for construction of park improvements shall submit acceptable engineering drawings and specifications, legal description, and construction cost estimates to the Director. The estimated value of credits for in-kind improvements shall be based on either the submitted cost estimates or upon alternative engineering criteria and construction cost estimates, at the Director’s discretion. The Director shall provide the applicant with a letter setting forth the estimated dollar amount of the credit, the reason for the credit, and the legal description of the project or development to which the credit may be applied. The applicant must sign and date a duplicate copy of such letter or certificate indicating their agreement to the terms of the letter or certificate and return such signed document to the Director before credit will be given. The failure of the applicant to sign, date, and return such document within 60 days shall nullify the credit. Final credit will be established at acceptance of improvements.
F. In cases where a developer would be entitled to a credit under this section, but the amount of the credit has yet to be determined on a per dwelling unit basis, the City shall take the total credit amount available to the entire plat or project, calculated by applying Subsections (A) through (F) of this section, and divide that amount by the number of dwelling units planned for that plat or project. The impact fee and credit may then be calculated and collected on a per dwelling unit basis as application is made for building permits. Where building permits for some, but not all, of the dwelling units within a plat or project have already been obtained at the time the ordinance codified in this chapter becomes effective, the credit for remaining dwelling units will be calculated to arrive at a per dwelling unit amount in the same manner. For example, if a plat is planned for 20 dwelling units, and building permits have only been issued for 10 of those units, the per dwelling unit credit for the remaining 10 units will equal the total credit amount divided by 20.
G. To utilize an approved credit to reduce impact fees assessed at the time of building permit issuance, the credit must be requested prior to building permit issuance or it is deemed waived.
H. No refund will be allowed in the event that the impact fee credit exceeds the amount of the impact fee itself.

14.300.100 Administrative Adjustment of Fee Amount – Payment under Protest.
A. Within 14 days of issuance by the City of a building permit, an applicant may appeal to the Planning Director for an adjustment to the fees imposed by this title. The Planning Director may adjust the amount of the fee, in consideration of studies and data submitted by the developer and any affected district, if one of the following circumstances exists:
    1. It can be demonstrated that the impact fee assessment was incorrectly calculated;
    2. Unusual circumstances of the development demonstrate that application of the impact fee to the development would be unfair or unjust;
    3. A credit specified in RCW 82.02.060(1)(b) may be warranted.
B. To avoid delay pending resolution of the appeal, impact fees may be paid under protest in order to obtain development approval.
C. Failure to exhaust this administrative remedy shall preclude appeals of the impact fee pursuant to SMC 14.300.110 below.

14.300.110 Appeals.
Appeals of mitigation requirements imposed pursuant to this title shall be as provided in Chapter 14.20 SMC.

14.300.120 Service Area Established.
The service area established in this section assures a proportional benefit of public facilities to development applicants and establishes a nexus between those paying for the fees and those benefiting from the capital facilities. Because the City’s size allows its park and recreation facilities to provide a reasonable benefit to its entire population regardless of their location within the City, the service area for the park impact fee shall be the entire City of Snohomish. The boundary within which impact fees will be charged shall include all unincorporated areas annexed to the City on and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

14.300.130 Use of Funds.
A. Park impact fees shall be used for development of parks, linear trail parks, and recreation facilities to serve new growth and development in Snohomish; provided that such impact fees may only be spent on system improvements. Sidewalks located parallel to public streets are not eligible for the use of park impact fee funds except as identified in the parks and recreation Capital Facilities Plan. The park Capital Facilities Plan distinguishes between facilities and funds needed to serve new development and those facilities and funds needed to correct existing deficiencies.
B. Impact fees may be spent on the following items to the extent that they relate to a particular system improvement: facility planning; land acquisition costs including survey, appraisal, recording fees, and other related expenses; site improvements, necessary off-site improvements; facility construction, engineering, design work, and permitting fees; facility financing, grant matching funds, applicable mitigation costs, capital equipment pertaining to public facilities, and any other expenses which can be capitalized and are consistent with the Capital Facilities Plan.
C. In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments are or have been issued for the construction of public facility or system improvements for which impact fees may be expended, impact fees may be used to pay debt service on such bonds or similar debt instruments to the extent that the facilities or improvements provided are consistent with the requirements of this chapter and are used to serve new development.

14.300.140 Refunds.
A. The current owner of property on which an impact fee has been paid may receive a refund of such fees if the City fails to expend or encumber the impact fees within six years of when the fees were paid on public facilities intended to benefit the development activity for which the impact fees were paid. This 6-year period may be extended by City Council, based on extraordinary and compelling reasons, which shall be identified in written findings approved by City Council. In determining whether impact fees have been encumbered, impact fees shall be considered encumbered on a first in, first out basis. The amount to be refunded shall include the interest earned by this portion of the account from the date that it was deposited into the impact fee fund.
B. An owner may request and shall receive a refund, including interest earned on the impact fees, when:
    1. The owner does not proceed to finalize the development activity as required by statute or City code or the Uniform Building Code; and
    2. The City has not expended or encumbered the impact fees prior to the application for a refund. In the event that the City has expended or encumbered the fees in good faith, no refund shall be forthcoming. However, if within a period of three years, the same or subsequent owner of the property proceeds with the same or substantially similar development activity, the owner shall be eligible for a credit against any then-existing park impact fee requirement. The owner must petition the City in writing and provide receipts of impact fees paid by the owner for a development of the same or substantially similar nature on the same property or some portion thereof. The City shall determine whether to grant a credit and such determinations may be appealed by following the procedures set forth in this chapter.
C. The City shall provide for the refund of fees according to the requirements of this section and RCW 82.02.080.
    1. The City shall notify potential claimants of the refund availability by first-class mail deposited with the United States Postal Service addressed to the owner of the property as shown in the Snohomish County Assessor’s property records.
    2. An owner’s request for a refund must be submitted to the City Finance Director in writing within one year of the date the right to claim the refund arises or the date that notice is given, whichever date is later. Notice is considered given on the date of mailing by the City.
D. Any impact fees that are not expended or encumbered within six years of their receipt by the City, and for which no application for a refund has been made within this one-year period, shall be retained by the City and expended consistent with the provisions of this chapter.
E. If the City seeks to terminate park impact fee requirements, all unexpended or unencumbered funds, including interest earned, shall be refunded pursuant to this section. Upon the finding that any or all fee requirements are to be terminated, the City shall place notice of such termination and the availability of refunds in a newspaper of general circulation at least two times and shall notify all potential claimants by first-class mail to the last known address of claimants. All funds available for refund shall be retained for a period of one year. At the end of one year, any remaining funds shall be retained by the City, but must be expended for the indicated public facilities. This notice requirement shall not apply if there are no unexpended or unencumbered balances within the account being terminated.

14.300.150 Use and Disposition of Land.
All land dedicated or conveyed pursuant to this chapter shall be set aside for development of park and recreation facilities. The City shall make every effort to use, develop and maintain land dedicated or conveyed for park and recreation facilities. In the event that the use of any such dedicated land is determined by the City Council to be infeasible for development of park and recreation facilities, the dedicated land may be sold or traded for another parcel of land, subject to the requirements of state law and City code. The proceeds from such a sale shall be used to acquire land or develop park and recreation facilities in the City. Prior to any proposed sale of land which has been dedicated to the City, the City shall notify each current taxpayer of record or resident of known address in the plat in which the dedicated land is proposed for sale and each taxpayer of record and resident of known address within five hundred feet of the park site.

14.300.160 Annual Report.
The City Finance Department shall prepare an annual report in accordance with the requirements of RCW 82.02.070 showing the system improvements that were financed in whole or in part by impact fees and the amount of funds collected, expended and held for future improvements. The annual report shall be complete on or before April 1 of each year for the preceding calendar year.

14.300.170 Definitions.
Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the following definitions shall apply.
Department means the City of Snohomish Public Works Department.
Development approval means any written authorization from the City which authorizes the commencement of development activity.
Director means Public Works Director or his/her authorized designee.
Dwelling Unit is defined in SMC 14.100.
Encumber means to transfer funds from the general park impact fee fund to an account created to fund, in whole or in part, a particular system improvement. Once funds have been encumbered they cannot be used to fund any other system improvement. Funds may only be encumbered by an action of the City Council.
Impact fee means a payment of money imposed upon development as a condition of development approval to pay for public facilities needed to serve new growth and development, and that is reasonably related to the new development that creates additional demand and need for public facilities, that is a proportionate share of the cost of the public facilities, and that is used for facilities that reasonably benefit the new development. “Impact fee” does not include a reasonable permit or application fee.
Owner means the owner of record of real property, although when real property is being purchased under a real estate contract, the purchaser shall be considered the owner of the real property if the contract is recorded.
Proportionate share means that portion of the cost of public facility improvements that is reasonably related to the service demands and needs of a new development.
Project improvements mean site improvements and facilities that are planned and designed to provide service for a particular development project and that are necessary for the use and convenience of the occupants or users of the project, and are not system improvements. No improvement or facility included in a capital facilities plan approved by the governing body of the City shall be considered a project improvement.
Public facilities means the following capital facilities owned or operated by government entities: (a) Public streets and roads; (b) publicly owned parks, open space, trails and recreation facilities; (c) school facilities; and (d) fire protection facilities in jurisdictions that are not part of a fire district.
Service area is defined in SMC 14.300.120.
System improvements mean public facilities that are designed to provide service to the community at large, in contrast to project improvements. System improve-ments are facilities included in any of the following documents: Capital Facilities Element of the Comprehensive Plan; Parks Element of the Comprehensive Plan; or Parks, Recreation, and Open Space Long Range Plan.

14.300.180 Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or word of this Chapter should be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality thereof shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of any other section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or word of this Chapter.

14.300.190 No Special Duty.
It is the purpose of this Chapter to provide for the health, welfare, and safety of the general public, and not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited by the terms of this Chapter. No provision or term used in this Chapter is intended to impose any duty whatsoever upon the City or any of its officers, agents, or employees for whom the implementation or enforcement of this Chapter shall be discretionary and not mandatory.
Nothing contained in this Chapter is intended to be, nor shall be construed to create or form the basis for, any liability on the part of the City or its officers, agents, and employees for any injury or damage resulting from the failure to comply with the provisions of this Chapter or be a reason or a consequence of any inspection, notice or order, in connection with the implementation or enforcement of this Chapter, or by reason of any action of the City related in any manner to enforcement of this Chapter by its officer, agents, or employees. (Ord. 2141, 2008)

Title 15 SEWER, WATER, AND STORMWATER
Chapter 15.04 Connection and Rates
    15.04.010    Water Meters – Required
    15.04.012    Fire Service
    15.04.020    Applications for Service
    15.04.022    Utility Service Subject to Annexation Policies
    15.04.025    Minimum Utility Line and Water Meter Sizes within the Public Rights-of-Way
    15.04.030    Permit – Fee – Issuance
    15.04.035    Service Installation and Charge
    15.04.036    Meter Installation Charge – Existing, Unmetered Services
    15.04.040    Connection to Main
    15.04.047    NE Sewer Area
    15.04.050    Pipes and Connections from the Meter Pit
    15.04.055    Side Sewers – Connections to City Main
    15.04.060    Activation of Water Service
    15.04.070    Use of Water
    15.04.075    Use of Side Sewer
    15.04.080    Furnishing Water to Other Persons Prohibited
    15.04.090    Right to Shut Off – Notice Not Required
    15.04.100    Right to Impose Water Use Restrictions
    15.04.110    Water and Sewer Service Rates
    15.04.120    Utility Connection Fee
    15.04.125    Utility Capital Facility Charge
    15.04.126    Project Development Fee
    15.04.127    Payment Plan for Utility Connection and Capital Facility Charges for Low Income Senior Citizen and Disabled Persons
    15.04.130    Collection of Charges
    15.04.140    Connection to Sewer System Required
    15.04.142    Surcharge to Utility Billing
    15.04.150    Right of Entry
    15.04.155    Vesting of Fees and Rates
    15.04.160    Violations – Penalty
    15.04.165    Violations of 15.04.140 – Penalty
    15.04.170    Severability
Chapter 15.05 Billing and Collection of Utility Charges
    15.05.010    Utilities billings – Definitions
    15.05.020    Delinquent bills – Liens
    15.05.030    Utility billings – Allocation of payments
    15.05.040    Voluntary termination of utility services
    15.05.050    Involuntary discontinuance of utility services
    15.05.060    Notice of late fee and termination – Service
    15.05.070    Notice of termination form
    15.05.080    Hearing – Procedure
    15.05.090    Termination and reconnection charges
    15.05.100    Meter removal – Charges
    15.05.110    Landlord – Tenant – Utility services
    15.05.115    New Construction Utility Billing
    15.05.120    Miscellaneous provisions
Chapter 15.06 Septic Tanks
    15.06.010    Septic tank permits
    15.06.020    Sewer hookup required
    15.06.030    Enforcement
Chapter 15.08 Pretreatment Ordinance
    15.08.010    Purpose and Policy
    15.08.020    Definitions
    15.08.030    Abbreviations
    15.08.040    Administration
    15.08.050    Prohibited Discharge Standards
    15.08.060    Federal Pretreatment Standards
    15.08.070    State Pretreatment Standards
    15.08.080    Local Limits
    15.08.090    pH Effluent Limitations
    15.08.100    Right of Revision
    15.08.110    Pretreatment Facilities
    15.08.120    Additional Pretreatment Measures
    15.08.130    Deadline for Compliance with Applicable Pretreatment Requirements
    15.08.140    Pretreatment Facilities for Fats, Oils and Grease (FOG)
    15.08.150    Accidental Spill, Discharge or Slug Control Plan
    15.08.160    Septic Tank Waste
    15.08.170    Wastewater Discharge Permit Requirements
    15.08.180    Special Agreement
    15.08.190    Special Agreement Requirements
    15.08.200    Sewer Use Survey Form
    15.08.210    Special Agreement Decisions
    15.08.220    Special Agreement Contents
    15.08.230    Special Agreement Review
    15.08.240    Special Agreement Modification
    15.08.250    Special Agreement Transfer
    15.08.260    Special Agreement Revocation
    15.08.270    Special Agreement Renewal
    15.08.280    Periodic Compliance Report
    15.08.290    Hazardous Waste Notification
    15.08.300    Noncompliance Reporting
    15.08.310    Notification of Significant Production or Discharge Changes
    15.08.320    Reports from Unpermitted Users
    15.08.330    Record Keeping
    15.08.340    Timing
    15.08.350    Sampling Requirements for Users
    15.08.360    Analytical Requirements
    15.08.370    Inspection and Sampling
    15.08.380    Monitoring Facilities
    15.08.390    Confidential Information
    15.08.400    Publication of Users in Significant Noncompliance
    15.08.410    Publication of Violations and/or Enforcement Actions
    15.08.420    Vandalism
    15.08.430    Emergency Suspensions
    15.08.440    Termination of Discharge (Nonemergency)
    15.08.450    Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations
    15.08.460    Cost Recovery
    15.08.470    Enforcement
    15.08.480    Severability
    15.08.490    Conflicts – Repeals
    15.08.500    Nonliability
Chapter 15.10 Cross-Connection Control Program Regulations
    15.10.010    Title
    15.10.020    Group A Public Water Systems Adopted
    15.10.030    Cross-Connection Control Manual Adopted
    15.10.040    Uniform Plumbing Code and Standards Adopted with Amendments, WAC 51-46 and 51-47
    15.10.050    Scope
    15.10.060    Local Administrative Authority
    15.10.070    Definitions
    15.10.080    Cross-Connections Regulated
    15.10.090    Cross-Connection Protection
    15.10.100    Expense to User/Consumer Borne
    15.10.110    Provisions for Water Service - New Construction
    15.10.120    Access to Premises
    15.10.130    Failure to Comply
    15.10.140    Notification of Cross-Connection Incident
    15.10.150    Facility Survey Inspection
    15.10.160    Plan Review -- New Construction, Remodel and Additions
    15.10.170    Installation Requirements and Instructions
    15.10.180    Initial and Annual Testing, Repairs
    15.10.190    Costs of Compliance
    15.10.200    Termination of Service
    15.10.210    No Special Duty Created
    15.10.211    Severability
    15.10.212    Repealer
Chapter 15.12 Side Sewer Installation
    15.12.005    Definition
    15.12.010    License to Install and Repair Side Sewers Required – Fee – Bond – Insurance
    15.12.020    Compliance with Chapter Required – Permit Required
    15.12.030    Permit – When Required
    15.12.040    Permit – Renewal
    15.12.050    Permit – Posting Required
    15.12.060    Inspection – Required Notice of Defects
    15.12.070    Inspection – Leaving Work, Trench, etc. Uncovered
    15.12.075    Excavations – Guarding Same
    15.12.080    Standards of Workmanship
    15.12.100    Dangerous Side Sewer – Notice to Abate – Failure to Abate – City Action
    15.12.110    Costs Borne by Owner
    15.12.120    Use of Old Side Sewer by New Building
    15.12.130    Elevation of Side Sewers – Back Up Valves
    15.12.140    Separate Side Sewer Connections
    15.12.145    Filling Vacated Privies and Septic Tanks
    15.12.150    Exceptions
    15.12.160    Materials Permitted
    15.12.170    Cuts in Pavement Size – Backfill
    15.12.180    Damaging Sewer System Unlawful
    15.12.190    Protecting and Guarding Excavation – Liability
    15.12.200    Restoring Surface
    15.12.210    Discharge of Stormwater, etc
    15.12.220    Acceptance of Unusual Waste – Procedure
    15.12.230    Planting Certain Trees
Chapter 15.13 Stormwater Utility
    15.13.010    Title/Effective Date
    15.13.020    Findings
    15.13.030    Purpose and Authority
    15.13.040    Funding for the Stormwater Utility’s Activities
    15.13.050    Revenues Generated – Revenue Fund 404
    15.13.060    Stormwater Utility Operating Budget
    15.13.070    Stormwater User’s Fee
    15.13.080    Equivalent Residential Unit (ERU)
    15.13.090    Property Classification for Stormwater User’s Fee
    15.13.100    Stormwater Fees and Rates by Resolution
    15.13.110    Discounts for Stormwater Rates
    15.13.120    Collection of Stormwater Utility Fees and Rates
    15.13.130    Severability
Chapter 15.14 Enforcement
    15.14.010    Liability for City's loss
    15.14.020    Penalty for violations
    15.14.030    Other remedies
    15.14.040    No special duty created
    15.14.050    Severability
Chapter 15.16 Stormwater Management
    15.16.010    Purpose
    15.16.020    Stormwater Management Manual Adopted
    15.16.030    Stormwater Management Review and Approval Required
    15.16.040    Standards, Definitions, and Requirements
    15.16.050    Adjustments and Exceptions
    15.16.060    Low Impact Development – Alternative Standards
    15.16.070    Construction and Maintenance of Stormwater Facilities
    15.16.080    Bonding and Insurance for Stormwater Facilities
    15.16.090    Prohibited, Allowable, and Conditional Discharges and Connections
    15.16.100    Administration, Inspection, and Fees
    15.16.110    Enforcement
    15.16.120    Appeals
Chapter 15.17 Latecomer Reimbursement/Cost Recovery Agreements for Utilities
    15.17.005    Purpose
    15.17.010    Definitions
    15.17.020    Latecomer Reimbursement – Water, Sewer, and Stormwater
    15.17.030    Applications for Latecomer Reimbursement
    15.17.040    Submittal of Latecomer Reimbursement Information
    15.17.050    Determination of Recommended Latecomer Reimbursement Charge and Area
    15.17.060    Notice of Recommended Latecomer Reimbursement Charge and Area
    15.17.070    Latecomer Reimbursement Agreement Form
    15.17.080    Official Notice of Recommended Charge and Area – Fixing of Hearing
    15.17.090    City Council Determination of Reimbursement Charge and Area
    15.17.100    Recording of Latecomer Agreement – Amendment of City Records
    15.17.110    Completion and Acceptance of Improvements
    15.17.120    Payment of Reimbursement Charge
    15.17.130    Segregation of Reimbursement Charges
    15.17.140    Recording of Release
    15.17.150    Multiple Connection Points

Chapter 15.04 CONNECTION AND RATES

Sections:
15.04.010    Water Meters – Required
15.04.012    Fire Service
15.04.020    Applications for Service
15.04.022    Utility Service Subject to Annexation Policies
15.04.025    Minimum Utility Line and Water Meter Sizes within the Public Rights-of-Way
15.04.030    Permit – Fee – Issuance
15.04.035    Service Installation and Charge
15.04.036    Meter Installation Charge – Existing, Unmetered Services
15.04.040    Connection to Main
15.04.047    NE Sewer Area
15.04.050    Pipes and Connections from the Meter Pit
15.04.055    Side Sewers – Connections to City Main
15.04.060    Activation of Water Service
15.04.070    Use of Water
15.04.075    Use of Side Sewer
15.04.080    Furnishing Water to Other Persons Prohibited
15.04.090    Right to Shut Off – Notice Not Required
15.04.100    Right to Impose Water Use Restrictions
15.04.110    Water and Sewer Service Rates
15.04.120    Utility Connection Fee
15.04.125    Utility Capital Facility Charge
15.04.126    Project Development Fee
15.04.127    Payment Plan for Utility Connection and Capital Facility Charges for Low Income Senior Citizen and Disabled Persons
15.04.130    Collection of Charges
15.04.140    Connection to Sewer System Required
15.04.142    Surcharge to Utility Billing
15.04.150    Right of Entry
15.04.155    Vesting of Fees and Rates
15.04.160    Violations – Penalty
15.04.165    Violations of 15.04.140 – Penalty
15.04.170    Severability

15.04.010 Water Meters – Required.
Water meters shall be installed on all water services of the City water utility. The cost of metering new water services shall be as set forth in Section 15.04.035. The cost of metering existing, unmetered services shall be as set forth in Section 15.04.036. (Ord. 1501, 1982; Ord. 1514, 1983; Ord. 1602, 1987; Ord. 1886, 1999)

15.04.012 Fire Service.
A. Definitions. 
    1. “Private fire main” means the pipe and its appurtenances on private property: (a) downstream of the connection to the public water system to the base of the system riser for water-based fire protection systems solely for the use of providing water for fire protection systems; or (b) downstream of the connection to the public water system and inlets to foam-making systems solely for the use of providing water for fire protection systems.
    2. “Public fire hydrant” means a fire hose connection device situated on public property or easement.
    3. “Fire Department Connection” means that portion of the service piping provided with internal swivel fittings that the Fire Department connects hoses to for active fire fighting purposes.
B. Fire Hydrant Installation. All fire hydrants shall be installed and connected to the City’s water system on public property or within a City utility easement. Fire hydrants installed as part of private developments shall be provided with a utility easement conveyed to the City in a form and location as prescribed by the City Engineer. Location, type, and spacing of fire hydrants shall be in accordance with the current adopted edition of the International Fire Code and the City’s Engineering Standards.
C. Private Fire Hydrant – Maintenance Costs. Existing private fire hydrants constructed and installed before adoption of this code shall be maintained at the expense of the property owner. Replacement or repair due to wear or casualty loss shall also be at the expense of the property owner. The City reserves the right to require private fire hydrants be terminated and new water main and fire hydrants be constructed and installed within City utility easements as prescribed by the City Engineer where redevelopment or development of the property occurs.
D. Use of Fire Hydrants. Except for fire and emergency use, use of fire hydrants connected to the City water system requires a Hydrant Use Permit. Neither public nor private fire hydrants, except private hydrants on metered lines, shall be used without prior City approval except for fire and emergency use. Fees for use of fire hydrants shall be set forth by resolution of the City Council. Tampering with or unauthorized use of fire hydrants is a misdemeanor subject to the penalties set forth in SMC 15.04.160. (Ord. 1514, 1983; Ord. 1602, 1987; Ord. 1730, 1993; Ord. 1886, 1999; Ord. 2236, 2012)

15.04.020 Applications for Service.
All applications for connection to or use of City water or sewer services shall be made on forms furnished by the City and shall be filed with and approved by the City. Such applications shall state the name of the owner of the property to be served, the correct address and legal description of said property, the dimensions and locations of any buildings on the property, the purpose for which the water or sewer service is to be used, a description of the course of the water or sewer line from the point of its connection with the public line to the building to be served, and such other information as the City shall require. The application shall be signed by the owner of the premises to be served, or by his duly authorized agent. (Ord. 1602, 1987; Ord. 1886, 1999; Ord. 2236, 2012)

15.04.022 Utility Service Subject to Annexation Policies.
Connection to or use of City utility services for property located outside the City limits shall not be allowed until such property is annexed into the City; provided, however, that exceptions can be made by the City Council, where connection is required due to public health emergencies, where pre-existing contractual obligations limit the City’s ability to require annexation, or as otherwise provided in the Growth Management Act, RCW 36.70A.110(4), as now or hereafter amended. For properties in the NE Sewer Area no annexation shall be permitted unless and until a covenant and agreement as required by Ordinance 2252 from each property in the area to be annexed is executed. The City shall not be obligated to extend sewers or increase the capacity of its sewer system to accommodate an annexation in the NE Sewer Area. (Ord. 2153, 2008; Ord. 2252, 2013)

15.04.025 Minimum Utility Line and Water Meter Sizes within the Public Rights-of-Way.
All new sewer and water lines installed in the public rights of way shall be sized in accordance with adopted City standards and specifications, unless specifically exempted by the City Engineer. All waivers or exemptions must be consistent with the intent and purpose of the adopted City standards, specifications, and the City’s adopted Water and Sewer Comprehensive Plans.
All new water service lines extending from the City waterline and meters shall be sized using the fixture count method as provided in the latest City adopted Uniform Plumbing Code. In existing situations, if the consumption appears excessive for the meter size, the City Engineer may require meter up sizing to prevent early damage to the meter. Downsizing of the meter may be considered if the fixture count can be reduced by installing a larger service line from the meter to the building, or, with single family residential units if a meter larger than the standard (a 5/8”) is specified then the property owner may request the smaller meter. The standard size meter will be allowed if the property owner signs an agreement acknowledging acceptance of the smaller meter along with a commitment to pay the full cost of a meter exchange should upsizing be desired at a later date.
In existing situations where the meter must be larger in order to provide for fire flow, the City will allow the installation of a larger meter than is required by the fixture count but will bill the customer based on the meter size dictated by the fixture count plus an oversized meter maintenance fee. The City reserves the right to require a plan for separating the fire and domestic system. If a new or existing account has processes that are not covered by the fixture count method then the manufacturer’s recommendations and the estimated peak flows will be used for proper sizing of the meter.
Exceptions to the code or Standards and Specifications due to existing conditions or future expansion must be approved by the City Engineer. (Ord. 1602, 1987; Ord. 1730, 1993; Ord. 1740, 1993; Ord. 1886, 1999)

15.04.030 Permit – Fee – Issuance.
In accordance with the City rights of way use ordinance as codified in Snohomish Municipal Code 12.12, a permit shall be required for each separate water or sewer main connection. In addition, permits are required for any repair or modification to private sewer or water lines (See SMC. 15.12.030). There shall be a permit fee as set forth by resolution of the City Council for each such connection, repair, or modification. Applications which are submitted with the required fees shall be referred to the City Engineer. The City Engineer shall review the same, and shall approve, modify, or deny the application. Upon approval of an application, the City Engineer shall provide a water or sewer plan showing the size and location of the public line, the point of connection, and such other information as may be necessary and required. Said plan shall be revised to show the water and sewer connection upon completion of work, and shall be kept as a permanent record of the City. In accordance with the City rights of way use ordinance as codified in Snohomish Municipal Code 12.12, the City Engineer shall issue a permit for all approved applications and shall inspect all construction to assure compliance with said permit and all other standards and specifications as adopted by the City. It is unlawful for any person to alter or do any work on a water or sewer line other than that which is provided for in a duly issued permit. Any person who shall violate this section shall be subject to enforcement action and the penalties set forth in the City rights of way ordinance as codified in Snohomish Municipal Code 12.12. (Ord. 1602, 1987; Ord. 1721, 1992; Ord. 1730, 1993; Ord. 1886, 1999)

15.04.035 Service Installation and Charge.
A. The City shall install all water service connections from the public waterline to the private property line unless specifically approved otherwise by the City Engineer. A service connection charge, not including permits, capital improvement fees, or system connection charges, shall be charged as follows: The City shall charge the applicant based on the estimated unit cost of labor, materials, and equipment for each aspect of the installation, including, but not limited to ditching, laying pipe, connection and metering, and surface restoration. The City may charge the property owner for any damage by the owner or his or her developer or contractor to the work performed by the City either during the process of installation or subsequently.
B. Any property owner or developer may install his own sewer service connection between the public sewer line and the property line, providing the work is done by a licensed and bonded contractor in accordance with the requirements of this code. Such connection must comply with all requirements of this code and other applicable specifications of the City of Snohomish. Whenever possible, all service connections must be installed coincident with the installation of the main public line. A service installation inspection fee as set forth by resolution of the City Council shall be paid for each water or sewer connection by a property owner or developer. Restrictions on property owner or developer relative to installations of a side sewer are outlined in SMC Sections 15.12.010 060.
C. All utility service installation charges shall be paid in full in the amounts set forth by resolution of the City Council prior to issuance of the associated permit. All service installation charges received by the City shall be paid into the water sewer revenue fund. (Ord. 1602, 1987; Ord. 1730, 1993; Ord. 1886, 1999; Ord. 2236, 2012)

15.04.036 Meter Installation Charge – Existing, Unmetered Services.
The cost of metering for existing, unmetered services shall be based on the estimated unit cost for services to be installed by the City.
The cost of metering shall be included on the next utility billing to be issued after the meter is installed and shall be paid in full or in installments of not less than one third of the total amount for metering in three equal installments payable upon receipt of the next three utility billings issued after the installation of the meters. (Ord. 1501, 1982; Ord. 1602, 1987; Ord. 1886, 1999)

15.04.040 Connection to Main.
All connections to a main waterline and all service pipes from the mains up to and including the meter pit shall be installed under the supervision of the City Engineer, and the same shall at all times be under the exclusive control of the City. The property owner applicant ordering such installation shall pay therefore the sum established by resolution. (Ord. 1602, 1987; Ord. 1730, 1993; Ord. 1886, 1999)

15.04.047 NE Sewer Area.
A. Existing Structures. 
    Within the NE Sewer Area, existing structures with on-site sewage disposal systems (septic tanks) will be required to connect to City sewer as follows:
        1. If within a newly annexed area, then in accordance with the requirements of SMC 15.04.145.
        2. If within the City limits, as to connection and extension, at such time as required by SMC 15.04.140.
    Existing structures within the NE Sewer Area shall pay for the development of extensions and capacity improvements as follows:
        1. As to the Cemetery Creek Special Project, if and when required by any ordinances addressing the Cemetery Creek Special Project;
        2. As to any local or interim capacity or extension improvements, if any, when required by any applicable ordinance, cost recovery agreement, or as required by any assessment for a local improvement district.
At the time of connection, existing structures also shall be required to pay meter and related charges and any City general facility charge, unless some other provision of City ordinance allows for the said meter and facility charge to be deferred or paid by an increase in the amount of monthly service charge.
B. Lots without structures. Lots with new structures for human habitation or commercial use in the NE Sewer Area will be required to connect to City sewer at such time as a building permit is issued for any building or structure for human habitation or commercial use. At such time of building permit issuance, payment of all fees for meter placement of the City’s general facility charge shall be required.
C. Issuance of Building Permit for New Structures. No building permit will issue for a new structure for human habitation or commercial use in the NE Sewer Area until the earlier of the following:
    1. Segments 2 and 3 of the Cemetery Special Project and any local extensions have been built and are available for connection, or
    2. Interim Sewer extensions and capacity improvements have been built to serve the new structures for human habitation and commercial use. Such interim extensions and capacity improvements shall not be built by the City but shall have been built by such owner or developer prior to the issuance of any occupancy permit. Such extensions and capacity improvements shall not increase the degree or amount of capacity insufficiency at any location in the City’s sewer system. The owner or developer of such extensions or capacity improvements, to the extent allowed by law, may seek cost recovery under a recovery contract, or if a local improvement district is formed, from the local improvement district. If the extension or capacity improvements are for improvements designated on the City’s Capital Facilities Plan, the owner or developer also may seek, to the extent allowed by law, a credit against any general facilities charge. At the time of connection to such extension or capacity improvements, payment for all fees for meter placement and of the City’s general facility charge shall be required.
    3. Effect of interim sewer extensions and capacity improvements. Connection to interim sewer extension and capacity improvements, and payment of fees and charges associated with the same shall not affect and shall not reduce any requirement for payment of fees, charges, and assessments imposed for the Cemetery Creek Special Project and the future connection to said special project upon demand by the City. (Ord. 2252, 2013)

15.04.050 Pipes and Connections from the Meter Pit.
The property/owner applicant shall, at his own expense, install all necessary pipes and connections from the structure being served to the meter pit. All such pipes must be provided with stop and waste cocks and must be so installed that the service pipes may be drained; such pipes and stop and waste cocks shall be fully protected so as to prevent freezing, and all property owners shall be responsible for keeping the service pipes and stopcocks within their premises in good repair. No reduction of water charges will be made on account of frozen service pipes or stopcocks on the property owner’s premises. (Ord. 1602, 1987; Ord. 1886, 1999; Ord. 2236, 2012)

15.04.055 Side Sewers – Connections to City Main.
The property owner or applicant representing the property owner shall, at his own expense, install all necessary pipes and connections from the structure being served to the City sewer main. The installation, maintenance, and repair of the pipe (side sewer) between the City main and the building being served shall be the sole responsibility of the property owner. (Ord. 1730, 1993; Ord. 1886, 1999)

15.04.060 Activation of Water Service.
Compliance with all City codes, standards, and specifications will be required before water shall be turned on. A final report shall be made by the City Water Division to the City Engineer verifying completion and proper functioning of the new connection, and specifying the location on the premises. (Ord. 1602, 1987; Ord. 1730, 1993; Ord. 1886, 1999)

15.04.070 Use of Water.
No consumer shall use or permit the use of water for any purpose other than that stated in the application filed therefore, and should other or additional service be desired then a new application therefore must be made and filed, conforming in all respects to the requirements of a new or original application. (Ord. 1514, 1983; Ord. 1602, 1987; Ord. 1886, 1999)

15.04.075 Use of Side Sewer.
The side sewer is for the exclusive use of the structure served. No other connections may be made. No connections of any surface water from roof downspouts, building footing drains, springs, or any other ground water drain shall be made to the sanitary sewer system without written approval of the City Engineer. (Ord. 1730, 1993; Ord. 1886, 1999)

15.04.080 Furnishing Water to Other Persons Prohibited.
No property owner or consumer shall allow water to be taken or used from his premises by any other person for the purpose of supplying water to another property or to avoid any of the requirements of the ordinance codified in this title. (Ord. 1602, 1987; Ord. 1886, 1999)

15.04.090 Right to Shut Off – Notice Not Required.
The City shall have the right to shut off or turn on the water from its mains and services at any time, without notice, for repairs, construction, reconstruction, maintenance, operation, and other purposes, without liability for injury to persons or damage to property of its customers and others. The City will endeavor to notify customers where practicable but shall not accept responsibility nor liability for injury to persons or the safety of boilers, hot water tanks, appliances, or other property on the premises of any water consumer. (Ord. 1602, 1987; Ord. 1886, 1999)

15.04.100 Right to Impose Water Use Restrictions.
The City shall have the right to forbid and/or establish certain specified hours for lawn and garden sprinkling and other nonessential uses of water within the whole or specified parts of the City when there is an actual or impending water shortage, extreme pressure loss in the distribution system, or for any other reasonable cause. The City may at any time determine such rules and/or restrictions to be necessary and after reasonable notification thereof may enforce same. Upon the violation of any such rule and/or restriction, the water may be shut off to the premises of the violator without notice and shall not be turned on again until the owner or occupant of the premises has agreed to comply with the rules and/or restrictions and has paid to the City, in addition to any other applicable charges, a penalty charge as set forth by resolution of City Council. (Ord. 1602, 1987; Ord. 1886, 1999)

15.04.110 Water and Sewer Service Rates.
The City Council shall, from time to time by Council resolution, determine the rates and other fees to be charged for the use of City water and sewer service utilities. Those rates and fees in effect prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall continue unchanged until subsequent amendment by resolution. All such resolutions shall be subject to public hearing and notice by publication thereof at least two weeks in advance of approval of said resolution. (Ord. 1514, 1983; Ord. 1602, 1987; Ord. 1886, 1999)

15.04.120 Utility Connection Fee.
A. Except where a credit or deferral for the Utility Connection Fee is authorized by SMC 15.04.142 or SMC 15.04.143, a Utility Connection Fee shall be assessed for each new water or sewer connection and for each connection which has remained unused for twelve months and/or for which a minimum maintenance fee as set forth in Section 15.05.040 has not been paid during said period to provide means by which property owners who connect to the City’s water and/or sewer utilities bear an equitable share of the cost of construction and replacement of major utility facilities and equipment, which include the following: all projects in the City’s Water and Sewer Capital Facilities plans. The Connection Fee for both the water and sewer connection shall be based upon the size of the water service. Connection Fees for utility connection made to property located outside of the corporate City limits shall be one hundred fifty percent (150%) of those charges established by resolution as authorized in Snohomish Municipal Code 15.04.120(B) below.
B. The City Council shall, from time to time by Council resolution, determine the amount of utility connection fee for water and sewer connection.
C. Payment of all Connection Fees shall be made in full upon submission of an application for service under SMC 15.04.020 or by a credit against payment or deferral established by SMC 15.04.142 or SMC 15.04.143. No water or sewer service shall be commenced until such charges have been paid in full with good funds or by the credit against payment or deferral established by SMC 15.04.142 or SMC 15.04.143. All charges constitute a lien against the property superior to all other liens and encumbrances except those for general and special assessments. Such a lien may be foreclosed in the same manner provided by law for the foreclosure of delinquent local improvement district assessments.
D. All Utility Connection Fees received by the City shall be deposited in the Water Sewer System Replacement Fund. (Ord. 1602, 1987; Ord. 1730, 1993; Ord. 1886, 1999; Ord. 2075, 2005; Ord. 2236, 2012)

15.04.125 Utility Capital Facility Charge.
A. Except where a credit for or deferral of a Utility Capital Facility Charge is authorized by SMC 15.04.142 or SMC 15.04.143, a Utility Capital Facility Charge shall be assessed for each new water or sewer connection which has remained unused for twelve months and/or for which a minimum maintenance fee as set forth in Section 15.05.040 has not been paid during said period to provide a means by which property owners who connect to the City’s water and/or sewer utilities bear an equitable share of the cost of construction of major utility facilities and equipment. The Capital Facility Charge for both the water and sewer connection shall be based upon the size of the water service. Capital Facility Charges for utility connection made to property located outside of the corporate City limits shall be one hundred fifty percent (150%) of those charges established by resolution as authorized in Snohomish Municipal Code 15.04.120(B).
B. The City Council shall, from time to time by Council resolution, determine the amount of Capital Facility Charge for water and sewer connection.
C. Payment of all Capital Facility Charges shall be made in full upon submission of an application for service under SMC 15.04.020 or by credit against payment or deferral as established by SMC 15.04.142 or SMC 15.04.143. No water or sewer service shall be commenced until such charges are paid in full in good funds or by credit against payment or deferral as established by SMC 15.04.142 or SMC 15.04.143. All charges constitute a lien against the property superior to all other liens and encumbrances except those for general taxes and special assessments. Such a lien may be foreclosed in the same manner provided by law for the foreclosure of delinquent local improvement district assessments.
D. A developer who has, at the City’s request, installed upsized utility infrastructure, and has not entered into any reimbursement agreement that includes a recovery for the oversized value, and has not applied for or received utility service connections prior to the adoption date of this ordinance, may apply for a Capital Facility Charge Credit. The value of the Capital Facility Credit shall be determined by the City Engineer and shall be based on the estimated value of the oversized infrastructure. The Capital Facility Credit shall be limited to the development that installed the utility infrastructure. Capital Facility Credits will be applied in equal amounts to each lot’s utility specific capital facility charges.
E. All Capital Facility Charges received by the City shall be deposited in the Water Sewer Cumulative Reserve Construction Fund. (Ord. 1886, 1999; Ord. 2075, 2005; Ord. 2236, 2012)

15.04.126 Project Development Fee.
A. Except where a credit for the Project Development Fee is given by SMC 15.04.142, a Project Development Fee shall be assessed for each new water or sewer connection, established in a defined special development area, to provide means by which property owners who connect to the City’s water and/or sewer utilities through infrastructure constructed by City’s water and/or sewer utility bear an equitable share of the cost required to develop the infrastructure. The Project Development Fee for both the water and sewer connection shall be based upon the size of the water service. The amount of the Project Development Fee shall be established by resolution as authorized in Snohomish Municipal Code 15.04.120(B).
B. The City Council shall determine the benefit area for a project development fee, the estimated number of future connections, cost of the facility construction including debt service and/or administrative and overhead costs to determine the amount of Project Development Fee for a water and/or sewer connection
C. Payment of all Project Development Fees shall be made in full upon submission of an application for service under SMC 15.04.020 or by credit against payment as established by SMC 15.04.142. No water or sewer service shall be commenced until such charges are paid in full in good funds or by credit against payment as established by SMC 15.04.142. All charges constitute a lien against the property superior to all other liens and encumbrances except those for general taxes and special assessments. Such a lien may be foreclosed in the same manner provided by law for the foreclosure of delinquent local improvement district assessments.
D. All Project Development Fees received by the City shall be deposited in a bond redemption fund, and shall be used solely for the repayment of debt associated with the specific project developed. (Ord. 1886, 1999; Ord. 2075, 2005; Ord. 2236, 2012)

15.04.127 Payment Plan for Utility Connection and Capital Facility Charges for Low Income Senior Citizen and Disabled Persons.
A. Definitions. 
    1. “Low Income Household” means a household in which the total annual income is below the very low income level for the Seattle/Everett area as established and amended by survey from time to time by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.
    2. “Senior Citizen” means a person 62 years of age or older.
    3. “Disabled Person” means a person with a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities, such as walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, learning, performing manual tasks, caring for oneself, et cetera.
B. Payment Plan for Utility Connection and Capital Facility Charges allowed. Low-income households in which the principal financial resources are provided by a person meeting the above definition of a low-income senior citizen or a disabled person may apply to defer the payment of Utility Connection and Capital Facility Fees. The application shall be made upon forms furnished by the City and approved or denied by the Mayor or his/her designee. As a condition of approving such application, customers will be required to authorize or consent to a lien for the amount of the Utility Connection and Capital Facility Fees and such lien will be recorded with the County Assessor. Payment of the lien shall be required on the sale or refinance of the property.
A low-income senior or disabled person is required to annually re-qualify for the deferral program on a form designated by the Mayor or his/her designee. Should the program participant fail to re-qualify, payment of the Utility Connection and Capital Facility Fee shall be due and payable ninety days from written notice by the City.
Customers requiring services in excess of a five-eighths-inch single family residential service shall not qualify for a deferral of the Utility Connection or Capital Facility Fees regardless of income.
Appeals of the determination of the Mayor or his/her designee shall be to the Utility Hearing Examiner. The Hearing Examiner’s decision shall be limited to determining whether the applicant meets the qualifying criteria established by this ordinance. The decision of the Utility Hearing Examiner shall be final. (Ord. 1923, 1999; Ord. 2341, 2017)

15.04.130 Collection of Charges.
All water/sewer charges shall be paid to the City Treasurer, who shall collect, receive, and receipt for the same and make out and file such detailed statements of receipts as shall be called for or requested by the City Council. (Ord. 1602, 1987; Ord. 1886, 1999)

15.04.140 Connection to Sewer System Required.
A. Existing structures within 200 feet of sewer. All existing structures within the City limits intended for human occupation or business within two hundred (200) feet of a sewer line or lateral shall connect to the City’s sewer system upon:
    1. A determination by the Snohomish Health District that the existing on-site sewage (septic) disposal system for the structure has failed; or
    2. Expansion of floor area of more than 20% to an existing structure or any combination of additions greater than 20% of the original structure as of July 1, 2014 and thereafter.
B. New lots. Any new lot within a subdivision or short subdivision for which preliminary plat approval was received after July 1, 2014, within the City limits shall be connected to the City’s sewer system.
C. New structures within 200 feet of sewer. Any new structure within the City limits designed or intended for human occupation or business any portion of which is built within 200 feet of sewer shall be connected to the City’s sewer system.
D. New structures or expansion of existing structures greater than 200 feet from sewer. Any new structure or the expansion of an existing structure within the City limits that is greater than 200 feet from sewer shall be connected to the City’s sewer system, except:
    1. Construction of one single family home on an existing parcel or expansion of an existing single family home on an existing lot (and expanded structure is still one single family home). Such single family home must meet Snohomish Health District criteria for an approved on-site septic tank system.
    2. Construction of one Equivalent Residential Unit (ERU), including non-residential and multi-family structures, and less than 2,000 square feet of additional floor area of any structure intended for human occupation or business on an existing lot. Improvement must meet Snohomish Health District criteria for an approved on-site septic tank system.
    Approval of any building permit or land division application utilizing one of the exceptions above (D1 or D2) to avoid or defer connection to the City’s sewer system is contingent upon submittal of a legally binding agreement with the City of Snohomish, which must be recorded with the property records of the county and in a form acceptable to the Public Works Director, in which the property owner and successors in interest agree to: prompt connection with sanitary sewers when they become available, and participation without protest in any sewer Local Improvement District (LID) or Utility Local Improvement District (ULID), including agreement to pay any connection fees and monthly charges assessed by the City, LID, or ULID. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of the applicant or any successor in interest to challenge the amount of any assessment.
E. Water connections required. Connections to the City sewer system will require simultaneous connection to the City water system, unless City water is not available within five hundred (500) feet of the lot or parcel.
F. Variation from distance determination. When determining the distance to connect to a public utility, the City Engineer shall take into account hardships caused by sensitive areas (e.g. stream crossing) or other physical barriers which make sewer main extension extremely difficult. The City Engineer shall have authority to administratively grant a variance from the distance calculation and requirement to connect. No variance shall be granted which would be detrimental to the public health, welfare, or environment, or which would be inconsistent with the long-range plans of the City utility system. Conditions may be imposed upon the granting of a variance to ensure the protection of the public health, welfare, and environment. Each variance shall be considered on a case-by-case basis, and shall not be construed as setting precedent for any subsequent application. The decision of the City Engineer on a variance application shall be final, subject to appeal to the City land use Hearing Examiner pursuant to the procedure of Chapter 14.20 within a 20-day period after the written decision of the City Engineer.
G. Connections. All connections shall be made to such sewer system in a permanent and sanitary manner, subject to all applicable utility requirements of the City and payment of fees, connection charges, local or general facility charges to be set by the City Council and subject to the approval of the City Engineer of the City and subject to such permit and construction requirements and regulations fixed by the City Council and in force at the time.
Provided that nothing in this ordinance will be construed to compel the City to extend utility services to any property. (Ord. 1670, 1989; Ord. 1886, 1999; Ord. 2086, 2005; Ord. 2271, 2014)

15.04.142 Surcharge to Utility Billing.
An owner or owners of a lot or parcel with an existing completed building(s) or structure(s) as of the effective date of this section required to be connected to City water or sewer utilities as a result of discontinuation of service from another water or sewer purveyor, may apply to the City for connection and obtain a credit against the Utility Connection Fee, the Utility Capital Facility Charge, and the Project Development Fee pursuant to an agreement to pay a surcharge added to his/her combined utility billing calculated as follows:
The surcharge shall be the sum of the Utility Connection Fee, the Utility Capital Facility Charge, and the Project Development Fee increased by an interest factor determined by the City to reflect the City’s cost of borrowed money for a five year term, said number being divided by sixty (60) to arrive at the monthly surcharge.
Said agreement shall be memorialized in writing and shall authorize the City to record a lien against the lot or parcel for which the surcharge is due. Upon signature on the agreement and recording a lien against the lot or parcel, the owner or owners shall receive a credit equal to the full amount of the Utility Connection Fee, the Utility Capital Facility Charge, and the Project Development Fee.
Upon payment of all other charges due for utility connection, sewer, and/or water service shall be commenced to the lot or parcel. (Ord. 2086, 2005; Ord. 2136, 2007)

15.04.150 Right of Entry.
The City Engineer and/or any authorized City employee shall have free access at all reasonable hours to buildings and premises to ascertain whether this title has been complied with and to inspect said premises where sewage service is rendered, and also for the purpose of exercising the right of water shut off in any case where a water shut off is authorized by this title. (Ord. 1602, 1987; Ord. 1886, 1999)

15.04.155 Vesting of Fees and Rates.
Unless otherwise specifically stated in Chapter 15.04, all utility connection fees for water and sewer established by resolution, and all water and sewer service rates, and all Project Development Fees and Utility Capital Facility Charges shall be paid at the rates and in the amounts in effect at the time of City receipt of a complete application for a building permit and payment of all applicable permit fees. No application for connection to the City water and/or sewer utility shall be deemed approved until payment of the fees and charges in effect at the time of complete application for a building permit or credit or deferral is granted pursuant to SMC 15.04.142 or SMC 15.04.143. In cases where a building permit is not required then the fees and charges in effect at the time of issuance of a plumbing permit shall apply. (Ord. 2081, 2005; Ord. 2236, 2012)

15.04.160 Violations – Penalty.
Whoever willfully injures or interferes with any stopcock, faucet, connecting or service pipes, main or lateral pipes, hydrant, well, powerhouse, pump, engine, dynamo or other machinery or appliances, filter, well, or reservoir which is a part of the City water sewer works, or whoever in any manner pollutes the water supply of the City, or whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter, except Section 15.04.140, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000), or by imprisonment in the county jail of not more than thirty (30) days, or both by fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 1602, 1987; Ord. 1886, 1999; Ord. 2075, 2005)

15.04.165 Violations of 15.04.140 – Penalty.
Any person failing to make a required connection to the City’s sanitary sewer system within 365 days of the date of notice from the City that connection is required commits a civil violation pursuant to SMC 1.01.080 and Chapter 1.14 SMC, except as otherwise provided therein. (Ord. 2086, 2005; Ord. 2155, 2008)

15.04.170 Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or word of this ordinance should be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality thereof shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of any other section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or word of this ordinance. (Ord. 2075, 2005; Ord. 2081, 2005)

Chapter 15.05 BILLING AND COLLECTION OF UTILITY CHARGES

Sections:
15.05.010    Utilities billings – Definitions
15.05.020    Delinquent bills – Liens
15.05.030    Utility billings – Allocation of payments
15.05.040    Voluntary termination of utility services
15.05.050    Involuntary discontinuance of utility services
15.05.060    Notice of late fee and termination – Service
15.05.070    Notice of termination form
15.05.080    Hearing – Procedure
15.05.090    Termination and reconnection charges
15.05.100    Meter removal – Charges
15.05.110    Landlord – Tenant – Utility services
15.05.115    New Construction Utility Billing
15.05.120    Miscellaneous provisions

15.05.010 Utilities billings – Definitions.
A. “Combined utility billing” means as follows: If the City operates the solid waste collection and disposal utility, the City will render a “combined utility billing” consisting of a bill for water, sewer, solid waste and/or other utility services provided by the City. Capital improvement charges, meter charges, connection charges or other similar charges may be included in the combined utility billing.
B. “Contractor utility billing” means a bill to a City consumer of solid waste or other contractor provided City utility services.
C. “Customer” means a regularly billed consumer of City utility services at the billing address as shown in the files of the City Finance Department.
D. “Utility hearing examiner” means a person who may be, but need not be, a City employee, designated by the Mayor to hear and decide billing disputes between customers and the City. (Ord. 1500, 1982; Ord. 1543, 1985; Ord. 1602, 1987; Ord. 2001, 2002; Ord. 2341, 2017)

15.05.020 Delinquent bills – Liens.
All combined utility charges shall be charged against the property for which the service was installed. Combined utility billings and/or contractor utility billings shall be mailed to all customers using the addresses contained in the records of the City Finance Department. In the event that any combined utility billing or contractor utility billing, or a portion thereof, is not paid by the due date indicated upon the billing, they shall be considered delinquent and shall automatically constitute a lien against the property to which the services were rendered. Such lien for accounts provided with water service, for up to four months of service, shall be enforced by termination of service and shall include the delinquent charges and such customer shall be responsible for all costs incurred by the City, including reasonable attorney’s fees; and shall encumber the property and shall be the obligation of the owner of the property, his heirs, successors and assigns until same is paid in full. Such lien for combined utility charges for accounts without water service shall include, but are not limited to, the right to stop service, deny service thereafter to any and all owners and/or occupants, and/or recording a lien at the office of the County Auditor against the property for which the service was installed; provided, that the City shall follow the procedures set forth in this chapter with respect to termination of service. (Ord. 1500, 1982; Ord. 1543, 1985; Ord. 1602, 1987; Ord. 2001, 2002)

15.05.030 Utility billings – Allocation of payments.
All payments on combined utility billings shall be applied first to capital improvement type charges, second to solid waste, third to sewer, and fourth to water. (Ord. 1500, 1982; Ord. 1602, 1987; Ord. 2001, 2002)

15.05.040 Voluntary termination of utility services.
A customer may request voluntary disconnection of utility services during periods where the premises are vacant. Three days advance written notice of such discontinuance shall be given to the City and the customer shall pay the City all charges to the date of the turnoff, and a minimum monthly maintenance charge as set forth by resolution of City Council for turned off services. Any customer who elects not to disconnect utility services shall also be charged a minimum monthly maintenance fee for billing periods where no water is used. (Ord. 1500, 1982; Ord. 1602, 1987; Ord. 2001, 2002)

15.05.050 Involuntary discontinuance of utility services.
Utility service may be discontinued by the City for any of the following reasons:
1. For delinquent, unpaid charges;
2. For use of water, sewer or solid waste utilities for properties other than the property to which the service is provided or for purposes not allowed by City ordinance;
3. For willful waste of water through improper or imperfect piping, equipment or otherwise;
4. When a customer's piping or equipment does not meet City standards or fails to comply with applicable codes and regulations;
5. For tampering with property of the City utility system;
6. In the event of the abandonment of the premises by the customer;
7. For use of the utility lines in a manner which adversely affects the City service to its other customers;
8. For fraudulent obtaining or use of utility service;
9. In the event the customer turns utility services on or off except in the case of an emergency. (Ord. 1500, 1982; Ord. 1602, 1987; Ord. 2001, 2002)

15.05.060 Notice of late fee and termination – Service.
A bimonthly utility bill shall be sent to each utility customer. The bill shall state that a late fee as adopted in the master fee schedule will be added to each account over thirty-five dollars ($35.00) that remains unpaid five (5) working days following the due date set forth in the bill. The bill shall state a termination date, which shall be thirty (30) days from bill date and a termination fee as adopted in the master fee schedule. A notice of termination of service will be sent to each utility customer, and property owner if a tenant is the customer whose account remains unpaid, ten (10) to fifteen (15) days prior to termination of service date informing the customer and property owner the date of termination of the utility service. The notice of termination shall be delivered personally, mailed by “First Class” mail, or posted at the service address as shown in the City’s records. A second and final notice of termination will be delivered personally and posted on the doors of customers whose bills remained unpaid at least three (3) days prior to termination date as shown on bill. Whenever it appears that the termination of utility service to a given service address will affect more than one (1) dwelling unit, the City shall cause reasonable effort to be made to give notice to all affected dwelling units. On approval by the City, a utility customer may enter into written payment arrangements. Such payment arrangements shall be on a form and procedure provided by the City and shall not exceed fifteen (15) days past the service disconnection date. A customer shall be limited to two (2) payment arrangements per twelve (12) month period. It shall be the sole discretion of the City as to the approval or denial of a request for payment arrangements. The City, in its sole discretion, may waive the late charge or shut-off penalty. (Ord. 2365, 2018)

15.05.070 Notice of termination form.
The notice of termination of water service will contain the following information: The address of City Hall, where payments may be sent, the information necessary to request a hearing for amounts in dispute, late fees and shut-off charges and the dates these fees will be charged to that particular account, the service address, the amount owing and the account number. (Ord. 1500, 1982; Ord. 1602, 1987; Ord. 1677, 1989; Ord. 2001, 2002; Ord. 2365, 2018)

15.05.080 Hearing – Procedure.
The utility hearing examiner will notify the party requesting the hearing in writing, at least five calendar days before the date of the hearing, of the time and place of the hearing. Hearings shall be conducted informally with the customer offered the opportunity to be heard, submit exhibits, be represented, and hear and question persons who might present testimony on behalf of the City. The utility hearing examiner shall make a decision, in writing, within three calendar days of the termination of the hearing. The customer shall thereafter have five calendar days to pay the amount, if any, determined to be delinquent by the utility hearing examiner. In the event of the failure of the customer to pay within said period of time, the utility services may be terminated without further notice. (Ord. 1500, 1982; Ord. 1602, 1987; Ord. 2001, 2002)

15.05.090 Termination and reconnection charges.
A property owner may have water service turned on or off by written request to the City. A water utility turn off or turn on, whether voluntary or involuntary, will be charged at a rate as set forth by resolution of City Council for each water turn on and each water turn off. (Ord. 1500, 1982; Ord. 1602, 1987; Ord. 2001, 2002)

15.05.100 Meter removal – Charges.
In the event a service which has been voluntarily or involuntarily terminated is reconnected or turned on by someone other than the City, except in the case of emergency, the City shall have the right to remove the water meter and so much of the service installation as the City deems appropriate under the circumstances. Resumption of service upon removal of the meter and/or other service apparatus shall require advance payment of the City's actual cost of meter and equipment removal and reinstallation. Any damage resulting from an unauthorized reconnection, destruction or removal of City locking mechanism caused to a meter, meter fitting, lock, or other utility apparatus by someone other than the City shall be billed to the property where the service was being provided and shall be paid in full prior to the reestablishment of utility service. Should the City be required to modify the water delivery system to enforce service disconnection due to the unauthorized reconnection by a customer, all costs associated with the modification shall be billed to the property owner via first class mail and post the notice at the effected property. The notice shall provide the property owner with three working days to pay all outstanding charges prior to the modification work being performed. (Ord. 1500, 1982; Ord. 1602, 1987; Ord. 2001, 2002)

15.05.110 Landlord – Tenant – Utility services.
A. All accounts for utilities shall be kept in the name of the fee owner or purchaser of the property and not in the name of the tenant. The property fee owner or purchaser shall be held responsible for utility charges. Nothing in this section shall prevent a tenant from paying a utility bill which has been billed to an owner.
B. Should the identity of the property owner not be known or should the property owner so direct, in writing, the utility bill may be kept in the designation "occupant" and mailed to the subject property, but such accounts shall be the liability of the property owner. (Ord. 1500, 1982; Ord. 1550, 1985; Ord. 1602, 1987; Ord. 2001, 2002)

15.05.115 New Construction Utility Billing.
Upon installation of the water meter service to the applicant’s property, the City shall commence billing water and stormwater service according to the rates established by ordinance or resolution. Charges for sanitary sewer service shall commence upon issuance of a final or conditional certificate of occupancy. (Ord. 2138, 2007)

15.05.120 Miscellaneous provisions.
A. The City reserves the right to require payment by cash or certified funds from any customer who has previously tendered a dishonored check.
B. When utility service has been involuntarily terminated, it will not be resumed until all charges due the City, including charges for resuming service, have been paid.
C. Utility turn-ons, except in case of emergency, will be made during regular business hours as soon as practicable after resumption of service is requested and authorized.
Severability clause: If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or word of this ordinance should be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality thereof shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of any other section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or word of this ordinance. (Ord. 1500, 1982; Ord. 1602, 1987; Ord. 2001, 2002; Ord. 2138, 2007)

Chapter 15.06 SEPTIC TANKS

Sections:
15.06.010    Septic tank permits
15.06.020    Sewer hookup required
15.06.030    Enforcement

15.06.010 Septic tank permits.
No building, or other City permit, will be issued for a building which is not served by public sewer connection or by a septic tank type sewer system, approved by the Snohomish Health District. The Snohomish Health District shall issue permits and conduct inspections for septic tank type systems within the City of Snohomish. (Ord. 1602, 1987)

15.06.020 Sewer hookup required.
No septic tank permit will be issued for a building which is situated within two hundred feet of a public sewer which is available and designated as an appropriate connection site by the City. (Ord. 1602, 1987)

15.06.030 Enforcement.
The Snohomish Health District shall have enforcement authority within the City of Snohomish to enforce all State of Washington and Snohomish Health District laws and regulations relating to the installation and operation of on site sewage disposal systems. (Ord. 1602, 1987)

Chapter 15.08 PRETREATMENT ORDINANCE

Sections:
15.08.010    Purpose and Policy
15.08.020    Definitions
15.08.030    Abbreviations
15.08.040    Administration
15.08.050    Prohibited Discharge Standards
15.08.060    Federal Pretreatment Standards
15.08.070    State Pretreatment Standards
15.08.080    Local Limits
15.08.090    pH Effluent Limitations
15.08.100    Right of Revision
15.08.110    Pretreatment Facilities
15.08.120    Additional Pretreatment Measures
15.08.130    Deadline for Compliance with Applicable Pretreatment Requirements
15.08.140    Pretreatment Facilities for Fats, Oils and Grease (FOG)
15.08.150    Accidental Spill, Discharge or Slug Control Plan
15.08.160    Septic Tank Waste
15.08.170    Wastewater Discharge Permit Requirements
15.08.180    Special Agreement
15.08.190    Special Agreement Requirements
15.08.200    Sewer Use Survey Form
15.08.210    Special Agreement Decisions
15.08.220    Special Agreement Contents
15.08.230    Special Agreement Review
15.08.240    Special Agreement Modification
15.08.250    Special Agreement Transfer
15.08.260    Special Agreement Revocation
15.08.270    Special Agreement Renewal
15.08.280    Periodic Compliance Report
15.08.290    Hazardous Waste Notification
15.08.300    Noncompliance Reporting
15.08.310    Notification of Significant Production or Discharge Changes
15.08.320    Reports from Unpermitted Users
15.08.330    Record Keeping
15.08.340    Timing
15.08.350    Sampling Requirements for Users
15.08.360    Analytical Requirements
15.08.370    Inspection and Sampling
15.08.380    Monitoring Facilities
15.08.390    Confidential Information
15.08.400    Publication of Users in Significant Noncompliance
15.08.410    Publication of Violations and/or Enforcement Actions
15.08.420    Vandalism
15.08.430    Emergency Suspensions
15.08.440    Termination of Discharge (Nonemergency)
15.08.450    Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations
15.08.460    Cost Recovery
15.08.470    Enforcement
15.08.480    Severability
15.08.490    Conflicts – Repeals
15.08.500    Nonliability

15.08.010 Purpose and Policy.
This ordinance sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) for the City of Snohomish and enables the City to comply with all applicable State and Federal laws, including the Clean Water Act and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR Part 403). The objectives of this ordinance are as follows:
A. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will interfere with the operation of the POTW.
B. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which will pass through the POTW, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or which are otherwise incompatible with the POTW.
C. To maintain a quality of wastewater treatment plant biosolids at a level which allows their use and disposal in compliance with applicable statutes and regulations.
D. To protect the POTW personnel who may be affected by wastewater, wastewater solids and biosolids in the course of their employment and to protect the general public.
E. To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and biosolids from the POTW as the opportunity becomes available and viable. (Ord. 2351, 2018)

15.08.020 Definitions.
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this ordinance, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated:
“Accessible,” when applied to required pretreatment monitoring or treatment equipment, shall mean direct access without the necessity of removing any panel, door, vehicle, equipment, materials, or other similar obstruction.
“Act” or “the Act” means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended.
“AKART” means an acronym for “all known, available, and reasonable technology” methods (prevention, control and treatment) to prevent and control pollution of the waters of the State of Washington. AKART shall represent the most current methodology that can be reasonably required for preventing, controlling, or abating the pollutants associated with a discharge.
“Applicable pretreatment standards” means, for any specified pollutant, this chapter as amended, State of Washington pretreatment standards, or EPA’s Categorical Pretreatment Standards (when applicable), whichever standard is appropriate and most stringent.
“Approval authority” means the Washington State Department of Ecology.
“Authorized representative of the user” means:
    A. If the user is a corporation:
        1. The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person, persons or board of directors who performs similar policy or decision making functions for the corporation.
    B. If the user is a partnership, a limited liability company or a sole proprietorship: a general partner, manager or proprietor, respectively.
    C. If the user is a Federal, State or local governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or his/her authorized designee.
    D. The individuals described in subsections A through C of this definition may, if so authorized by the entity’s governing documents, designate another authorized representative if the designation is in writing. The designation must specify the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company. The written designation must be submitted to the City.
“Average daily flow” means the arithmetical average of the total process wastewater flow over a one (1) year period. This average shall be calculated based on days when flow occurs.
“Best management practices (BMPs)” means a schedule of activities, prohibition of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in Section 403.5(a)(1) and (b) of the Act.
“Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD)” means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter amenable to measurement by the methods described in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, current approved edition; under standard laboratory procedures for five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration of milligrams per liter (mg/L).
“Categorical Pretreatment Standard” or “Categorical Standard” means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the U.S. EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471.
“Categorical user” means a user covered by one (1) of EPA’s Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
“City” means City of Snohomish, Washington.
“Composite sample” means the sample resulting from the combination of individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an increment of either flow or time.
“Cooling water/noncontact cooling water” means water used for cooling that does not come into direct contact with any material, raw sewage, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. Cooling water may be generated from any use, such as air conditioning, heat exchangers, cooling or refrigeration, to which the only pollutant added is heat.
“Dangerous waste” means any solid, liquid, or mixed waste defined according to WAC 173-303-080 through 173-303-110.
“Department of Ecology (DOE)” means the Washington State Department of Ecology or authorized representatives thereof.
“Discharge” or “indirect discharge” means the introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (c), (d) of the Act. The discharge into the POTW is normally by means of pipes, conduits, pumping stations, force mains, constructed drainage ditches, surface water intercepting ditches, and all constructed devices and appliances appurtenant thereto.
“Domestic sewage” means the liquid and waterborne wastes derived from ordinary living processes, free from industrial wastes, and of such character to permit satisfactory disposal, without special treatment, into the POTW.
“Domestic user” or “residential user” means any person who contributes, causes, or allows the contribution of wastewater into the City’s POTW that is of a similar volume and/or chemical make-up as that of a residential dwelling unit. Discharges from a residential dwelling unit typically include up to one hundred (100) gallons per capita per day at two hundred fifty (250) mg/L of BOD and TSS.
“Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)” means the United States Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional Water Management Division Director, or other duly authorized official of said agency.
“Existing source” means any categorical user that discharges wastewater to the POTW, which discharge commenced prior to the publication of proposed Categorical Pretreatment Standards that will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of the Act.
“Existing user” means any noncategorical user that is discharging wastewater prior to the effective date of this ordinance.
“Fats, oils and grease (FOG)” means those components of wastewater amenable to measurement by the methods described in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater. The term “fats, oils and grease” shall include polar and nonpolar fats, oils and grease and other components extracted from wastewater by these methods.
“Grab sample” means a sample that is taken at a specific spot at a site over a short period of time; a sample that represents a “snapshot” in both space and time of a sampling area.
“Grease trap” means a device designed to retain grease from one (1) to a maximum of four (4) fixtures, with a maximum capacity of fifty (50) gpm/one hundred (100) lbs. and a minimum of twenty (20) gpm/forty (40) lbs.
“High strength waste” means any water or wastewater having a concentration of BOD or TSS in excess of three hundred (300) mg/L, or having a concentration of fats, oils and grease in excess of two hundred (200) mg/L.
“Industrial user” means any and all liquid or waterborne wastes from industrial or commercial processes, except domestic sewage.
“Inflow and infiltration” means a combination of water entering the sanitary sewer system through inappropriate connections (inflow) and ground water entering sanitary sewers through defective pipe joints and broken pipes (infiltration), causing dilution of sewage and decrease in efficient treatment.
“Interceptor” means a device designed and installed so as to separate and retain deleterious or undesirable matter from normal wastes and to permit normal liquid wastes to discharge by gravity.
“Interference” means a discharge that alone, or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, either: (A) inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations; (B) inhibits or disrupts its biosolids (sludge) processes, use or disposal; (C) is a cause of a violation of any permit or that prevents the use or disposal of sewage sludge in compliance with any statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued under the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act, any State regulations contained in any State sludge management plan, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, and/or the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act.
“Local limits” means the maximum allowed levels to be discharged by industrial or commercial facilities as determined by the publicly owned treatment works’ NPDES permit.
“Maximum allowable discharge limit” means the maximum concentration (or loading) of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time.
“Medical wastes” means isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes.
“Minor user” means a user of the POTW identified by the City as having the potential to discharge a waste stream into the POTW, either singly or in combination with other users, that may have an undesirable impact on the POTW, but less impact than a significant user.
“New source” means any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act that will be applicable to such source; provided, that:
    A. The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located;
    B. The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source;
    C. The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation is substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent factors, the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should be considered.
Construction on a site at which an existing source is located is not a “new source” if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsection B or C of this definition, regardless of whether such construction otherwise alters, replaces or adds to existing process or production equipment.
Construction of a new source has commenced if the owner or operator has:
    A. Begun or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site construction program:
        1. Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment;
        2. Significant site preparation work, including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities, that is necessary for the placement, assembly or installation of new source facilities or equipment.
    B. Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment that is intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts that can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, or design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection.
“New user” means any noncategorical user that plans to discharge a new source of wastewater to the collection system after the effective date of this ordinance. This discharge may be from either a new or existing facility. Any person that buys an existing facility that is discharging nondomestic wastewater will be considered an existing user if no significant changes are made in the operation.
“Noncategorical user” means any user other than a categorical user as defined in 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subpart N.
“North American Industry Classification System” or “NAICS” means a classification pursuant to the North American Industry Classification Manual issued by the United States Office of Management and Budget.
Notice. Whenever the word “notice” is used in this ordinance the term shall mean written notice whether the word “written” precedes the word “notice” or not. Use of the words “verbal or oral notice” shall not mean written notice.
“Oil/water separator” means a device that allows oils mixed with water to become trapped in a holding section for removal, while the water is allowed to pass through for disposal.
“Pass through” means a condition occurring when discharges from users (singly or in combination) exit the POTW in quantities or concentrations that either: (A) cause a violation of any requirement of a City, NPDES, or State Waste Discharge Permit; (B) cause an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation; or (C) cause a violation of any water quality standard for waters of the State.
“Person” means any individual, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, any Federal, State or local governmental agency or entity, or any other entity whatsoever or their legal representative, agents, or assigns.
“pH” means a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed in standard units.
“Pollutant” means any substance discharged into the POTW or its collection system that if discharged directly would alter the chemical, biological, physical, or radiological integrity of the waters of the State as defined in RCW 90.48.020.
“Pretreatment” means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to (or in lieu of) introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes, by process changes, or by other means (except diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard).
“Pretreatment requirements” means substantive or procedural requirements related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard.
“Pretreatment standards (standards)” means prohibited discharge standards, Categorical Pretreatment Standards, and local limits established by the POTW.
“Process water” means wastewater that is neither sanitary, noncontact cooling water nor boiler blow down wastewater.
“Prohibited discharge standard (prohibited discharge)” means the absolute prohibition against the discharge of certain substances listed in SMC 15.08.050.
“Publicly owned treatment works (POTW)” means a “treatment works” as defined by Section 212 of the Act that is owned by the State or a municipality. This definition includes all devices, facilities, or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances that convey wastewater to a treatment plant. The term also includes the City of Snohomish Wastewater Treatment Plant.
“Septage” means the liquid and solid material pumped from a septic tank, cesspool, or similar domestic sewage treatment system. This includes liquids and solids from domestic holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers and septic tanks.
“Settling tank” allows suspended particles to settle out of water or wastewater as it flows slowly through the tank.
“Sewage” means human excrement and gray water (household showers, household dishwashing/laundry operations, etc.).
“Sewer” means any pipe, conduit, ditch, or other device used to collect and transport sewage from the generating source.
“Significant industrial user (SIU)” or “significant user” means:
    A. A user subject to Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
    B. A user that:
        1. Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) GPD or more of process wastewater to the POTW;
        2. Contributes a process waste stream that makes up five (5) percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW;
        3. Is designated as such by the City on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
    C. Upon finding that a user meets the criteria in subsection B of this definition and has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s operation or for violating any applicable requirement, the City may, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that said user should not be considered a significant industrial user.
“Significant noncompliance” means a violation or pattern of violation of applicable pretreatment standards by a user.
“Slug load” means any discharge at a rate of flow or concentration that could cause a violation of this ordinance, or any discharge of a nonroutine episodic nature including an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge.
“Snohomish County Health Department (Health Department)” means the Snohomish County Health Department or authorized representative thereof.
“Special agreement” means a document authorizing a user to discharge wastewater to the City’s POTW.
“State” means the State of Washington.
“State standards” means the Washington pretreatment standards contained in Chapter 90.48 RCW and Chapter 173-208 WAC.
“Stormwater” means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting from such precipitation, including but not limited to snowmelt.
“Total suspended solids (TSS)” means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, wastewater or other liquid.
“Toxic pollutant” means one (1) or a combination of the pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by EPA under Section 307 of the Act, or other pollutants as may be promulgated by EPA.
“Treatment plant effluent” means the discharge from the POTW into waters of the State.
“User” means any person that utilizes any part of the POTW.
“Wastewater” means liquid and waterborne industrial wastes or sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, that are contributed to the POTW.
“Wastewater treatment plant” or “treatment plant” means that portion of the POTW that is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste.
“Waters of the State” means rivers, ponds, streams, inland waters, underground waters, salt waters and all other surface waters and watercourses within the jurisdiction of the State of Washington.
“Waters of the United States” means:
    A. All waters which are currently used, were used in the past, or may be susceptible to use in interstate or foreign commerce, including all waters which are subject to the ebb and flow of the tide;
    B. All interstate waters, including interstate wetlands;
    C. All other waters such as intrastate lakes, rivers, streams (including intermittent streams), mudflats, sandflats, wetlands, sloughs, prairie potholes, wet meadows, playa lakes, or natural ponds, the use, degradation, or destruction of which would affect or could affect interstate or foreign commerce, including any such waters:
        1. Which are or could be used by interstate or foreign travelers for recreational or other purposes;
        2. From which fish or shellfish are or could be taken and sold in interstate or foreign commerce;
        3. Which are used or could be used for industrial purposes by industries in interstate commerce;
    D. All impoundments of waters otherwise defined as waters of the United States under this definition;
    E. Tributaries of waters identified in subsections A through D of this definition;
    F. The territorial sea;
    G. Wetlands adjacent to waters (other than waters that are themselves wetlands) identified in subsections A through F of this definition.
Waste treatment systems, including treatment ponds, or lagoons designed to meet the requirement of the Clean Water Act (other than cooling ponds as defined in 40 CFR 423.11(m) which also meet the criteria of this definition) are not waters of the United States. This exclusion applies only to manmade bodies of water which neither were originally created in waters of the United States (such as disposal area in wetlands) nor resulted from the impoundment of waters of the United States. Waters of the United States do not include prior converted cropland. Notwithstanding the determination of an area’s status as prior converted cropland by any other Federal agency, for the purposes of this definition, the final authority regarding Clean Water Act jurisdiction remains with EPA.
“Zero discharge permit” means a permit for a categorical user that operates its processes so that no industrial waste is discharged to the POTW. (Ord. 2351, 2018)

15.08.030 Abbreviations.
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
+-------+-------------------------------------------------+
| AKART | All Known Available and Reasonable Technology   |
+-------+-------------------------------------------------+
| ASPP  | Accidental Spill Preventions Plan               |
+-------+-------------------------------------------------+
| BMPs  | Best Management Practices                       |
+-------+-------------------------------------------------+
| BOD   | Biochemical Oxygen Demand                       |
+-------+-------------------------------------------------+
| CFR   | Code of Federal Regulations                     |
+-------+-------------------------------------------------+
| COD   | Chemical Oxygen Demand                          |
+-------+-------------------------------------------------+
| CSO   | Combined Sewer Overflow                         |
+-------+-------------------------------------------------+
| DOE   | Department of Ecology                           |
+-------+-------------------------------------------------+
| EPA   | U.S. Environmental Protection Agency            |
+-------+-------------------------------------------------+
| FOG   | Fats, Oils, and Grease                          |
+-------+-------------------------------------------------+
| GPD   | Gallons per Day                                 |
+-------+-------------------------------------------------+
| gpm   | Gallons per Minute                              |
+-------+-------------------------------------------------+
| L     | Liter                                           |
+-------+-------------------------------------------------+
| LEL   | Lower Explosive Limit                           |
+-------+-------------------------------------------------+
| mg    | Milligrams                                      |
+-------+-------------------------------------------------+
| mg/L  | Milligrams per Liter                            |
+-------+-------------------------------------------------+
| NSCIU | Nonsignificant Categorical Industrial User      |
+-------+-------------------------------------------------+
| NPDES | National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System |
+-------+-------------------------------------------------+
| O&M   | Operation and Maintenance                       |
+-------+-------------------------------------------------+
| POTW  | Publicly Owned Treatment Works                  |
+-------+-------------------------------------------------+
| RCRA  | Resource Conservation and Recovery Act          |
+-------+-------------------------------------------------+
| SIC   | Standard Industrial Classifications             |
+-------+-------------------------------------------------+
| SIU   | Significant Industrial User                     |
+-------+-------------------------------------------------+
| SSO   | Sanitary Sewer Overflow                         |
+-------+-------------------------------------------------+
| SWDA  | Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 USC 6901, et seq.) |
+-------+-------------------------------------------------+
| TSS   | Total Suspended Solids                          |
+-------+-------------------------------------------------+
| UPC   | Uniform Plumbing Code                           |
+-------+-------------------------------------------------+
| USC   | United States Code                              |
+-------+-------------------------------------------------+
(Ord. 2351, 2018)

15.08.040 Administration.
The size, type and location of each interceptor, separator, trap, hydro-mechanical and engineered system designed to ensure adequate pretreatment of required wastes shall be in accordance with the current adopted edition of the Uniform Plumbing Code and Engineering Construction Standards, whichever is more stringent, and will be administered by the City.
A permit is required for the installation and construction of all interceptors, separators, traps and/or engineered systems regulated under the Uniform Plumbing Code or Engineering Construction Standards. (Ord. 2351, 2018)

15.08.050 Prohibited Discharge Standards.
A. General Prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to Categorical Pretreatment Standards or any other national, State or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
B. Specific Prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances or wastewater:
    1. Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140ºF (60ºC) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. Any liquids, solids, or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are or may be sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW. At no time shall two (2) successive readings on an explosion meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the system), be more than five (5) percent nor any single reading over ten (10) percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter;
    2. Wastewater having a pH range of less than 5.0 or more than 10.0 or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment;
    3. Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference but in no case solids greater than one-quarter (1/4) inch. Animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshing, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dusts, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastics, gas, tar asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or polishing wastes in amounts that cause interference in the POTW. Fats, oils and grease in amounts that may cause obstructions or maintenance problems in the collection/conveyance system, or interference in the POTW;
    4. Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, COD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW;
    5. Wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104ºF (40ºC) unless the approval authority, upon the request of the POTW, approves alternate temperature limits;
    6. Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through;
    7. Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems;
    8. Trucked or hauled pollutants unless authorized by the City, and at discharge points designated by the City;
    9. Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interactions with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair;
    10. Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently impart color to the treatment plant’s effluent, or cause a violation of the City’s NPDES permit;
    11. Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except as specifically approved by the City in compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations;
    12. Stormwater, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, de-ionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater (except occurring I&I as part of infrastructure that is addressed through regular and routine maintenance), unless specifically authorized by the City;
    13. Any sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial or commercial wastes or from industrial or commercial processes, except as authorized in writing by the City;
    14. Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized in writing by the City;
    15. Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant’s effluent to fail a toxicity test. Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants, as referenced in the Act, in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, to constitute a hazard to humans or animals or exceed limitations set forth in the national Categorical Pretreatment Standards, State standards or specific City limitations;
    16. Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances in amounts which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW;
    17. Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES and/or other disposal system permits;
    18. Any wastewater which in the opinion of the City can cause harm either to the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment; have an adverse effect on the receiving stream; or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance, unless allowed under special agreement by the City (except that no special waiver shall be given from Categorical Pretreatment Standards);
    19. The contents of any tank or other vessel owned or used by any person in the business of collecting or pumping sewage, effluent, septage, or other wastewater unless said person has first obtained approval from the City, completed any sampling as may be required by the City and paid all fees assessed for being allowed to discharge;
    20. Any hazardous or dangerous wastes as defined in rules published by the State of Washington (Chapter 173-303 WAC) and/or in EPA Rule 40 CFR Part 261;
    21. Persistent pesticides and/or pesticides regulated by the Federal Insecticide Fungicide Rodenticide Act (FIFRA);
    22. Any slug load;
    23. Any substance which may cause the POTW’s effluent or treatment residues, biosolids, sludges, or scums to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse, or to interfere with the reclamation process;
    24. The use of the treatment and controls located at the POTW for wastewater treatment required by a National Emission Standard for Hazardous Air Pollutants for Source Categories (NESHAP) under 40 CFR Part 63 is prohibited. The discharge of any untreated wastewater regulated by a NESHAP also is prohibited. The POTW does not and will not accept a NESHAP regulated waste stream nor provide treatment or controls as an agent for any industrial user within the meaning of 40 CFR Part 63, including but not limited to 40 CFR Part 63.1595.
Pollutants, substances or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they are likely to be discharged to the POTW unless the user has in place an accidental spill prevention plan (ASPP)/slug control plan. (Ord. 2351, 2018)

15.08.060 Federal Pretreatment Standards.
All users shall meet the Categorical Pretreatment Standards as promulgated by the EPA pursuant to the Act. Adjustment to Categorical Pretreatment Standards may be made in accordance with 40 CFR Part 403.15. Alternative Categorical Pretreatment Standards may be derived in accordance with 40 CFR Part 403.6(e).
The national Categorical Pretreatment Standards found in 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471 are incorporated herein by reference as if set forth in full in this ordinance. (Ord. 2351, 2018)

15.08.070 State Pretreatment Standards.
A. State and local requirements and limitations on discharges to the POTW shall be met by all users that are subject to such standards in any instance in which they are more stringent than Federal requirements and limitations. State and local regulations require the use of all known, available, and reasonable technology methods of prevention, control and treatment.
B. Any user determined by the City to qualify as a significant industrial user shall file an application for a State Waste Discharge Permit with DOE in accordance with the requirement of WAC 173-216-070. A copy of proof of acceptance of the application and payment of permit fees shall be provided to the City and kept at the user’s facilities and available upon request by the City. Failure to submit the application or rejection of the application by DOE may be considered sufficient grounds to terminate or refuse to provide sewer service. Final determination will be made by the City. (Ord. 2351, 2018)

15.08.080 Local Limits.
No user shall discharge wastewater containing materials in concentrations that exceed the following maximum allowable discharge limits: set forth in the City’s NPDES permit as it now reads or is hereafter amended. Said permit shall be on file at Snohomish City Hall and shall be available for review during normal business hours.
A. High Strength Wastes. Users of any waters or wastes containing higher than ordinary concentrations of compatible pollutants, including, but not limited to, oxygen demanding pollutants and suspended solids (ordinary concentrations are defined as three hundred (300) mg/L for five (5) day BOD and suspended solids, two hundred (200) mg/L of FOG) may be required to discharge at a specific release rate or at a specified strength if, in the opinion of the City, the release of such waste in an uncontrolled manner could adversely affect the POTW.
B. Fats, Oils, and Greases (FOG). No user shall discharge water or wastes containing in excess of one hundred (100) mg/L (maximum level) of FOG of animal or vegetable origin, or fifty (50) mg/L (maximum level) of petroleum products, cutting oil, or mineral products of mineral oil origin whether or not emulsified.
C. Dilution. No user shall increase the use of potable or process water in any way, or combine separate waste streams, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The City may request the DOE to impose mass limitations on users that it believes may be using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. (Ord. 2351, 2018)

15.08.090 pH Effluent Limitations.
Users shall not have a discharge with a pH of less than 5.0 or more than 10.0. If at any time a user’s discharge exceeds these limits for more than one (1) hour, it will be deemed a violation of this ordinance. (Ord. 2351, 2018)

15.08.100 Right of Revision.
City reserves the right to establish, in ordinance, wastewater discharge authorizations or special agreements, differing standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW. (Ord. 2351, 2018)

15.08.110 Pretreatment Facilities.
A. All general users shall provide all known, available and reasonable methods of prevention, control and treatment as required to comply with this ordinance and shall achieve compliance with all applicable pretreatment standards and requirements set out in this ordinance within the time limitation specified by the EPA, the State or the City, whichever is more stringent.
Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the City shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user’s expense.
The City may establish best management practices (BMPs) for particular groups of users. These BMPs may include, but are not limited to, types or methods of pretreatment technology to be used, methods of source control, minimum maintenance requirements, drag out prevention practices, spill prevention practices, or other requirements as deemed necessary. The City may establish BMPs in lieu of numerical limits for noncategorical users.
When required by the City, an engineering report as required by, and complying with, Chapter 172-240 WAC, including detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures, shall be submitted to the City for review, and shall be acceptable to the City before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an acceptable discharge to the City under the provisions of this ordinance.
Within ninety (90) days after the completion of the wastewater pretreatment facility, the discharger shall furnish as-built drawings and its operations and maintenance procedures (manual). Any subsequent significant changes in the pretreatment facility or method of operation shall be reported to and approved in writing by the City prior to the initiation of the changes. Such pretreatment facilities will be under the control and directions of an employee of the user trained and qualified to operate such system.
New sources and new users determined to be significant industrial users (SIUs) must have pretreatment facilities installed and operating, if required, prior to discharge.
B. Users who operate automatic and coin-operated laundries, car washes, filling stations, commercial garages or similar businesses having any type of washing facilities (including pressure washing and steam cleaning) or any other dischargers producing grit, sand, oils, lint or other materials which have the potential of causing partial or complete obstruction of the POTW shall, upon order of the City, install approved interceptors, oil/water separators, or tanks in accordance with specifications adopted by the City such that excessive amounts of oil, sand and inert solids are effectively prevented from entering the POTW.
C. All grease interceptors, oil/water separators, settling tanks, grease and grit traps shall be properly installed, maintained and operated by the user at their own expense. The installation shall be kept in continuous operation at all times, and shall be maintained to provide efficient operation.
Cleaning must be performed by a service contractor qualified to perform such cleaning, or other qualified and trained personnel, and in a manner approved by the City. All material removed shall be disposed of in accordance with all State and Federal regulations. Records and certification of maintenance shall be made readily available to the City for review and inspection, and must be maintained for a minimum of three (3) years. Maintenance records must include the date, action taken and who performed the maintenance. If a service contractor performed the maintenance the user must record the company’s name, address, telephone number and name of operator.
If a failure to maintain or effectively operate grease interceptors, oil/water separators, settling tanks, grease and grit traps or any other approved pretreatment device results in partial or complete blockage of the POTW, or other parts of the City sewer system, or adversely affects the treatment or transmission capabilities of the POTW, or requires excessive maintenance by the City, or poses a possible health hazard, the user responsible for the facilities shall be subject to the remedies herein, including cost recovery, enforcement and penalties.
The user shall control production and/or discharges upon reduction, loss, failure or bypass of the pretreatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power to the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails.
D. Each facility required to install and maintain a grease interceptor, oil/water separator, settling tank, grease trap and/or grit trap under this ordinance shall provide regular maintenance of said device to the satisfaction of the City in accordance with the requirements set forth in this ordinance.
Each person who removes waste from the device shall, to the extent technically and mechanically possible, remove the entire contents and shall comply with the following:
    1. All grease interceptors, oil/water separators, settling tanks, grease and/or grit traps shall be maintained by the user at the user’s expense. Maintenance shall include the complete removal of all contents including floating materials, wastewater, and bottom sludge and solids. Decanting or discharging of removed waste back into the device from which the waste was removed or any other device, for the purpose of reducing the volume to be hauled, is prohibited.
    2. All grease interceptors and oil/water separators must be pumped out completely once every six (6) months, or more frequently if deemed necessary by the City. Exception to this minimum frequency of pumping may be made with written approval from the City for generators of small quantities of waste.
    3. All waste removed from each grease interceptor or oil/water separator must be disposed of at a facility permitted by the Health Department, or other appropriate agency, in the county in which the disposal facility is located. Under no circumstances shall the waste be discharged to any part of the POTW.
    4. A log indicating each cleaning and/or pumping of a grease interceptor, oil/water separator, settling tank, grease and/or grit trap for the previous twelve (12) months shall be maintained by each user. This log shall include date, time, amount removed, employee or hauler, including name of operator(s) on site and disposal site and shall be kept in a conspicuous location for inspection by Health Department or City personnel. Logs will be maintained on site and available for minimum of three (3) years.
    5. The information required in the maintenance log shall be submitted to the City annually. The reporting period shall be from October 1st through September 30th of each year. The report shall be submitted within thirty (30) days after the end of the reporting period. The City will send an annual reminder letter of this requirement to be mailed in September. The corresponding report is due to the City no later than October 31st each year.
    6. Each grease interceptor, oil/water separator, settling tank, grease and/or grit trap cover shall be readily accessible for service and maintenance to ensure it is in good working and operating condition. The use of ladders or the removal of bulky equipment in order to service the device shall constitute a violation of this ordinance. Location of all devices shall be shown on the approved building plan.
    7. All grease interceptors, oil/water separators, settling tanks, grease and/or grit traps shall be provided with a sample box located at the outlet end so that periodic sampling of effluent quality can occur. (Ord. 2351, 2018)

15.08.120 Additional Pretreatment Measures.
A. When determined necessary by the City, each user discharging into the POTW shall install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to insure equalization of flow. The City may require the facility to be equipped with alarms and a rate of discharge controller, the regulation of which shall be determined by the City. A special agreement may be required solely for flow equalization.
B. Grease interceptors, oil/water separators, settling tanks, grease and grit traps shall be provided when, in the opinion of the City, they are necessary for the proper treatment of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease, oil, sand and/or grit, except that such devices will not be required for residential users. All devices will be of the type and capacity approved by the City and shall be located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspections. Such devices shall be installed, inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at their expense.
C. Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection system.
D. When a new building is constructed without a tenant, and has any sewers which are intended to serve wastes other than sanitary or domestic waste, a treatment device approved by the City shall be installed.
E. In the event pretreatment devices are no longer required, all equipment to be abandoned will be pumped and filled as required for abandoned sewers and sewage disposal facilities in accordance with Section 722 of the Uniform Plumbing Code and any other regulation or rules. If abandoning equipment in place is not feasible or an option, the alternative is to have equipment removed and disposed of separately. The City shall be provided a written report that stipulates the form of filling or removal that occurred, the date the work was completed and an as-built plan that indicates the location or previous location of equipment or piping filled in place or removed. (Ord. 2351, 2018)

15.08.130 Deadline for Compliance with Applicable Pretreatment Requirements.
Compliance by existing sources covered by Categorical Pretreatment Standards shall be within three (3) years of the date the Standard is effective unless a shorter compliance time is specified in the appropriate Standard. The City shall establish a final compliance deadline date for any categorical user when the local limits for said user are more restrictive than EPA’s Categorical Pretreatment Standards. The City may establish a final compliance deadline date for any existing user not covered by Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
New source users and new users of an existing facility are required to comply with applicable pretreatment standards within the shortest feasible time not to exceed ninety (90) days from the beginning of discharge. New sources and new users of a new facility shall install and have in operating condition, and shall start up, all pollution control equipment required to meet applicable pretreatment standards before beginning to discharge.
Any existing user or a categorical user that must comply with a more stringent local limit, which is in a state of noncompliance with any local limit, shall be provided with a compliance schedule placed in a special agreement to insure compliance within the shortest time feasible. (Ord. 2351, 2018)

15.08.140 Pretreatment Facilities for Fats, Oils and Grease (FOG).
A. Pretreatment is required for newly constructed or remodeled meat cutting, processing and/or curing facilities, fish, fowl and animal slaughterhouses, tallow-rendering, fat-rendering, hide curing establishments, restaurants, cafes, lunch counters, bakeries, coffee stands, cafeterias, bars, clubs or hotels; hospital, sanitarium, factory or school kitchens; and other establishments that serve or prepare food where grease may be introduced into the sewer system including soap manufacturing, factory or hobbyist where FOGs are utilized or generated. All uses referenced herein shall have pretreatment facilities to prevent the discharge of fat waste, oil, or grease. Remodeled facilities with existing pretreatment devices that are determined by the City to be inadequate in size or functionality shall install adequately functioning and/or adequately sized devices.
All existing users at the time of adoption of this ordinance that discharge wastewater containing fats, oils and greases of polar origin (animal or vegetable) and/or oil or grease of nonpolar origin (petroleum or mineral) in excess of one hundred (100) mg/L for polar origin and fifty (50) mg/L for nonpolar origin shall meet the requirement for interception of grease, oils and fats by installing an approved grease interceptor, grease trap or oil/water separator within ninety (90) days of the date of the correction notice as issued by the City. Timelines may be adjusted if approved in writing by the City.
B. Requirements for waste discharge from fixtures and equipment in establishments that may contain grease, including, but not limited to, scullery sinks, pot and pan sinks, vent hood drains, soup kettles and floor drains located in areas where grease containing materials may exist, may be drained into the sanitary sewer only after such discharges are pretreated in an approved grease interceptor or trap in accordance with this section.
No sanitary wastes from toilets, urinals, or other similar fixtures may be discharged through a grease interceptor or grease trap. All other wastes shall enter the trap or interceptor through the inlet pipe only. The wholesale shredding of food wastes into any fixture that discharges to a grease interceptor or trap is prohibited.
C. Pretreatment facilities designed for the prevention of discharge of fats, oils, and grease must be approved by the City in writing prior to installation, using UPC approved or nationally recognized alternate methods.
D. All establishments that generate liquid or semi-solid polar oil or grease shall maintain a container on site for containment of liquid and semisolid oil or grease waste. This liquid or semi-solid oil or grease shall be transported to an approved rendering plant or other form of approved disposal as deemed acceptable by the City. In no case shall free liquid oil or grease be disposed of directly into fixtures that are connected to the sewer system. Unused butter, margarine, lard, or other solid grease products shall not be discharged into the sewer system through garbage disposals or other means. No exceptions to the prohibitions of this subsection are allowed for fixtures that discharge to the sewer system through an approved grease interceptor or grease trap. Hauling and recycling of restaurant grease shall be accomplished by a facility holding a State Rendering Permit.
All establishments that generate nonpolar oil or grease shall maintain a container on site for the containment of this waste. In no case shall free liquid oil or grease be disposed of directly into fixtures that are connected to the sewer system. No exceptions to the prohibitions of this subsection are allowed.
E. The use of any additive, such as enzymes, chemicals, or bacteria, as a substitute for installing a grease interceptor or grease trap or the maintenance of a grease interceptor or grease trap is prohibited, unless allowed by in writing by the City.
F. Each facility required to install and maintain a grease trap or grease interceptor under this ordinance shall provide regular maintenance of said device to the satisfaction of the City in accordance with the requirement set forth.
    1. Each person who engages in grease waste handling shall maintain all vehicles, hoses, pumps, tanks, tools and equipment associated with grease waste handling in good repair, free of leaks, and in a clean and sanitary condition. All hoses and valves on grease waste handling vehicles or tanks shall be tightly capped or plugged after each use to prevent leakage, dripping, spilling or other discharge of grease wastes on any public or private property.
    2. No person shall collect, transport or handle any hazardous material (as defined in any applicable EPA standard) in any vehicle used for grease waste handling.
    3. In the event that the discharged effluent from the facility continuously exceeds the City’s FOG discharge limits of one hundred (100) mg/L, or if the City’s sewer system is adversely affected by the discharges, then the City may require installation of a grease trap, grease interceptor and/or additional pretreatment devices to ensure adequate removal of FOG. (Ord. 2351, 2018)

15.08.150 Accidental Spill, Discharge or Slug Control Plan.
A. The City may require any user to install, properly operate, and maintain, at the user’s expense, facilities to prevent slug loads or accidental discharges of pollutants to the POTW. The City may require users to produce and/or implement spill plans developed in compliance with applicable OSHA, Health, Fire, and the DOE regulations applicable to discharges to the POTW. When such plans are required by the City they shall contain at least the following elements:
    1. A description of all wastewater discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges.
    2. A description of any and all stored chemicals.
        a. SDS Sheet would be acceptable at a minimum.
    3. Procedures for immediately notifying the City of any accidental or slug load discharges, with procedures for follow-up written notification within five (5) days.
    4. Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug load discharge, including, but not limited to, the following: inspection and maintenance of chemical storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of runoff, worker training, construction of containment structures or equipment, and measures for emergency response.
B. Users shall notify the lead operator of the Wastewater Treatment Plant during business hours from 7:00 a.m. to 3:30 p.m., or City Hall after hours from 3:30 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. and all holidays immediately upon the occurrence of a slug load or accidental discharge of substances prohibited or regulated by this ordinance and take immediate actions to correct the situation. Notification made in person or by telephone call shall be followed by submitting a written report, to the City, that contains the following information within five (5) days. Such notification shall include:
    1. Location of discharge.
    2. Date and time thereof.
    3. Type of waste.
    4. Waste concentration and volume.
    5. Corrective actions taken and planned.
Signs shall be permanently posted in conspicuous places on the user’s premises advising employees whom to call and the above-referenced telephone number in the event of a slug load or accidental discharge. Employers will instruct all employees, who may cause or discover such discharge, of the notification procedures.
Any user responsible for an accidental discharge or slug load of prohibited or regulated material shall be liable for any expenses, loss, or damage to the sewer system and POTW, in addition to the amount of any fines imposed by the City. The user may also be responsible for reimbursing the City for any fines or penalties issued under State or Federal statute. (Ord. 2351, 2018)

15.08.160 Septic Tank Waste.
Residential/domestic septic tank waste may not be introduced into the POTW either at the Wastewater Treatment Plant or at any other site within the collection system. Such waste will be considered a violation of this ordinance and any other applicable requirement established or adopted by the City. (Ord. 2351, 2018)

15.08.170 Wastewater Discharge Permit Requirements.
A. No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the DOE. Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in this ordinance. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the user of its obligation to comply with all Federal and State pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of Federal, State and local law including but not limited to this ordinance.
B. The City may require other users to enter into special agreements (as deemed necessary by the City) to carry out the purposes of this ordinance.
C. Copies of all correspondence, testing results, reports, permit applications and/or letters between the user and the DOE will be provided to the City within fifteen (15) days of the correspondence. (Ord. 2351, 2018)

15.08.180 Special Agreement.
A. The City may enter into special agreements with users to authorize discharges compatible with the POTW at concentrations greater than those typical of domestic wastewater. Users with BOD or TSS levels higher than three hundred (300) mg/L or FOG higher than two hundred (200) mg/L must have such an agreement before commencing discharge. Within such agreements, the City may establish terms of the user’s discharge to the POTW including maximum flow rates and concentrations. The City may also establish fees to recover costs associated with treating such wastes and monitoring schedules in such agreements. In no case will a special agreement waive compliance with State or Federal pretreatment standards or requirements including Categorical Standards.
B. Users discharging or intending to discharge pollutants other than BOD and TSS in a significant amount and claiming compatibility must prove, to the satisfaction of the City, that such pollutants are compatible with the POTW. The City may require any claim of compatibility to be approved by the DOE in writing.
C. The City reserves the right to enter into special agreements with users that the City feels may be a minor user, SIU, middle tier SIU, nonsignificant SIU or zero discharge SIU setting out different terms under which a user may discharge. The user may request a net/gross adjustment to a Categorical Standard, in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15; they may also request a variance from the Categorical Pretreatment Standard from the DOE in accordance with 40 CFR 403.13. (Ord. 2351, 2018)

15.08.190 Special Agreement Requirements.
A. No user required by the City to enter into a special agreement shall commence or continue to discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a special agreement from the City. Any breach of the terms and conditions of a special agreement shall be deemed noncompliance with this ordinance and subject to the sanctions set out in this ordinance. Obtaining a special agreement does not relieve a user of its obligations to comply with all Federal and State pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of Federal, State and local law, including but not limited to this Ordinance.
B. All users required to obtain a special agreement shall submit to the City a completed sewer use survey in a form prescribed by the City.
C. New sources, sources that become a user subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable Categorical Pretreatment Standard, and new users that are determined to be SIU, at least ninety (90) days prior to the anticipated start-up shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit as may be required by the State and will submit to the City a completed sewer use survey form to determine the need to enter into a special agreement with the City. (Ord. 2351, 2018)

15.08.200 Sewer Use Survey Form.
The City shall periodically notify new, existing and potential users of the requirement to complete a sewer use survey form. Upon notification, users shall fully and accurately complete the survey form and return the completed form to the City within thirty (30) days of receipt. Each user shall maintain a copy of the latest completed survey form at their place of business. Failure to fully or accurately complete a survey form, or to maintain the latest survey form on the premises where a wastewater discharge is occurring, shall constitute noncompliance and a violation of this ordinance. (Ord. 2351, 2018)

15.08.210 Special Agreement Decisions.
The City will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within sixty (60) days of receipt of a completed sewer use survey form, the City will determine whether or not to authorize a special agreement. Upon a determination to so authorize, the special agreement shall be executed within thirty (30) days of full evaluation and acceptance of the data. The City shall deny any request for a special agreement for discharges that may detrimentally impact the POTW. The City Council hereby delegates authority to the City Mayor, Public Works Director and City Engineer to execute and enter into special agreements on behalf of the City. (Ord. 2351, 2018)

15.08.220 Special Agreement Contents.
Special agreements shall include such conditions as are deemed necessary by the City to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant’s effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate biosolids management and recycling, and protect against damage to the wastewater treatment and collection system.
Special agreements may contain but are not limited to the following conditions:
A. A statement that indicates the special agreement duration, which shall not be less than one (1) year and not to exceed five (5) years.
B. A statement that the special agreement is nontransferable and nonassignable without prior notification to and written approval of the City.
C. Applicable pretreatment standards and requirements, including any special requirements.
D. Any self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, education and record keeping requirements.
E. A statement of applicable administrative penalties for noncompliance with the special agreement requirements, and pretreatment standards and requirements. This shall not be construed as a waiver of any penalties set forth in this ordinance.
F. Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, and time of discharge.
G. Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW.
H. Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment.
I. Any other special provisions the City deems are consistent with the purposes of this ordinance.
J. Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the City to insure compliance with this ordinance. (Ord. 2351, 2018)

15.08.230 Special Agreement Review.
Any user may petition the City Public Works Department in writing to review and consider modification of the terms of their special agreement subject to the following:
A. Submission of a written request for review alone shall not constitute a basis for noncompliance with any provision of a special agreement.
B. In the petition, the appealing user must indicate the special agreement provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition and language, if any, it seeks to place in the special agreement.
C. Compliance with the terms of the special agreement shall not be revised or stayed pending the request for review.
D. The Public Works Director shall appoint appropriate staff to consider the petition for review. Such staff will make a recommendation to the Public Works Director whose decision to allow revision to a special agreement shall be final. (Ord. 2351, 2018)

15.08.240 Special Agreement Modification.
By written amendment the City and user may modify the special agreement for good cause including, but not limited to, the following:
A. To incorporate any new or revised Federal, State or local pretreatment standards or requirements;
B. To address significant alterations or additions to the user’s operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of special agreement execution;
C. A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the discharge authorized with the special agreement;
D. Information indicating that the discharge authorized poses a threat to the POTW, City personnel, or the receiving waters;
E. Noncompliance with any terms or conditions of the special agreement;
F. Misrepresentation or failure to fully and accurately disclose all relevant facts in the sewer use survey form or in any required reporting;
G. To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to a new owner/operator. (Ord. 2351, 2018)

15.08.250 Special Agreement Transfer.
Special agreements may be assigned or transferred to a new owner and/or operator only if the user gives at least thirty (30) days’ written notice to the City and the City approves the special agreement transfer or assignment. The notice to the City shall include a written certification by the new owner and/or operator that includes:
A. A statement signed by the user and the transferee or assignee that the transferee/assignee has no immediate intent to change the facility’s operations and processes;
B. Identify the specific date on which the transfer or assignment is to occur;
C. Written acknowledgement by the transferee/assignee of full responsibility for complying with the existing special agreement.
Failure to provide advance written notice of transfer or assignment renders the special agreement void as of the date of the facility transfer.
Provided that the above occurs and that there are no significant changes to the operation and process, or wastewater discharge, the transferee or assignee and the new owner and/or operator will be considered an existing user and be covered by the existing limits and requirements in the previous owner/operator’s special agreement. (Ord. 2351, 2018)

15.08.260 Special Agreement Revocation.
Special agreements may be revoked for any of the following reasons:
A. Failure to notify the City in writing of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
B. Failure to provide prior written notification to the City of changed conditions;
C. Misrepresentation or failure to fully and accurately disclose all relevant facts in the sewer use survey form;
D. Refusing to allow the City timely access to the facility premises and records;
E. Failure to meet discharge limitations;
F. Failure to meet a compliance schedule;
G. Failure to complete and submit a sewer use survey when required;
H. Failure to provide advance written notice of the transfer or assignment of a facility currently holding a valid special agreement;
I. If the City has to invoke its emergency provision as cited in this ordinance;
J. Noncompliance with any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the special agreement or this ordinance;
K. Any other reason that may impair the health of the general public, City personnel or the POTW. (Ord. 2351, 2018)

15.08.270 Special Agreement Renewal.
A user who is required to have a special agreement shall apply for a special agreement renewal by submitting, at a minimum, a completed sewer use survey in a form prescribed by the City, in accordance with this ordinance, a minimum of one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the expiration of the existing special agreement.
A user, whose existing special agreement has expired and who has submitted their renewal request in the time period specified, shall be deemed to have an effective special agreement until the City executes or denies the new special agreement.
A user, whose existing special agreement has expired and who fails to submit their renewal request in the time period specified, will be deemed to be discharging without a valid special agreement and considered to be in violation and in noncompliance with this ordinance. (Ord. 2351, 2018)

15.08.280 Periodic Compliance Report.
The City may require reporting by any user if information or data is needed to establish a sewer charge, determine the treatability of the discharge by the POTW, determine the need for a special agreement, or determine any other factor that is related to the operation and maintenance of the POTW. (Ord. 2351, 2018)

15.08.290 Hazardous Waste Notification.
Any user that is discharging fifteen (15) kilograms of hazardous wastes as defined in 40 CFR 261 in a calendar month or any facility discharging any amount of acutely hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(c) is required to provide a one (1) time notification in writing to the City, EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director and the Hazardous Waste Division of the DOE.
Any user exempt from this notification shall comply with the requirements contained herein within thirty (30) days of becoming aware of a discharge of fifteen (15) kilograms or more of hazardous wastes in a calendar month or the discharge of acutely hazardous wastes to the POTW.
Any user discharging one hundred (100) kilograms or more of hazardous waste in any calendar month to the POTW where the pollutants are not reported through self-monitoring under an applicable State Waste Discharge Permit and/or special agreement shall report discharge to both the City and the DOE.
All notifications shall be in writing and will include the following information:
A. The name of the dangerous waste as set forth in Chapter 173-303 WAC, and the dangerous waste number;
B. The specific hazardous constituents;
C. The estimated mass and concentration of such constituents in the waste streams discharged during the calendar month;
D. The type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other);
E. The estimated mass of dangerous waste constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged in the following twelve (12) months.
These notification requirements do not apply to pollutants already reported under any self-monitoring requirements in a State Discharge Permit.
Whenever the EPA publishes final rules identifying additional hazardous wastes or new characteristics of hazardous waste, a user shall notify the City of the discharge of such a substance within ninety (90) days of the effective date of such regulations.
In the case of any notification made under this section, a user shall certify under oath that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. (Ord. 2351, 2018)

15.08.300 Noncompliance Reporting.
If monitoring/sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user shall notify the City within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling within five (5) days and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the City within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation.
The user is not required to resample if:
A. The City performs sampling at the user’s site at a frequency of at least once per month; or
B. The City performs sampling at the user’s site between the time when the user performs their initial sampling and the time when the user receives the results of their sampling. (Ord. 2351, 2018)

15.08.310 Notification of Significant Production or Discharge Changes.
Any user operating under a special agreement with the City incorporating mass or concentration limits based on production levels shall notify the City in writing within two (2) business days after the user has a reasonable basis to know that the production level will significantly change within the next calendar month. Any user not providing a notice of such anticipated change will be required to comply with existing limits contained in the special agreement.
All users shall promptly notify the City in writing in advance of any substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge, including significant manufacturing process changes, pretreatment modifications, and the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for which the user has submitted initial notification, as required in 40 CFR 403.12(p). (Ord. 2351, 2018)

15.08.320 Reports from Unpermitted Users.
All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit or enter into a special agreement with the City shall provide appropriate reports to the City as may be required. (Ord. 2351, 2018)

15.08.330 Record Keeping.
Users subject to reporting requirements of this ordinance shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities and monitoring devices, including maintenance and quality control records, required by this ordinance and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements.
Records shall at a minimum include:
A. The date, exact place, method and time of sampling (including names of the person(s) taking the sample);
B. Dates analyses were performed;
C. Who performed the analyses;
D. The analytical techniques or methods used;
E. The results of such analysis;
F. Dates of flow or monitoring equipment calibration and equipment maintenance (including names of the person(s) performing the calibration and/or maintenance).
These records shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or POTW, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period. (Ord. 2351, 2018)

15.08.340 Timing.
Written reports and/or correspondence will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report and/or correspondence shall govern. Hand delivered reports and/or correspondence shall be date stamped by the City and such date shall be considered the date of submittal. (Ord. 2351, 2018)

15.08.350 Sampling Requirements for Users.
Whenever a user is required to collect samples for analysis, the requirements listed below shall be followed.
A minimum of four (4) grab samples within a twenty-four (24) hour period must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, sulfide and volatile organics. For oil and grease, one (1) grab sample during normal operations of the facility will be sufficient. The City will determine on a case-by-case basis whether the user will be able to composite the individual grab samples. For all other pollutants, twenty-four (24) hour composite samples must be obtained through flow-proportional composite sampling techniques where feasible. The City may waive flow-proportional composite sampling for any user that demonstrates, to the satisfaction of the City, that flow-proportional sampling is not feasible. In such cases, samples may be obtained through time-proportional composite sampling techniques or through a minimum of four (4) grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged.
For nonsignificant users, samples should be taken immediately downstream from a point where any, and all, industrial waste streams from the facility are combined, or at a point determined by the City and/or contained in a special agreement.
All sample results shall indicate the time, date and location of sampling. They shall also include methods of analyses. All sampling and analyses shall be representative of normal work cycle and expected pollutant discharges from the user. (Ord. 2351, 2018)

15.08.360 Analytical Requirements.
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by the EPA.
All analyses performed to establish compliance and used in compliance reporting (with the exception of flow, pH, and percent explosivity) shall be performed by a laboratory accredited by the DOE, Quality Assurance Division, in accordance with Chapter 173-50 WAC. Laboratories must be accredited for the analyses for which they are performing.
The City will follow the same procedures as listed above. (Ord. 2351, 2018)

15.08.370 Inspection and Sampling.
The user shall allow the City reasonable and timely access to facilities and records to ascertain whether the provisions of this ordinance, and any special agreement or order issued hereunder, are being met and whether the user is complying with all requirements thereof. Users shall allow the City ready access to all parts of the premises for the purpose of inspections, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties.
Where a user has security measures in force that require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security personnel so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the City will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.
The City shall have the right to set up on the user’s property, or require the installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user’s discharge.
Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal requests of the City and shall not be replaced. The cost of clearing such access shall be borne by the user.
Unreasonable delays in allowing the City access to the user’s premises shall be considered in noncompliance with this ordinance. (Ord. 2351, 2018)

15.08.380 Monitoring Facilities.
When required by the City, each user shall provide and operate at its own expense a monitoring facility to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurements of the discharge to the POTW. Each monitoring facility shall be situated on the user’s premises. If such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, the City may concur with the facility being constructed in the public right-of-way, providing that the facility is located such that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. The City, whenever applicable, may require the construction and maintenance of sampling facilities at other locations where appropriate.
There shall be ample room in or near such monitoring facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user.
All monitoring facilities shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with all applicable construction standards and specifications and City requirements as deemed necessary.
The City may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. All devices used to measure wastewater flow shall be calibrated at least annually or as deemed necessary by the City to ensure accuracy. Any other continuously monitoring device shall be calibrated on a monthly basis.
The user shall maintain an operation and maintenance manual for each piece of monitoring equipment and each monitoring facility that is required by their discharge permit or special agreement. (Ord. 2351, 2018)

15.08.390 Confidential Information.
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, site surveys, sewer use survey form, special agreement, and monitoring programs, and from City inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production that are exempt from disclosure under the Public Records Act – Chapter 42.56 RCW, or as hereafter amended.
When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the City shall make reasonable efforts to protect the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes from inspection by the public. Such information, however, shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report.
Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other “effluent data” as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. (Ord. 2351, 2018)

15.08.400 Publication of Users in Significant Noncompliance.
The City may publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the area where the POTW is located, a list of the users that, during the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term “significant noncompliance” shall mean:
A. Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty-six (66) percent or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six (6) month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount;
B. Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty-three (33) percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criterion (1.4 for BOD, TSS, FOG, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
C. Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement that the City believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges from the same user, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of City personnel or the general public);
D. Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the City’s exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
E. Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance;
F. Failure to provide within forty-five (45) days after the due date any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with Categorical Pretreatment Standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
G. Failure to accurately report noncompliance;
H. Any other violation(s) that the City determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program;
I. Any violation of breach of any condition contained within a special agreement. (Ord. 2351, 2018)

15.08.410 Publication of Violations and/or Enforcement Actions.
The City may publish violations and/or enforcement actions at any time, where monetary fines may be inappropriate in gaining compliance, or in addition to monetary fines. Violations and/or enforcement actions may also be published when the City feels that public notice should be made, or at other appropriate times. The cost of such publications will be recovered from the user. (Ord. 2351, 2018)

15.08.420 Vandalism.
No person shall willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, tamper with, or prevent access to any structure, appurtenance or equipment, or other part of the sewer system or the POTW. Any person found in violation of this requirement shall be subject to the sanctions set out in this ordinance. (Ord. 2351, 2018)

15.08.430 Emergency Suspensions.
The City may immediately suspend a user’s discharge (after informal notice to the user) whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health, safety or welfare of persons or property.
The City may also immediately suspend a user’s discharge (after informal notice and opportunity to respond) that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW or which presents or may present an endangerment to the environment.
Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user’s failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the City shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection and/or termination of water service to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals, property and/or the environment.
The City may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the City that the period of endangerment has passed. If the City does not allow the user to recommence its discharge within fifteen (15) days of the emergency suspension the City shall initiate termination procedures as referenced in this ordinance.
A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the City prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under this ordinance.
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension or other emergency action under this section. (Ord. 2351, 2018)

15.08.440 Termination of Discharge (Nonemergency).
In addition to the provisions in SMC 15.08.260, any user that violates the following conditions will be subject to discharge termination:
A. Violation of special agreement conditions;
B. Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge;
C. Failure to report significant changes in operation or wastewater volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge;
D. Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring or sampling;
E. Violation of the pretreatment standards outlined in this ordinance;
F. Failure to provide advance notice of special agreement transfer as stated in SMC 15.08.250;
G. Failure to properly renew the special agreement as stated in SMC 15.08.270.
Users will be notified of the proposed termination of discharge and offered an opportunity for a hearing before the City Hearing Examiner pursuant to this ordinance and Chapter 14.95 SMC to dispute the proposed termination action. Initiation of a termination proceeding by the City shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. The Hearing Examiner is specifically authorized to conduct such hearings and is authorized to enter written findings, conclusions and a decision based on the criteria set forth in subsections  A through G  of this section and SMC 15.08.260. (Ord. 2351, 2018)

15.08.450 Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations.
For the purpose of this section “upset” means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operation error, improperly designed facilities, inadequate facilities, lack of preventative maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards if the requirements of the next paragraph are met.
A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence, that:
A. An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset;
B. The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures;
C. The user has submitted the following information to the City and the wastewater treatment plant operator within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided to the City within five (5) days):
    1. A description and location of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance;
    2. The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue;
    3. Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance;
    4. In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof;
    5. A user may appeal any enforcement action due to an upset as provided under this ordinance;
    6. Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with applicable pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails.
A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the prohibitions in SMC 15.08.050 if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with other discharges from the same user, would cause pass through or interference and that either:
A. A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or interference;
B. No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature of constituents from the user’s prior discharge when the City was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and, in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements.
For the purpose of this section “bypass” means the intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a user’s treatment facility and “severe property damage” means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause applicable pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of subsections A and B that follow:
A. If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior written notice to the City, at least ten (10) days before the date of the bypass, if possible.
A user shall submit oral notice to the City of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards or requirements within twenty-four (24) hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided to the City within five (5) days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain the following:
    1. A description of the bypass and its cause;
    2. The duration of the bypass including exact dates and times;
    3. If the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue;
    4. Steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass.
The City may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within twenty-four (24) hours.
B. Bypass is prohibited and the City may take an enforcement action against a user for bypass, unless:
    1. Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage;
    2. There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance;
    3. The user submitted notices as required under subsection A above. (Ord. 2351, 2018)

15.08.460 Cost Recovery.
By resolution of the City Council the City may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the City’s pretreatment program. The City reserves the right to change existing and/or implement new fees and charges.
All charges will be collected by direct billing. Unless the City has been made aware of extenuating circumstances that would prevent prompt payment, all fees are payable within thirty (30) days of the billing. Charges past due will be considered a violation of this ordinance. Users not paying within sixty (60) days of the billing period will be subject to termination of service.
These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this ordinance and are separate from all other rates or charges for sewer service; provided, that the City shall collect said charges in the same manner as other sewer utility rates are collected, including but not limited to the sewer lien procedures provided under Chapter 35.67 RCW.
Fees and charges that may be assessed include but are not limited to the following:
A. All fines, charges and fees associated with executing enforcement actions that may be incurred will be assessed including cost of collection and analyzing a user’s discharge, and fees for monitoring, inspection, surveillance and enforcement procedures;
B. Costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, including the cost of additional inspections, sampling, analysis and monitoring;
C. Reasonable attorneys’ fees, court costs, and other expenses including the cost of any actual damages;
D. Fees for special agreements, the cost of processing the forms, public notice, issuing and administering the agreement and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by the user, and renewing, modifying or transferring agreements;
E. Any expenses incurred due to noncompliance by a user, including but not limited to costs of opening a plugged sewer, costs of repairing a damaged sewer, costs of determining the cause of an SSO or CSO, and costs of cleaning up and mitigating an SSO or CSO.
F. Any user found liable of a violation of this ordinance will be responsible for all expenses including loss, damage, and any other liability which may be incurred to the City as a result of fish kills, damage to person or property or damage to the POTW. This is in addition to any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this ordinance or other applicable law. (Ord. 2351, 2018)

15.08.470 Enforcement.
Violations of this ordinance shall be enforced pursuant to Chapter 1.14 SMC as applicable, except as otherwise provided herein.
If the City has been refused access to a building, structure or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this ordinance, or that there is a need to inspect as part of a routine inspection program of the City designed to verify compliance with this ordinance or any wastewater discharge permit or special agreement or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the City shall seek issuance of a search and/or seizure warrant from any court with jurisdiction to issue such warrant. Except in the case of emergency such warrant shall be served at reasonable hours by the City and may be accomplished in the company of a uniformed police officer of the City. (Ord. 2351, 2018)

15.08.480 Severability.
Should any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance or its application to any person or situation be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance or its application to any other person or situation. The City Council of the City of Snohomish hereby declares that it would have adopted this ordinance and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof irrespective of the fact that any one (1) or more sections, subsections, clauses, phrases or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 2351, 2018)

15.08.490 Conflicts – Repeals.
In the event of conflicts with any provision or enforcement of this ordinance with another ordinance adopted by the SMC, this ordinance will supersede all others only where directly applicable under this ordinance. (Ord. 2351, 2018)

15.08.500 Nonliability.
It is not the intent of this ordinance to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited by the terms or requirements of this ordinance.
It is the specific intent of this ordinance to place the obligation of complying with these regulations upon the applicant or discharger and no provision or any term used in this ordinance is intended to impose any duty whatsoever upon the City or any of its officers, employees or agents, except as provided under the Act or other related statutes of the United States or the State of Washington.
Nothing contained in this ordinance is intended to be or shall be construed to create or form the basis for any tort liability on the part of the City or its officers, employees or agents, for any injury or damage resulting from the failure of an applicant or discharger to comply with the provisions of this ordinance, or by reason or in consequence of any inspection, notice, order, certificate, permission or approval authorized or issued or done in connection with the implementation or enforcement of this ordinance, or inaction on the part of City related in any manner to the implementation or the enforcement of this ordinance by its officers, employees or agents. (Ord. 2351, 2018)

Chapter 15.10 CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL PROGRAM REGULATIONS

Sections:
15.10.010    Title
15.10.020    Group A Public Water Systems Adopted
15.10.030    Cross-Connection Control Manual Adopted
15.10.040    Uniform Plumbing Code and Standards Adopted with Amendments, WAC 51-46 and 51-47
15.10.050    Scope
15.10.060    Local Administrative Authority
15.10.070    Definitions
15.10.080    Cross-Connections Regulated
15.10.090    Cross-Connection Protection
15.10.100    Expense to User/Consumer Borne
15.10.110    Provisions for Water Service - New Construction
15.10.120    Access to Premises
15.10.130    Failure to Comply
15.10.140    Notification of Cross-Connection Incident
15.10.150    Facility Survey Inspection
15.10.160    Plan Review -- New Construction, Remodel and Additions
15.10.170    Installation Requirements and Instructions
15.10.180    Initial and Annual Testing, Repairs
15.10.190    Costs of Compliance
15.10.200    Termination of Service
15.10.210    No Special Duty Created
15.10.211    Severability
15.10.212    Repealer

15.10.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as the City of Snohomish, Cross-Connection Control Program Regulations. (Ord. 1909, 1999)

15.10.020 Group A Public Water Systems Adopted.
The Group A Public Water Systems WAC 246-290, is hereby adopted by reference. For the purposes of adoption, the word “purveyor” shall mean the City of Snohomish.

15.10.030 Cross-Connection Control Manual Adopted.
The Cross-Connection Control Manual, Accepted Procedure and Practice, Sixth edition, published by the Pacific Northwest Section of the American Water Works Association, is hereby adopted by reference with amendments.
AMEND Table 4-2 titled Mandatory Service Isolation - column “Minimum Protection Recommended at Meter” to read “Minimum Protection Determined At Meter”.
AMEND Table 4-3 titled Recommended Service Isolation - column “Minimum Protection Recommended at Meter” to read “Minimum Protection Determined At Meter”.
AMEND Table 4-4 titled “Recommended Protection at Fixtures and Equipment” to read
“Required Protection at Fixtures and Equipment” and ADD language that reads “As Determined by Degree of Hazard”.

15.10.040 Uniform Plumbing Code and Standards Adopted with Amendments, WAC 51-46 and 51-47.
The current edition, as adopted by Washington State, of the Uniform Plumbing Code and Standards published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, as amended and adopted under Snohomish Municipal Code 19.04.050.

15.10.050 Scope.
All community water systems must comply with the cross-connection control requirements of WAC 246-290-490. The City’s authority over cross-connection control shall begin at the water supply source and includes the entire public water treatment, storage, and distribution facilities. The City’s authority ends at the point of delivery to the consumer’s water system, which begins at the downstream end of the service connection or water meter located on the public right-of-way or utility easement.

15.10.060 Local Administrative Authority.
Where provisions relative to cross-connection control are regulated under other codes adopted by City ordinance, or, where service connections are located outside of the City of Snohomish boundaries, the City may enter into a cooperative agreement for administration, inspection and enforcement of cross-connection control when applicable.

15.10.070 Definitions.
WAC Section 246-290-010 Definitions are hereby amended to include the following:
“Compliance Inspection” is an inspection performed by the Cross-Connection Control Specialist to ensure that the approved backflow prevention assembly(s) commensurate with the degree of hazard have been installed, and that the cross-connection to the purveyor’s water system no longer exists.
“Degree of Hazard” means the potential risk to public health and the adverse effect of the hazard upon the potable water system, depending on the type of cross-connection that could occur.
“Facility Survey Inspection” means the consumer’s premises has been inspected by the Cross-Connection Specialist for the purposes of evaluating and identifying potential and/or existing cross-connections, and determining by degree of hazard the required backflow protection necessary to protect the water supply of the consumer’s water system.
“Hydrant Use Inspection” means the inspection, monitoring and controlled use of a purveyor’s hydrant to ensure that equipment or vehicles have an approved backflow prevention device or assembly in place prior to receiving water from the purveyor’s water system.
“Potable Water Supply” means any water supply system intended or used for human consumption or other domestic uses and which must meet Washington State Department of Health Water System Rules and Regulations.
“Premises” means any piece of land to which water is provided, including all structures, occupied spaces, leased or tenant spaces, and any improvements made on and/or to.

15.10.080 Cross-Connections Regulated.
No cross-connections shall be created, installed, used or maintained within the water utility boundaries serviced by the City of Snohomish. Any water district, municipal organization, or other organization, which is connected to the City water supply and/or which is furnished to people within said district or organization, shall cause all people or members to comply with the rules and regulation contained in this chapter.

15.10.090 Cross-Connection Protection.
The City shall ensure that cross-connections between the distribution system and a consumer’s water system be eliminated or controlled by the installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly or device commensurate with the degree of hazard.
Depending on the degree of hazard, and the required backflow prevention assembly or device, the City may, at its discretion, rely on in-premise protection as adequately protecting the public water system. Where the degree of hazard requires more stringent isolation, the City may require both premise and in-premise isolation.

15.10.100 Expense to User/Consumer Borne.
Pursuant to Section 15.10.080, cross-connections that exist, or which have the potential to create or cause conditions that require protection of the public water system, by the installation of approved backflow prevention assemblies or devices, providing premise isolation and/or in-premise isolation, shall be installed, tested, and maintained at the user/consumer’s expense.

15.10.110 Provisions for Water Service - New Construction.
All new connections where backflow prevention is required in accordance with this chapter will not have water service provided until the Cross-Connection Control Specialists receives a copy of the initial Backflow Assembly Test report, which indicates the assembly or device is approved and passed all required testing. The testing and report must be prepared and conducted by an approved, certified Backflow Assembly Tester.

15.10.120 Access to Premises.
Authorized employees of the City of Snohomish, with proper identification, shall have access during reasonable hours and with reasonable notification to all premises to which water is supplied.

15.10.130 Failure to Comply.
In the event any water user refuses access to premises for inspection by the Cross-Connection Control Specialist, or fails to comply with any requirements of this chapter, the City may at its sole discretion require the user/consumer to immediately install premise isolation, terminate the water service, and the user/consumer may be cited with a misdemeanor infraction pursuant to Snohomish Municipal Code Title 19, Building and Construction Codes.

15.10.140 Notification of Cross-Connection Incident.
In the event of any cross-connection incident, where the purveyor’s water system has been or may be contaminated, the Cross-Connection Control Specialist and the local administrative authority shall be notified immediately. Failing to notify an incident has occurred shall subject the property owner, user/consumer to the provisions of Section 15.10.130, Failure to Comply. All costs incurred enforcing this provision shall be borne by the person(s) that caused the cross-connection to occur.

15.10.150 Facility Survey Inspection.
The facility survey inspection is an on-site inspection to determine the degree of hazards present if any, the appropriate backflow prevention assembly to control the hazard, and to verify the proper installation and function of existing backflow prevention assemblies or devices.
A. If a cross-connection exists without protection, the user/consumer will be given a written correction notice that outlines the corrective action required. Based on the degree of hazard found, a compliance date will be determined, and a compliance inspection will be required. Facility surveys may also be conducted from time to time to ensure compliance with this section. The City will notify the local administrative authority of all actions taken.
B. For existing facilities, the City will notify the property owner and/or occupant, (user/consumer) in writing to request an inspection appointment. If there is no response, the City will send a second request certified mail (return receipt requested), notifying them that an inspection of the facility will be conducted within five (5) working days from the date the City receives proof that the letter was received. Pursuant to Section 15.10.130, the City may take action for failure to comply.
C. For new construction, remodels or additions, a facility survey will be completed at final inspection in conjunction with the local administrative authority.

15.10.160 Plan Review -- New Construction, Remodel and Additions.
A. When the proposed scope of work requires installation of, connection to, or use of the City’s water system, the user/consumer shall provide the purveyor with a detailed plumbing diagram of all plumbing fixture types and locations. Plans shall provide cross-connection protection, type of backflow assemblies and installation requirements. No construction or use of water system service, whether permanent or temporary, will be permitted until the City has reviewed and approved the plans for compliance. The local administrative authority and the City will coordinate and conduct a cooperative plan review.
B. When the scope of work is within an existing building, facility, use or parcel and involves new construction or remodeling, the consumer shall provide the City with the detailed drawings and plumbing diagrams proposed for review and approval. The plans shall provide cross-connection protection, type of backflow assemblies and installation requirements. In multi-tenant facilities, a complete plumbing diagram which details existing conditions, including protection methods, are required to be submitted to ensure that no potential cross-connection exists or may cause a hazard to be created which would affect the City’s water system. The local administrative authority and the City will coordinate and conduct a cooperative plan review.

15.10.170 Installation Requirements and Instructions.
To ensure proper operation and accessibility of all backflow prevention assemblies, the following requirements shall apply:
A. No part of the backflow prevention assembly shall be submerged in water or installed in a location subject to flooding. If a backflow prevention assembly is installed in a vault or basement, adequate drainage shall be provided. Reduced Pressure Principle Assemblies shall be installed above ground.
B. Assemblies must be installed at the point of use. Alternate locations must be requested in writing and approved by the City of Snohomish prior to installation.
C. The assembly must be protected from freezing and other severe weather conditions.
D. All backflow prevention assemblies to be installed shall be of a type and model pre-approved by the Washington State Department of Health and the City of Snohomish.
E. The assembly shall be readily accessible with adequate room for maintenance and testing. All devices shall have a minimum of twelve inches clearance on all sides of the device.
F. If written permission is granted to install the backflow assembly inside a building, the assembly shall be readily accessible during regular working hours of 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday.
G. If an assembly is approved for installation inside of the premises, and it is installed five feet above the floor, it must be equipped with rigid and permanently installed scaffolding or platforms acceptable to the City of Snohomish. The installation must also meet the requirements set out by the U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration and the State of Washington Occupational Safety and Health Codes.
H. Reduced Pressure Principle Assemblies shall be installed above ground level only if a relief valve discharge can be drained to daylight through a “boresight” type drain. The drain shall be of adequate capacity to carry the full rated flow of the device and shall be screened on both ends.
I. An approved air gap shall be at least twice the inside diameter of the incoming supply line as measured vertically above the top rim of the drain and in no case less than one inch.
J. Where a backflow device is deemed necessary, the model of the assembly and installation plans shall be submitted to the City of Snohomish for approval prior to installation.
K. Upon backflow device installation, the City of Snohomish shall be notified and all devices shall be inspected and tested. All backflow devices must be registered with the City of Snohomish by means of the initial test report.
L. Prior to installation, any variances from these installation requirements shall be requested in writing by the owner and approved by the City of Snohomish.
M. The City shall be notified within twenty-four (24) hours of the installation of a backflow assembly, and an inspection scheduled with the Cross-Connection Control Specialist and the local administrative authority to ensure compliance. All backflow assemblies shall be tested upon installation and annually thereafter, and following any retrofit, by a Certified Backflow Assembly Tester, and a copy of all test reports submitted to the purveyor for approval within five (5) working days of the test.

15.10.180 Initial and Annual Testing, Repairs.
All backflow assemblies installed within the water service boundaries served by the City of Snohomish water utility shall be tested immediately upon installation and on an annual basis thereafter, and following each assembly retrofit. A Washington State Certified Backflow Assembly Tester shall perform the testing. All devices not functioning properly at the time of testing shall be promptly repaired or replaced. Any device not promptly repaired or replaced may cause the City of Snohomish to deny or discontinue water to the premises. All testing and repairs are the financial responsibility of the water user. A copy of the approved test report shall be provided to the Cross-Connection Control Specialist within five (5) working days of the test.

15.10.190 Costs of Compliance.
All costs associated with purchase, installation, inspections, testing, replacement, maintenance, parts, and repairs of the backflow device are the financial responsibility of the water user. In the event the City must initiate action to enforce compliance with this chapter, all costs incurred enforcing the action shall be borne by the water user, and the City may use whatever means necessary to recover the costs of enforcement.

15.10.200 Termination of Service.
Failure on the part of any customer to discontinue the use of all cross-connections except in accordance with this ordinance, is sufficient cause for the immediate discontinuance of public water service to the premises.

15.10.210 No Special Duty Created.
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the health, welfare and safety of the general public, and not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited by the terms of this chapter.
It is the specific intent of this chapter to place the obligation of complying with its requirements upon the permit applicant and any person owning, operating or controlling any premises, building or structure within the scope of this chapter; that no provision nor term used in this chapter is intended to impose any duty whatsoever upon the City or any of its officers, agents or employees for whom the implementation or enforcement of this chapter shall be discretionary and not mandatory.
Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to be, nor shall be, construed to create or form the basis for any liability on the part of the City or its officers, agents and employees for any injury or damage resulting from the failure of any premises or building to comply with the provisions of this chapter or be reason or a consequence of any inspector, notice, order, certificate, permission or approval authorized or issued or done in connection with the implementation or enforcement of this chapter or by reason of any action of the City related in any manner to the enforcement of this chapter by its officers, agents or employees.

15.10.211 Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are declared to be separate and severable. The invalidity of any clause, sentence, paragraph, subdivision, section or. portion of this chapter or the invalidity of the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this chapter, or the validity of its application to other persons or circumstances.

15.10.212 Repealer.
All provisions of the Snohomish Municipal Code, which are inconsistent with this ordinance, are hereby repeated. (Ord. 1909, 1999)

Chapter 15.12 SIDE SEWER INSTALLATION

Sections:
15.12.005    Definition
15.12.010    License to Install and Repair Side Sewers Required – Fee – Bond – Insurance
15.12.020    Compliance with Chapter Required – Permit Required
15.12.030    Permit – When Required
15.12.040    Permit – Renewal
15.12.050    Permit – Posting Required
15.12.060    Inspection – Required Notice of Defects
15.12.070    Inspection – Leaving Work, Trench, etc. Uncovered
15.12.075    Excavations – Guarding Same
15.12.080    Standards of Workmanship
15.12.100    Dangerous Side Sewer – Notice to Abate – Failure to Abate – City Action
15.12.110    Costs Borne by Owner
15.12.120    Use of Old Side Sewer by New Building
15.12.130    Elevation of Side Sewers – Back Up Valves
15.12.140    Separate Side Sewer Connections
15.12.145    Filling Vacated Privies and Septic Tanks
15.12.150    Exceptions
15.12.160    Materials Permitted
15.12.170    Cuts in Pavement Size – Backfill
15.12.180    Damaging Sewer System Unlawful
15.12.190    Protecting and Guarding Excavation – Liability
15.12.200    Restoring Surface
15.12.210    Discharge of Stormwater, etc
15.12.220    Acceptance of Unusual Waste – Procedure
15.12.230    Planting Certain Trees

15.12.005 Definition.
Side sewer: That portion of the sewer system extending from the City main in a City right of way or easement to the building being served. The side sewer is the full responsibility of the property owner. (Ord. 1730, 1993)

15.12.010 License to Install and Repair Side Sewers Required – Fee – Bond – Insurance.
Prior to engaging in the installation or repair of a side sewer all individuals (except property owners doing the work themselves, on their own property and not generally in the business to do this type of work), partnerships, or corporations shall secure the following licenses:
A. A City business license from the City, good for the year of issue, unless sooner revoked for cause by action of the City Council; and
B. A current State of Washington General Contractor license or any contractor with a State specialty license for excavation. Posting of bonding (as outlined below) and proof of the valid contractor license and liability insurance (see Title 12 for insurance requirement) are required in order to obtain the City business license. Each original license fee shall be as set forth by resolution of City Council. Each applicant shall post a five thousand dollar or one hundred twenty-five percent of the estimated cost, whichever is greater, surety company bond with the city guaranteeing faithful performance of the licensee's obligations to those with whom he or she contracts and evidence of not less than one hundred thousand dollars liability insurance against injuries to persons and damage to property of the City and others prior to commencing any such installation and/or repairs, and such bond and insurance shall be kept in force concurrently with such license.
No licensed contractor shall break, alter, or tamper with any public sewer without the approval and supervision of the City Engineer. (Ord. 1602, 1987; Ord. 1730, 1993)

15.12.020 Compliance with Chapter Required – Permit Required.
It is unlawful to make any connection with any public or private sewer without complying with all of the provisions of this chapter in relation thereto and having a permit to do so from the City Engineer. (Ord. 1602, 1987)

15.12.030 Permit – When Required.
It is unlawful to construct, extend, relay, repair, or make connection to any private sewer or sewer main without obtaining a permit pursuant to the provisions of Snohomish Municipal Code from the City Engineer. The City Engineer may issue such permit to the owner or occupant of any property to construct, extend, relay, repair, or make connection to any private sewer inside the property lines. Should the owner or occupant employ a licensed contractor to do the work, such contractor shall take the permit in his or her own name, and the owner, occupant, or any other person shall lay no pipe under the authority of the contractor's permit. Any work outside the property line and inside the City rights of way shall require a licensed contractor.
In the event any of the permitting requirements set forth in this chapter shall conflict with the requirements of Snohomish Municipal Code Chapter 12.12, the provisions of Snohomish Municipal Code Chapter 12.12 shall control. (Ord. 1602, 1987; Ord. 1721, 1992; Ord. 1730, 1993)

15.12.040 Permit – Renewal.
No permit issued pursuant to the provisions of Snohomish Municipal Code shall be valid for a longer period than ninety days unless extended or renewed by the City Engineer upon application therefore prior to the expiration. Failure to renew the permit prior to expiration thereof shall require the payment of a new permit fee. (Ord. 1602, 1987; Ord. 1730, 1993)

15.12.050 Permit – Posting Required.
The permit required herein must at all times during the performance of the work, and until the completion thereof and approval by the City Engineer, be posted in some conspicuous place at or near the work and must be readily and safely accessible to the City Engineer. (Ord. 1602, 1987; Ord. 1730, 1993)

15.12.060 Inspection – Required Notice of Defects.
Any person performing work under permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall notify the city engineer when the work will be ready for inspection, and shall specify in such notification the location of the premises by address and the file number of the permit.
On any calls for inspection forty-eight hours notice plus Saturday, Sunday, and holidays may be required by the City Engineer.
If the City Engineer finds the work or material used is not in accordance with this chapter, he shall notify the person doing the work, and also the owner of the premises, by posting a written notice on the permit card, and such posted notice shall be all the notice that is required to be given of the defects in the work or material found in such inspection. (Ord. 1602, 1987)

15.12.070 Inspection – Leaving Work, Trench, etc. Uncovered.
All work done pursuant to a permit herein provided for shall be under the inspection and subject to the approval of the City Engineer, and no side sewer construction shall be covered until such inspection shall have been completed.
No trench shall be filled or any sewer covered until the work shall have been inspected and approved by the City Engineer. (Ord. 1602, 1987)

15.12.075 Excavations – Guarding Same.
It is unlawful to leave unguarded any excavation made in connection with the construction or repair of any side sewer or to fail to maintain the lateral support of any public place in connection with the construction, alteration, or repair of any side sewer. (Ord. 1730, 1993)

15.12.080 Standards of Workmanship.
All work within the limits of any public area shall be prosecuted to completion with due diligence and in conformance with adopted City Code, Standards and Specifications. Rights of way areas including streets where excavated for side sewers shall be restored and/or replaced, and the surface shall be repaired at the sole expense of the property owner/contractor to as good or better condition as before excavated. The City Engineer may cause correction of any construction standard or specification deficiency prior to final approval and/or activation of the connection. The cost incurred in such work shall be charged to the property owner and shall be immediately payable to the City Treasurer upon written notification of the amount thereof given to the contractor or posted at the location. (Ord. 1602, 1987; Ord. 1730, 1993)

15.12.100 Dangerous Side Sewer – Notice to Abate – Failure to Abate – City Action.
When any side sewer is constructed, laid, connected or repaired, and does not comply with the provisions of this chapter, or where it is determined by the a health officer or the City Engineer that a side sewer is obstructed, broken, or inadequate and is a menace to health, or is liable to cause damage to public or private property, the health officer or City Engineer shall give notice to the owner, agent or occupant of the property in which such condition exists. If he or she shall refuse to reconstruct, relay, reconnect, repair, or remove the obstruction of said side sewer within the time specified in such notice, upon coordination with the health officer he or she shall so notify the City Engineer who may perform such work as may be necessary to comply with this chapter, and the cost of such work so done shall be charged to the property owner or occupant and shall become immediately payable to the City Treasurer upon written notice of such amount being given to the property owner or occupant or posted upon said premises. (Ord. 1602, 1987; Ord. 1730, 1993)

15.12.110 Costs Borne by Owner.
All costs and expense incidental to the installation, connection, and maintenance of a side sewer shall be borne by the owner of the premises served by the side sewer. (Ord. 1602, 1987)

15.12.120 Use of Old Side Sewer by New Building.
The use of an existing side sewer may be permitted when approved by the City Engineer as conforming to all requirements of this chapter and City adopted standards and specifications as appropriate where a new or converted building or new installation replaces an old one. (Ord. 1602, 1987; Ord. 1730, 1993)

15.12.130 Elevation of Side Sewers – Back Up Valves.
In any building, structure, or premises in which the house drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, the same shall be lifted by artificial means and discharged into the public sewer or into a septic tank according to Snohomish Health District.
Whenever a situation exists involving an unusual number of backups the City Engineer may prescribe a minimum elevation at which the house sewer may be discharged to the public sewer. Sewers below such minimum elevation shall be lifted by artificial means; or if approved by the City Engineer, a check valve may be installed. The effective operation of the check valve shall be the responsibility of the owner of the sewer. Approval of a check valve shall be made only upon the applicant filing with the City an acceptable instrument agreeing to save the City of Snohomish harmless from all damage resulting therefrom. (Ord. 1602, 1987; Ord. 1730, 1993)

15.12.140 Separate Side Sewer Connections.
Not more than one building shall be connected to a side sewer. Each property shall have an individual side sewer connection. (Ord. 1602, 1987; Ord. 1730, 1993)

15.12.145 Filling Vacated Privies and Septic Tanks.
All vaults or privies shall be disinfected and filled with approved backfill; and all septic tanks, cesspools, and similar installations shall be evaluated for the need to remove, and if allowed to remain in place, disinfected and filled with approved backfill at the time of the discontinuance of the use thereof. No septic tank or cesspool shall be used as a portion of a side sewer. (Ord. 1730, 1993)

15.12.150 Exceptions.
Where physical conditions render compliance with the foregoing provisions impracticable, the City Engineer may issue a special permit for installation of a side sewer requiring compliance with said provisions insofar as is reasonably possible, and such permit shall be issued only upon the condition that the permittee shall record with the county auditor an instrument acceptable to the city engineer agreeing to save harmless and indemnify the City of Snohomish from any damage or injury resulting from such installation. (Ord. 1602, 1987)

15.12.160 Materials Permitted.
All materials utilized for connection to City utilities shall be as specified in current City Standards and Specifications. Copies of the Standards and Specifications shall be provided upon request to the City Engineering Division. (Ord. 1602, 1987; Ord. 1730, 1993)

15.12.170 Cuts in Pavement Size – Backfill.
No excavation shall be made in any public area except in accordance with the City right of way ordinance, as adopted in Snohomish Municipal Code 12.12 and City Standards and Specifications and approved plans. (Ord. 1602, 1987; Ord. 1730, 1993)

15.12.180 Damaging Sewer System Unlawful.
It is unlawful to break, damage, destroy, deface, alter or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewer system of the City or without authority from the City Engineer to break, damage, destroy or deface any public walk, curb or pavement, or to make openings or excavations in a public area for the purpose of connecting to any public or private sewer. (Ord. 1602, 1987)

15.12.190 Protecting and Guarding Excavation – Liability.
Any excavation made by any licensed sewer contractor in any public place or immediately adjacent thereto shall be protected and guarded by fencing or covering and by proper lights. The protection of the public from danger of such excavation shall be the responsibility of the side sewer contractor; and said contractor shall be liable on his bond for any damage caused by his failure to properly protect and guard such excavation as herein required. If the contractor fails to properly protect and guard such excavation, the City Engineer may properly protect and guard same and charge the cost thereof to the side sewer contractor. Private property owners doing work shall exercise due care in preventing the creation of hazardous situation that could lead to injury or damage to neighboring property, be it public or private property. (Ord. 1602, 1987; Ord. 1730, 1993)

15.12.200 Restoring Surface.
All streets, sidewalks, parking strips and other public areas disturbed or altered in the course of any side sewer or drainage work, shall be restored by the property owner/contractor under the direction of the City Engineer and in accordance with City Engineering and Construction Standards. (Ord. 1602, 1987; Ord. 1730, 1993)

15.12.210 Discharge of Stormwater, etc.
into Sanitary Sewer. No new construction shall be built so as to discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process water to any sewer which is built solely for sanitary sewage. In combined sewer areas all remodeling or reconstruction that changes the use of the property or building or increases the impervious area may be required to install a stormwater system to mitigate the impact of stormwater on the City sanitary sewer system. All new construction, substantial remodel, or reconstruction shall be required to provide stormwater control in accordance with Chapters 15.13 and 15.16 SMC. (Ord. 1602, 1987; Ord. 1730, 1993; Ord. 2173, 2009)

15.12.220 Acceptance of Unusual Waste – Procedure.
The City Engineer shall make recommendations to the City Council in regard to entering into any agreement whereby any waste of unusual character may be accepted by the City for treatment before entry in the public sewer, the payment for such treatment to be such as is fixed by the City Council. (Ord. 1602, 1987)

15.12.230 Planting Certain Trees.
It is unlawful to plant within thirty feet of any public or private sewer any tree or shrub whose roots are likely to enter and obstruct the flow of the sewers or interfere with the infrastructure relating thereto. A list of acceptable trees may be obtained from the City. (Ord. 1602, 1987; Ord. 1730, 1993)

Chapter 15.13 STORMWATER UTILITY

Sections:
15.13.010    Title/Effective Date
15.13.020    Findings
15.13.030    Purpose and Authority
15.13.040    Funding for the Stormwater Utility’s Activities
15.13.050    Revenues Generated – Revenue Fund 404
15.13.060    Stormwater Utility Operating Budget
15.13.070    Stormwater User’s Fee
15.13.080    Equivalent Residential Unit (ERU)
15.13.090    Property Classification for Stormwater User’s Fee
15.13.100    Stormwater Fees and Rates by Resolution
15.13.110    Discounts for Stormwater Rates
15.13.120    Collection of Stormwater Utility Fees and Rates
15.13.130    Severability

15.13.010 Title/Effective Date.
Effective January 1, 2005, a Stormwater Utility shall be established for the City of Snohomish. (Ord. 2060, 2004)

15.13.020 Findings.
The City of Snohomish finds, determines, and declares that the stormwater system which provides for the collection, treatment, storage, and disposal of stormwater provides benefits and services to all property within the incorporated City limits. Such benefits include, but are not limited to: the provision of adequate systems of collection, conveyance, detention, treatment, and release of stormwater; the reduction of hazards to property and life resulting from stormwater runoff; improvements in general health and welfare through reduction of undesirable stormwater conditions; and improvements to the water quality in the stormwater and surface water system and its receiving waters. (Ord. 2060, 2004)

15.13.030 Purpose and Authority.
For those purposes of the Federal Clean Water Act and pursuant to authority set forth in RCW Chapters 35A.11, 35.67, and 35.92, there is created a stormwater utility which shall consist of a separate fund account and such staff as the City Council shall authorize. The stormwater utility, under the control of the City Council, shall:
1. Administer the acquisition, design, construction, maintenance, and operation of the stormwater utility system, including capital improvements designated in the capital improvement program;
2. Administer and enforce this ordinance and all regulations and procedures adopted relating to the design, construction, maintenance, operation, and alteration of the utility stormwater system, including, but not limited to, the quantity, quality, and/or velocity of the stormwater conveyed thereby;
3. Advise the City Council and other City departments on matters relating to the utility;
4. Review plans and approve or deny, inspect and accept extensions and connections to the system;
5. Enforce regulations to protect and maintain water quality and quantity within the system in compliance with water quality standards established by state, regional, and/or federal agencies as now adopted or hereafter amended;
6. Annually analyze the cost of services and benefits provided, and the system and structure of fees, charges, civil penalties and other revenues of the utility;
7. Perform such other actions as are consistent with the Federal Clean Water Act and RCW Chapters 35A.11, 35.67, and 35.92. (Ord. 2060, 2004)

15.13.040 Funding for the Stormwater Utility’s Activities.
Funding for the stormwater utility’s activities may include, but not be limited to, the following:
1. Stormwater user fees.
2. Civil penalties and damage assessments imposed for or arising from the violation of the City’s stormwater management ordinance.
3. Stormwater permit and inspection fees.
4. Other funds or income obtained from federal, state, local, and private grants, or revolving funds.
To the extent that the stormwater utility fees collected are insufficient to construct needed stormwater drainage facilities, the cost of the same may be paid from such City funds as may be determined by the City Council. (Ord. 2060, 2004)

15.13.050 Revenues Generated – Revenue Fund 404.
All revenues generated by or on behalf of the stormwater utility shall be deposited in a stormwater utility fund and used exclusively for the stormwater utility. For the purpose set forth in this Ordinance, Fund 404 is hereby established. (Ord. 2060, 2004)

15.13.060 Stormwater Utility Operating Budget.
The City Council shall adopt an operating budget for the stormwater utility as part of the biennial budget and/or budget amendment process. The operating budget shall set forth for such fiscal year the estimated revenues and the estimated costs for operations and maintenance, extension and replacement and debt service. (Ord. 2060, 2004; Ord. 2354, 2018)

15.13.070 Stormwater User’s Fee.
There shall be imposed on each and every developed property in the City a stormwater user’s fee, which shall be set from time to time by ordinance or resolution, and in the manner and amount prescribed by this ordinance. (Ord. 2060, 2004)

15.13.080 Equivalent Residential Unit (ERU).
1. Establishment. There is established for purposes of calculating the stormwater user’s fee the equivalent residential unit (ERU).
2. Single Family ERU. The average square footage of impervious surface of a detached single family residential property, which shall be 2,500 square feet.
3. Non-Residential ERU. 2,500 square feet of impervious surface for all property other than that developed as single family detached residential.
4. Setting the ERU. The fee or rate per ERU shall be set by the City Council from time to time by ordinance or resolution.
5. Source of ERU. The City Engineer shall have the discretion to determine the source of the data from which the ERU is established, taking into consideration the general acceptance and use of such source on the part of other stormwater systems, and the reliability and general accuracy of the source. The City Engineer shall have the discretion to determine the impervious surface area of other developed property through property tax assessor’s rolls or site examination, mapping information, aerial photographs, and other reliable information. (Ord. 2060, 2004)

15.13.090 Property Classification for Stormwater User’s Fee.
1. Property Classifications. For purposes of determining the stormwater user’s fee, all properties in the City are classified into one of the following classes:
    a. Single family detached residential property.
    b. Other developed property.
2. Single family residential fee. The City Council finds that the intensity of development of most parcels of real property in the City classified as single family residential, single family residential with one accessory living unit, or duplex are similar, and that it would be excessively and unnecessarily expensive to determine precisely the square footage of the improvements (such as buildings, structures, and other impervious areas) on each such parcel. Therefore, all single family residential, single family residential with one accessory living unit, or duplex properties in the City shall be one ERU (2,500 square feet of impervious surface) regardless of the size of the parcel or the improvements.
3. Other developed property fee. The fee for all other developed property (i.e. non-single family detached residential property) in the City shall be the base rate multiplied by the numerical factor obtained by dividing the total impervious area (square feet) of the property by one ERU. The impervious surface area for other developed property is the square footage for the buildings and other improvements on the property. One ERU shall be 2,500 square feet of impervious surface. The minimum stormwater management fee for other developed property shall equal the base rate for single family residential property. (Ord. 2060, 2004; Ord. 2063, 2004)

15.13.100 Stormwater Fees and Rates by Resolution.
The City Council shall adopt stormwater fees and rates by resolution. Said fees and rates shall be effective January 1, 2005, and may be combined in a resolution stating the fees and rates for water, sewer, and garbage. Stormwater fees and rates shall be reviewed during the budget and/or budget amendment process. (Ord. 2060, 2004; Ord. 2354, 2018)

15.13.110 Discounts for Stormwater Rates.
The City may offer discounts for stormwater rates in the same manner and under the same conditions as are offered for Sewer pursuant to SMC 15.04.127. (Ord. 2060, 2004)

15.13.120 Collection of Stormwater Utility Fees and Rates.
The City may enforce the collection of stormwater utility fees and rates under the same conditions that apply to the Sewer utility under SMC 15.05. (Ord. 2060, 2004)

15.13.130 Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or word of this ordinance should be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality thereof shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of any other section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or word of this ordinance. (Ord. 2060, 2004)

Chapter 15.14 ENFORCEMENT

Sections:
15.14.010    Liability for City's loss
15.14.020    Penalty for violations
15.14.030    Other remedies
15.14.040    No special duty created
15.14.050    Severability

15.14.010 Liability for City's loss.
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this title shall, in addition to any penalties provided for such violation, be liable for any expense, loss or damage occasioned thereby to the City. (Ord. 1602, 1987)

15.14.020 Penalty for violations.
Any person or corporation violating any provision of this title shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a fine of not to exceed one thousand dollars, to imprisonment not to exceed six months in the county jail, or to both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 1602, 1987)

15.14.030 Other remedies.
In addition to any criminal or civil action authorized under this title, any person failing to comply with any provision of this title shall be subject to the civil remedies set forth in other applicable city ordinances or duly adopted codes, as they now read or are hereinafter amended, including, but not limited to, the Uniform Plumbing Code. (Ord. 1602, 1987)

15.14.040 No special duty created.
It is the purpose of this title to provide for the health, welfare and safety of the general public, and not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited by the terms of this title.
It is the specific intent of this title to place the obligation of complying with its requirements upon the permit applicant and any person owning, operating or controlling any premises, building or structure within the scope of this title; that no provision nor term used in this title is intended to impose any duty whatsoever upon the City or any of its officers, agents or employees for whom the implementation or enforcement of this title shall be discretionary and not mandatory.
Nothing contained in this title is intended to be, nor shall be, construed to create or form the basis for any liability on the part of the City or its officers, agents and employees for any injury or damage resulting from the failure of any premises or building to comply with the provisions of this title or be reason or a consequence of any inspector, notice, order, certificate, permission or approval authorized or issued or done in connection with the implementation or enforcement of this title or by reason of any action of the City related in any manner to the enforcement of this title by its officers, agents or employees. (Ord. 1602, 1987)

15.14.050 Severability.
The provisions of this title are declared to be separate and severable. The invalidity of any clause, sentence, paragraph, subdivision, section or portion of this title to any person or circumstance, shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this title, or the validity of its application to other persons or circumstances. (Ord. 1602, 1987)

Chapter 15.16 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT

Sections:
15.16.010    Purpose
15.16.020    Stormwater Management Manual Adopted
15.16.030    Stormwater Management Review and Approval Required
15.16.040    Standards, Definitions, and Requirements
15.16.050    Adjustments and Exceptions
15.16.060    Low Impact Development – Alternative Standards
15.16.070    Construction and Maintenance of Stormwater Facilities
15.16.080    Bonding and Insurance for Stormwater Facilities
15.16.090    Prohibited, Allowable, and Conditional Discharges and Connections
15.16.100    Administration, Inspection, and Fees
15.16.110    Enforcement
15.16.120    Appeals

15.16.010 Purpose.
The City Council finds that this chapter is necessary in order to promote the public health, safety, and welfare by providing for the comprehensive management of surface and stormwaters, erosion control, and flooding. The Council also finds that this chapter is necessary in order to minimize water quality degradation; to prevent flood damage, siltation, and habitat destruction in the City’s creeks, streams, and other water bodies; to protect property owners adjacent to developing land from increased runoff rates which could cause stream erosion and damage to public and private property; to promote sound development and redevelopment policies which respect and preserve the City’s watercourses and aquatic habitat; to promote low impact development strategies that reduce impervious surface and stormwater runoff; to ensure the safety of City streets and rights-of-way; and to prevent water quality degradation and promote ground water recharge through the implementation of comprehensive and thorough permit review, construction inspection, enforcement, and maintenance programs, in order to promote the effectiveness of the requirements contained in this chapter.

15.16.020 Stormwater Management Manual Adopted.
The 2012 State Department of Ecology Stormwater Management Manual for Western Washington, as amended by Sections 1 through 6 of Appendix 1 of the Western Washington Phase II Municipal Stormwater Permit, as now or hereafter amended, is hereby adopted as the City’s minimum stormwater regulations and as a technical reference manual and is hereinafter referred to as the “Stormwater Manual.” (Ord. 2315, 2016)

15.16.030 Stormwater Management Review and Approval Required.
Stormwater Management review and approval by the City is required when any development or proposed project meets or exceeds the threshold conditions defined in the Stormwater Manual (e.g., new impervious area, drainage system modifications, redevelopments, etc.) and is subject to a City development permit or approval requirement.

15.16.040 Standards, Definitions, and Requirements.
A. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, all standards, definitions, and requirements shall be in accordance with the Stormwater Manual.
B. Plan and Report Submittal. Stormwater site plans, supporting technical analyses, and other required documentation shall conform to the requirements contained in the Stormwater Manual.
C. Where to Submit. All stormwater site plans prepared in connection with any of the permits and/or approvals set forth in this chapter shall be submitted to the Department of Planning and Development Services.
D. All plans, drawings, and calculations designed to control surface water and subsurface water, submitted to the City, will be prepared by a licensed professional engineer, registered in the State of Washington, or by a qualified person as set forth in the Stormwater Manual, and those plans, drawings, and calculations will be stamped showing that engineer’s registration, if applicable.
E. Interpretation. The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements in their interpretation and application and shall be liberally construed to serve the purposes of this chapter.
F. More Strict Standard Applies. When any provision of any other ordinance of the City’s regulations conflicts with this chapter, that which provides greater environmental protection shall apply unless otherwise provided for in this chapter.
G. Determining Construction Site Sediment Damage Potential. Any person submitting a stormwater site plan must also determine the Construction Site Sediment Damage Potential. Qualified personnel must use the rating system described in Appendix 7 of the Western Washington Phase II Municipal Stormwater Permit to determine the site’s potential to discharge sediment.

15.16.050 Adjustments and Exceptions.
Adjustments and exceptions to the minimum standards and requirements may be granted as set forth in the Stormwater Manual.

15.16.060 Low Impact Development – Alternative Standards.
A. The City allows and encourages low impact development (LID) best management practices (BMPs), as an alternative to conventional stormwater management systems that rely on detention ponds and closed conveyance. Low impact development is intended to manage runoff close to the source of generation and to mimic the predeveloped hydrologic condition of a site.
B. Low impact development is accomplished first through minimizing the impervious surface coverage and second by managing runoff through dispersion, infiltration, evapo-transpiration, or a combination of these approaches. Use of LID BMPs may reduce or eliminate the need for conventional detention facilities but does not remove the obligation to comply with the minimum requirements of the Stormwater Manual.
C. A variety of BMPs to minimize impervious surfaces and to manage stormwater have been developed and tested for use in Western Washington. These BMPs and the overall LID approach are described in the LID Technical Guidance Manual for Puget Sound (LID Manual).
D. The menu of LID BMPs identified in the LID Manual are accepted by the City for use in stormwater site plans to address the minimum requirements for flow control and runoff treatment in this chapter, subject to the specifications, performance standards, and design criteria in the LID Manual and review and approval under this chapter.
E. A covenant or easement shall be recorded with the Snohomish County Auditor’s office for each lot containing or served by bioretention facilities in a form approved by the City Attorney. The covenant shall identify requirements and liability for preservation and maintenance of low impact development facilities approved under this chapter and privately held in individual or undivided ownership or intended for public ownership, shall restrict conversion of LID facilities, and shall grant the City access to low impact development facilities on private property to allow inspection, maintenance, and repair.

15.16.070 Construction and Maintenance of Stormwater Facilities.
A. All stormwater facilities required under this chapter shall be constructed and maintained as set forth in the Stormwater Manual and the permits and/or approvals of the City.
B. Maintenance of private stormwater facilities.
    1. The person or persons holding title to the property and the applicant required to construct a stormwater facility shall remain responsible for the facility’s continual performance, operation, and maintenance in accordance with the standards and requirements of the Stormwater Manual, this chapter, and the permits and/or approvals of the City and shall remain responsible for any liability as a result of these duties. Language designating the responsible parties shall be printed on the face of the plat documents. The requirements of this subsection B shall apply to all new facilities constructed in the City.
    2. The City shall have authority to periodically enter upon the property and inspect the facilities to ensure such compliance and to issue orders requiring maintenance and/or repair. In event that the titleholders or other responsible parties do not effect such maintenance and/or repairs, the City may perform such work, and the cost thereof shall be recoverable by the City from said titleholders or other responsible parties and/or by filing a lien against the property.
    3. When an inspection identifies an exceedence of the maintenance standard, maintenance shall be performed in accordance with the following schedule:
    - Within 1 year for typical maintenance of facilities, except catch basins.
    - Within 6 months for typical maintenance.
    - Within 2 years for maintenance that requires capital construction of less than $25,000.

15.16.080 Bonding and Insurance for Stormwater Facilities.
A. The City may require all persons constructing stormwater facilities under this chapter to post with the City cash or surety bonds to cover the cost of defects in materials, workmanship, and installation and also to correct maintenance deficiencies during the initial 2-year maintenance period following satisfactory completion of the facilities. Posting of such bonds shall be consistent with the City’s policy for security deposits and subject to review by the City Attorney.
B. The person constructing the stormwater facility and/or the property owner shall maintain a liability policy during the construction period and the initial 2-year maintenance period or until the point in time if and when the City assumes maintenance responsibilities, with limits no less than $1,000,000 combined single limit per occurrence and $2,000,000 aggregate for personal injury, bodily injury, and property damage, and with the City named as an additional insured. A copy of the endorsement naming the City as additional insured shall be attached to the certificate of insurance, which shall be provided to the City prior to commencement of the work.

15.16.090 Prohibited, Allowable, and Conditional Discharges and Connections.
A. Definitions. The following definitions shall be applicable to this section:
    1. AKART – All Known, Available, and Reasonable methods of prevention, control, and Treatment. See also the State Water Pollution Control Act, RCW 90.48.010, and RCW 90.48.520.
    2. “Ground water” means water in a saturated zone or stratum beneath the surface of the land or below a surface water body.
    3. “Hazardous materials” means any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
    4. “Hyperchlorinated” means water that contains more than 10mg/L chlorine.
    5. “Illicit discharge” means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the City's storm drain system, except as expressly exempted by this chapter.
    6. “Illicit connection” means any man-made conveyance that is connected to a municipal separate storm sewer without a permit, excluding roof drains and other similar type connections. Examples include sanitary sewer connections, floor drains, channels, pipelines, conduits, inlets, or outlets that are connected directly to the municipal separate storm sewer system.
    7. “Municipal separate storm sewer system” (MS4) means a conveyance or system of conveyances, including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains, which are:
        a. Owned or operated by the City of Snohomish;
        b. Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
        c. Not part of a Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW). (“POTW” means any device or system used in treatment of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature which is publicly owned); and
        d. Not a combined sewer (“Combined sewer” means a system that collects sanitary sewage and stormwater in a single sewer system).
    8. “National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharge Permit” means a permit issued by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) (or by the Washington Department of Ecology under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC Section 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.
    9. “Non-stormwater discharge” means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.
    10. “Person” means any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation, or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner of a premises or as the owner's agent.
    11. “Pollution” means any pollutants which cause or contribute to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform, and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
    12. “Storm” or “stormwater drainage system” means publicly owned facilities, including the City's municipal separate storm sewer system, by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures.
    13. “Stormwater” means runoff during and following precipitation and snowmelt events, including surface runoff and drainage.
    14. “Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP)” means a document which describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented by a person to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a premises and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.
B. Prohibited discharges.
    1. No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause or allow others under his/her control to throw, drain or otherwise discharge into the municipal storm drain system any materials other than stormwater.
    2. Examples of prohibited contaminants include but are not limited to the following:
        a. Trash or debris.
        b. Construction materials.
        c. Petroleum products including but not limited to oil, gasoline, grease, fuel oil, and heating oil.
        d. Antifreeze and other automotive products.
        e. Metals in either particulate or dissolved form.
        f. Flammable or explosive materials.
        g. Radioactive material.
        h. Batteries.
        i. Acids, alkalis, or bases.
        j. Paints, stains, resins, lacquers, or varnishes.
        k. Degreasers and/or solvents.
        l. Drain cleaners.
        m. Pesticides, herbicides, or fertilizers.
        n. Steam cleaning wastes.
        o. Soaps, detergents, or ammonia.
        p. Swimming pool cleaning wastewater or filter backwash.
        q. Chlorine, bromine, or other disinfectants.
        r. Heated water.
        s. Domestic animal wastes.
        t. Sewage.
        u. Recreational vehicle waste.
        v. Animal carcasses.
        w. Food wastes.
        x. Bark and other fibrous materials.
        y. Lawn clippings, leaves, or branches.
        z. Silt, sediment, concrete, cement, or gravel.
        aa. Dyes. Unless approved by the City.
        bb. Chemicals not normally found in uncontaminated water.
        cc. Any other process-associated discharge except as otherwise allowed in this section.
        dd. Any hazardous material or waste not listed above.
C. Allowable discharges. The following types of discharges shall not be considered illegal discharges for the purposes of this chapter unless the City determines that the type of discharge, whether singly or in combination with others, is causing or is likely to cause pollution of surface water or ground water:
    1. Diverted stream flows.
    2. Rising ground waters.
    3. Uncontaminated ground water infiltration – as defined in 40 CFR 35.2005(20).
    4. Uncontaminated pumped ground water.
    5. Foundation drains.
    6. Air conditioning condensation.
    7. Irrigation water from agricultural sources that is commingled with urban stormwater.
    8. Springs.
    9. Water from crawl space pumps.
    10. Footing drains.
    11. Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
    12. Discharges from emergency fire fighting activities.
D. Conditional Discharges. The following types of discharges shall not be considered illegal discharges for the purposes of this chapter, if they meet the stated conditions, or unless the City determines that the type of discharge, whether singly or in combination with others, is causing or is likely to cause pollution of surface water or ground water:
    1. Potable water, including water from water line flushing, hyperchlorinated water line flushing, fire hydrant system flushing, and pipeline hydrostatic test water. These planned discharges shall be de-chlorinated to a concentration of 0.1 ppm or less, pH-adjusted, if necessary and in volumes and velocities controlled to prevent re-suspension of sediments in the stormwater system.
    2. Lawn watering and other irrigation runoff. These types of discharges shall be permitted if the amount of runoff is minimized through water conservation efforts.
    3. De-chlorinated swimming pool discharges. These discharges shall be de-chlorinated to a concentration of 0.1 ppm or less, pH-adjusted and reoxygenized if necessary, volumetrically and velocity controlled to prevent re-suspension of sediments in the stormwater system.
    4. Street and sidewalk wash water, water used to control dust, and routine external building wash down that does not use detergents. These discharges shall be permitted, if the amount of street wash and dust control water used is minimized. At active construction sites, street sweeping must be performed prior to washing the street.
    5. Non-stormwater discharges covered by another NPDES permit. These discharges shall be in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order, and other applicable laws and regulations.
    6. Other non-stormwater discharges. These discharges shall be in compliance with the requirements of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) reviewed and approved by the City, which addresses control of such discharges by applying AKART to prevent contaminants from entering surface or ground water.
E. Prohibited Connections.
    1. The construction, use, maintenance, or continued existence of illicit connections to the stormwater system is prohibited.
    2. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
    3. A person is considered to be in violation of this section, if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4 or allows such a connection to continue.

15.16.100 Administration, Inspection, and Fees.
A. Administration.
    1. This chapter shall be primarily administered by the Director of Public Works or a designee, hereafter referred to as the Director, with the cooperation and assistance of the Department of Planning and Development Services. The Director of Public Works and the Director of Planning and Development Services shall have the authority to develop and implement administrative procedures to administer and enforce this chapter.
    2. The Director may approve, conditionally approve, or deny activities regulated by this chapter.
B. Inspections.
    1. The Director is authorized to gain access to private property as provided by law and in this chapter, to make such inspections of stormwater facilities, and take such actions as may be required to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
    2. Inspection prior to clearing and construction will apply to sites with a high potential for sediment damage, as identified by the applicant during civil review based on definitions and requirements of Appendix 7 of the Western Washington Phase II Municipal Stormwater permit.
    3. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter or to monitor for proper function of stormwater facilities, or whenever the Director has reasonable cause to believe that violations of this chapter are present or operating on a subject property or portion thereof, the Director or a designee may enter such premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or perform any duty imposed upon the Director by this chapter; provided, that if such premises or portion thereof is occupied, the Director shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the premises or portion thereof and request entry. If after reasonable effort, the inspector is unable to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the premises or portion thereof and has reason to believe an imminent hazard exists, the inspector may enter.
    4. Property owners shall provide proper ingress and egress to any stormwater facility to the Director or a designee to inspect, monitor, or perform any duty imposed upon the Director by this chapter. The Director shall notify the responsible party in writing of failure to comply with this access requirement. Failing to obtain a response within 7 days from the receipt of notification, the Director may order the work required completed or otherwise address the cause of improper access. The obligation for the payment of all costs that may be incurred or expended by the City in causing such work to be done shall thereby be imposed on the person holding title to the subject property and/or imposed against the subject property by filing a lien.
C. Fees. Fees for all reviews, inspections, permits and/or approvals, and appeals, which are set forth in this chapter, shall be set by resolution of the City Council.

15.16.110 Enforcement.
Enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be as set forth in Chapter 1.14 SMC. The violation or failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be considered a civil violation pursuant to SMC 1.01.080 and Chapter 1.14 SMC, except as otherwise provided therein. The remedies provided in Chapter 1.14 SMC shall be cumulative and shall be in addition to any other remedy provided by law.

15.16.120 Appeals.
The decisions of the Director may be appealed by an aggrieved party to the Hearing Examiner by filing written notice of appeal, including an appeal fee as set by resolution of the City Council, with the City Clerk within 10 days of notice of the Director’s decision.

Chapter 15.17 LATECOMER REIMBURSEMENT/COST RECOVERY AGREEMENTS FOR UTILITIES

Sections:
15.17.005    Purpose
15.17.010    Definitions
15.17.020    Latecomer Reimbursement – Water, Sewer, and Stormwater
15.17.030    Applications for Latecomer Reimbursement
15.17.040    Submittal of Latecomer Reimbursement Information
15.17.050    Determination of Recommended Latecomer Reimbursement Charge and Area
15.17.060    Notice of Recommended Latecomer Reimbursement Charge and Area
15.17.070    Latecomer Reimbursement Agreement Form
15.17.080    Official Notice of Recommended Charge and Area – Fixing of Hearing
15.17.090    City Council Determination of Reimbursement Charge and Area
15.17.100    Recording of Latecomer Agreement – Amendment of City Records
15.17.110    Completion and Acceptance of Improvements
15.17.120    Payment of Reimbursement Charge
15.17.130    Segregation of Reimbursement Charges
15.17.140    Recording of Release
15.17.150    Multiple Connection Points

15.17.005 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to prescribe rules and regulations for exercise of the authority to enter into a latecomer reimbursement agreement granted to the City by RCW Chapter 35.91.

15.17.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the terms listed below shall be defined as follows:
“Latecomer reimbursement agreement” means a written contract between the City of Snohomish and one or more parties providing both for construction of utility improvements and for reimbursement to the party or parties constructing the improvements for part of the costs of the facilities by owners of property benefitted by the improvements.
“Owner” means the Owner of real property or the Owner’s representative; provided that for the purposes of executing a latecomer reimbursement agreement, a bond, a bill of sale, and any instrument establishing real property rights, “Owner” means the legal Owner of the real property.
“Owner/Applicant” means an Owner who is in the process of applying for or has entered into a latecomer reimbursement agreement with the City.
“Public Works Director” or “Director” means the Public Works Director and the Director’s designee.
“Utility improvements” or “improvements” means City-owned water, sewer, and stormwater improvements and facilities, including but not limited to mains, valves, manholes, catch basins, pumping stations, hydrants, reservoirs, ponds, and appurtenances.

15.17.020 Latecomer Reimbursement – Water, Sewer, and Stormwater.
Upon compliance with this chapter, an Owner/Applicant who constructs utility improvements may receive latecomer reimbursement from Owners of real property abutting the utility improvements who:
A. Did not contribute, in whole or in part, to the original cost of the utility improvements;
B. Are within the reimbursement area that is established under this chapter;
C. Have been assessed a reimbursement charge under this chapter; and
D. Within fifteen (15) years after the execution of the latecomer reimbursement agreement, either connect such real property to the water or sewer improvements or use the stormwater improvements.

15.17.030 Applications for Latecomer Reimbursement.
An Owner/Applicant desiring to enter into a latecomer reimbursement agreement, for utility improvements, shall submit to the Public Works Department an application for latecomer reimbursement on a form prepared by the Director. The Owner/ Applicant also shall submit a latecomer application fee in an amount established by resolution. The Owner/Applicant also shall pay any processing charges established by resolution. The reimbursement application shall include but not be limited to the following:
A. Preliminary utility improvements design drawing;
B. A scaled vicinity drawing, stamped by a licensed professional engineer or licensed civil surveyor, depicting the proposed utility improvements, the location of same, the proposed benefitted area, dimensions and Snohomish County Assessor’s numbers for each tax parcel within the proposed benefitted area, size of each parcel, and evaluations where necessary for determining benefits;
C. A title report for all parcels within the proposed reimbursement area;
D. The itemized estimate of the total costs for the utility improvements, prepared by a qualified licensed professional engineer, and the estimated percentage of the costs to be assessed to the parcels in the proposed reimbursement area; and
E. The proposed method for calculating the pro rata reimbursement charges, which shall be consistent with SMC 15.17.070.
The Director may require additional information, or revisions to the maps and other documents described above, that are necessary to evaluate the reimbursement application. Before submitting the reimbursement latecomer application, the Owner/Applicant shall request and attend a pre-reimbursement application meeting with Public Works Department representatives.

15.17.040 Submittal of Latecomer Reimbursement Information.
For improvements that are subject to latecomer reimbursement, the Director, after determining that the utility improvements are complete under SMC 15.17.030, shall send a letter to the Owner/Applicant by first class mail, and by certified mail, return receipt requested, requesting the submittal of all data and information in support of the cost of the improvements. The Owner/ Applicant shall submit the data and information within twenty-one (21) calendar days of the date of the letter. If the Owner/Applicant fails to submit the data and information within twenty-one (21) calendar days, or fails to submit any additional data and information requested by the Director within twenty-one (21) calendar days of a request for additional data and information, the Owner/Applicant shall be deemed to have waived the right to reimbursement, and the application shall be null and void and terminated. Upon written request filed with the Director within seven (7) calendar days after any deadline, and upon proof of hardship and/or excusable neglect, the Director may set aside the application termination and grant a period of up to twenty-one (21) calendar days for the Owner/Applicant to submit the data and information. The decision of the Director shall be final.

15.17.050 Determination of Recommended Latecomer Reimbursement Charge and Area.
Based on information and data provided by the Owner/Applicant, and on other available information and data, the Director shall determine the estimated cost of the utility improvements, the recommended pro rata reimbursement charge, and the recommended reimbursement area. The estimated cost shall include but not be limited to design, engineering, construction, inspection, restoration, and legal review. To determine the recommended pro rata reimbursement charge, the Director may use any method or combination of methods, including but not limited to calculations based on the maximum number of developable lots under current zoning, length of front footage of the parcel along the improvements, or total square footage of the parcel subject to reimbursement.

15.17.060 Notice of Recommended Latecomer Reimbursement Charge and Area.
The Director shall advise the Owner/Applicant of the recommended reimbursement charge and area by letter sent by first class mail and by certified mail, return receipt requested. The letter shall enclose an original latecomer reimbursement agreement for signature by the Owner/Applicant, who shall return the executed agreement within twenty-one (21) calendar days after the date of the letter. If the Owner/Applicant fails to return the executed agreement within said period, the application for latecomer reimbursement shall be deemed null and void and terminated. Upon written request filed with the Director within seven (7) calendar days after the deadline, and upon proof of hardship and/or excusable neglect, the Director may set aside the application termination and grant a period of up to twenty-one (21) calendar days for return of the executed agreement. The decision of the Director shall be final.

15.17.070 Latecomer Reimbursement Agreement Form.
The form of the latecomer reimbursement agreement shall be prepared and approved by the Director. The form shall include, but not be limited to, the following information, terms, and conditions:
A. Provide a fifteen (15) year reimbursement period, following the effective date of the agreement;
B. State the approved total cost of the utility improvements, and the cost subject to reimbursement;
C. State the method for determining the reimbursement charges;
D. Provide the payment of the reimbursement charges is required after completion of the utility improvements and prior to City’s final approval of any short plat or subdivision within the reimbursement area, or at the time a connection to the utility improvements is requested if the subject property is not within a short plat or subdivision or is within a short plat or subdivision that received final approval prior to the date of execution of the latecomer reimbursement agreement;
E. State that interest shall not accrue on the reimbursement charges;
F. Provide that the City shall deduct from all reimbursement charges it collects an amount equal to six percent (6%) of each collected amount to cover its administrative collection costs;
G. Provide that in the event that the actual costs of the utility improvements are less than the Director’s estimate used in calculating the estimated reimbursement charges by ten percent (10%) or more, the Director is authorized to recalculate and reduce the reimbursement charges and cause a revised list of reimbursement charges to be filed with the Snohomish County Auditor;
H. State that the Owner/Applicant shall be responsible for paying the cost of recording the agreement;
I. Provide that the City shall mail the reimbursement to the Owner/Applicant, or to any other person/entity designated in writing by the Owner/Applicant to receive the reimbursement, at the address given to the Director by such persons/entities;
J. Require that, every year from the date the agreement is executed, the Owner/Applicant or other person/entity designated to receive reimbursement shall provide the City with their current name, address, and phone number;
K. Provide that in the event that after reasonable efforts by the City, the person/entity to whom/which reimbursement fees are to paid cannot be located, and upon the expiration of one (1) year from the date reimbursement fees were collected by the City, the reimbursement fees shall become the property of the City and shall be deposited in the City sewer and water utility fund;
L. Provide that the City may interplead any reimbursement sum into Snohomish County Superior Court if a dispute arises as to the proper person or entity to receive the reimbursement payment.

15.17.080 Official Notice of Recommended Charge and Area – Fixing of Hearing.
Upon receipt of an executed latecomer reimbursement agreement from the Owner/Applicant, the Director shall send an official notice of the recommended reimbursement charge and area by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the Owners of the real property subject to reimbursement, according to the title report submitted by the Owner/Applicant, updated by the Owner/Applicant if requested by the Director. The notice shall include but not be limited to the following:
A. The amount of the pro rata reimbursement charge;
B. A map showing the Owner/Applicant’s property, the general location of the utility improvements, and the reimbursement area;
C. The conditions under which the pro rata reimbursement charge would be due and owing, such as only upon connection to and use of the improvements;
D. The time period for reimbursement;
E. A statement that the cost information and data regarding the utility improvements may be reviewed at the Public Works Department;
F. The date, time, and location of the hearing before the City Council; and
G. A statement that written comments concerning the Director’s recommended latecomer reimbursement charge and area must be submitted to the Director and the City Council at least seven (7) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing before the City Council.
Notice of the hearing shall be sent by first class mail and certified mail, return receipt requested, to the Owner/Applicant and the Owners of real property subject to recommended reimbursement charge and area, at least twenty-one (21) calendar days before the date of the hearing.

15.17.090 City Council Determination of Reimbursement Charge and Area.
After the hearing, the City Council shall by motion approve, disapprove, or modify the recommended reimbursement charge and area. The motion approving or modifying the recommended reimbursement charge and area shall also authorize the Mayor to sign and execute the latecomer reimbursement agreement, including any amendment to or modifications of the agreement necessary to reflect the Council’s decision. The City Council decision by motion shall be the final action of the City on the reimbursement charge and area. (Ord. 2341, 2017)

15.17.100 Recording of Latecomer Agreement – Amendment of City Records.
After final execution of the latecomer reimbursement agreement, the Director shall cause it to be recorded with the Snohomish County Auditor. The cost of recording shall be paid/reimbursed by the Owner/Applicant. After recording, the Director shall cause a copy of the recorded agreement to be mailed to the Owner/Applicant and the Owners of real property within the reimbursement area by first class mail and certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall cause City records for land use development and utility systems to indicate, if feasible, the latecomer reimbursement charges against the burdened parcels.

15.17.110 Completion and Acceptance of Improvements.
A. After the latecomer reimbursement agreement has been fully executed by the parties, and all necessary permits and approvals have been obtained, the Owner/Applicant shall construct the utility improvements, and upon completion, request final inspection and acceptance of the improvements by the City, subject to any required obligation to repair defects. An appropriate bill of sale, easement, and any other documents needed to convey the improvements to the City, and to insure the City’s right of access for maintenance and replacement, shall be provided to the City. The form of these instruments shall be approved by the Director.
B. Prior to acceptance of the utility improvements by the City, the Owner/Applicant shall provide the Director with adequate and appropriate documentation of the actual costs of the improvements and a certification by the Owner/Applicant that all such costs have been paid. In the event that the actual costs of the improvements are less than the Director’s estimate used in calculating the estimated reimbursement charges by an amount of ten percent (10%) or more, the Director shall recalculate and reduce the reimbursement charges and cause a revised list of reimbursement charges to be filed with the Snohomish County Auditor.

15.17.120 Payment of Reimbursement Charge.
A. After full completion of the utility improvements subject to the reimbursement agreement, the Owner of real property that is part of a proposed short plat or subdivision and that is subject to a reimbursement charge shall pay the charge prior to the City’s final approval of any short plat or subdivision.
B. After full completion of the utility improvements subject to the reimbursement agreement, the Owner of real property that is not within a short plat or subdivision, or is within a short plat or subdivision that received final approval prior to the date of execution of the latecomer reimbursement agreement, shall pay the reimbursement charge at the time a connection to the utility improvements is requested. If a building permit is issued concurrently with the connection, the reimbursement charge shall be paid prior to issuance of the building permit.

15.17.130 Segregation of Reimbursement Charges.
Following a division of a reimbursement parcel by subdivision, City approval or permit or court order, the owner of the original parcel subject to the reimbursement agreement shall apply for segregation to the Director by written application, in a form approved by the Director. The City shall have no duty or responsibility to notify the Owner of the original parcel of this requirement, and shall not be liable for any damages, claims, or liabilities resulting from the failure to segregate. The application shall include a copy of the latecomer reimbursement agreement imposing the reimbursement charge, and a copy of the ordinance, resolution, or other action legally dividing the property. The segregation shall be made as nearly as possible on the same basis as the original reimbursement, and the total of the segregated parts of the reimbursement shall equal the reimbursement before segregation. Upon verification of the legal division, the Director shall approve the segregation. The Director shall cause a notice of segregated reimbursement charge to be recorded with the Snohomish County Auditor. The cost of recording shall be paid by the Owner. After recording, the Director shall cause a copy of the recorded notice to be mailed to the Owner by first class mail and certified mail, return receipt requested.

15.17.140 Recording of Release.
When the reimbursement charge against a parcel has been paid in full, or the fifteen (15) year period for the reimbursement charge has elapsed, the Director shall cause a notice of payment and release, or a notice of release, as applicable, to be recorded with the Snohomish County Auditor.

15.17.150 Multiple Connection Points.
If the real property abuts more than one utility improvement for which there is a reimbursement charge, the Director shall select the improvement to which connection shall be made, based on engineering, safety, and topographical considerations. (Ord. 2202, 2010)

Title 16 (RESERVED)

Title 17 (RESERVED)

Title 18 (RESERVED)

Title 19 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Chapter 19.04 Building Codes
    19.04.010    Title
    19.04.020    State Building Code Act Chapter 19.27 RCW Adopted
    19.04.030    Department of Building Safety Established
    19.04.031    City Building/Fire Official Designation
    19.04.032    Snohomish County Fire District #4 Service Area
    19.04.033    Fire District Services Coordination
    19.04.034    Policies and Procedures
    19.04.035    Appeals of Orders, Decisions, or Determinations to City Land Use Hearing Examiner
    19.04.036    Work Exempt from Permits
    19.04.038    Substantially Damaged Buildings, Substantially Improved Buildings – Adherence to Adopted Codes
    19.04.039    Inspection Requirements, Process and Penalties
    19.04.040    International Building Code and Appendices Adopted by Reference with Amendments
    19.04.041    International Building/Residential Code – Exception – Residential Use Structures Less Than 120 Square Feet
    19.04.042    International Building/Residential Code – Nonresidential Use Structures – Other Requirements
    19.04.050    International Residential Code and Appendices Adopted by Reference with Amendments
    19.04.060    Uniform Plumbing Code and Appendices Adopted by Reference with Amendments. WAC Chapters 51-56.
    19.04.070    International Fire Code Adopted by Reference with Amendments
    19.04.080    International Mechanical Code and Appendices Adopted by Reference with Amendments. WAC Chapter 51-52.
    19.04.090    International Property Maintenance Code and Appendix Adopted by Reference
    19.04.140    International Energy Conservation Code of the State of Washington with Appendices Adopted by Reference with Amendments
    19.04.170    Permit to Construct
    19.04.180    Validity of Permit – No Authority to Violate Codes or Ordinances
    19.04.181    Permit Payment of Fees, Work Commencement to Be Considered Valid
    19.04.182    Permit Expiration and New Permit Application Requirements
    19.04.183    Permit Renewal Requirements
    19.04.190    Permit Issuance Prerequisite – Private Sewage Disposal Permit
    19.04.200    Permit Fees – Generally
    19.04.210    Fees
    19.04.220    Permit Fees – Waived
    19.04.230    Permit Fees – Basics
    19.04.235    Permit Fees – Refunds
    19.04.240    Permit Fees – Contributed
    19.04.300    Approval of Application and Appeals
    19.04.310    Appeals
    19.04.400    Code Adoption – Purpose
    19.04.500    Disclaimer of Liability
    19.04.510    Validity
    19.04.520    Violation – Penalty – Effective

Chapter 19.04 BUILDING CODES

Sections:
19.04.010    Title
19.04.020    State Building Code Act Chapter 19.27 RCW Adopted
19.04.030    Department of Building Safety Established
19.04.031    City Building/Fire Official Designation
19.04.032    Snohomish County Fire District #4 Service Area
19.04.033    Fire District Services Coordination
19.04.034    Policies and Procedures
19.04.035    Appeals of Orders, Decisions, or Determinations to City Land Use Hearing Examiner
19.04.036    Work Exempt from Permits
19.04.038    Substantially Damaged Buildings, Substantially Improved Buildings – Adherence to Adopted Codes
19.04.039    Inspection Requirements, Process and Penalties
19.04.040    International Building Code and Appendices Adopted by Reference with Amendments
19.04.041    International Building/Residential Code – Exception – Residential Use Structures Less Than 120 Square Feet
19.04.042    International Building/Residential Code – Nonresidential Use Structures – Other Requirements
19.04.050    International Residential Code and Appendices Adopted by Reference with Amendments
19.04.060    Uniform Plumbing Code and Appendices Adopted by Reference with Amendments. WAC Chapters 51-56.
19.04.070    International Fire Code Adopted by Reference with Amendments
19.04.080    International Mechanical Code and Appendices Adopted by Reference with Amendments. WAC Chapter 51-52.
19.04.090    International Property Maintenance Code and Appendix Adopted by Reference
19.04.140    International Energy Conservation Code of the State of Washington with Appendices Adopted by Reference with Amendments
19.04.170    Permit to Construct
19.04.180    Validity of Permit – No Authority to Violate Codes or Ordinances
19.04.181    Permit Payment of Fees, Work Commencement to Be Considered Valid
19.04.182    Permit Expiration and New Permit Application Requirements
19.04.183    Permit Renewal Requirements
19.04.190    Permit Issuance Prerequisite – Private Sewage Disposal Permit
19.04.200    Permit Fees – Generally
19.04.210    Fees
19.04.220    Permit Fees – Waived
19.04.230    Permit Fees – Basics
19.04.235    Permit Fees – Refunds
19.04.240    Permit Fees – Contributed
19.04.300    Approval of Application and Appeals
19.04.310    Appeals
19.04.400    Code Adoption – Purpose
19.04.500    Disclaimer of Liability
19.04.510    Validity
19.04.520    Violation – Penalty – Effective

19.04.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as the “Snohomish City Building Code” and it will hereinafter be referred to as “the Code.” The Code shall consist of all State, International, or Uniform Codes included in or incorporated in this chapter, including local amendments. (Ord. 2319, 2016)

19.04.020 State Building Code Act Chapter 19.27 RCW Adopted.
The State Building Code Act, Chapter 19.27 RCW, is hereby adopted by reference. (Ord. 2319, 2016)

19.04.030 Department of Building Safety Established.
There is established in the City the Department of Building Safety and shall be under the administration and operational control of the Building/Fire Official as approved by the Mayor. The Building/Fire Official shall have the power and duties as set forth in this chapter and as set forth in the model codes adopted by reference in this chapter. The Department of Building Safety shall be the “administrative agency” or “authority having jurisdiction” as may be referenced in any code adopted, except where regulated or governed by another agency. (Ord. 2319, 2016; Ord. 2341, 2017)

19.04.031 City Building/Fire Official Designation.
The City of Snohomish designates the City Building Official as the City Fire Official, who shall be known as the City Building/Fire Official. Where the adopted codes reference Fire Code Official it shall mean Building/Fire Official. (Ord. 2319, 2016)

19.04.032 Snohomish County Fire District #4 Service Area.
The City of Snohomish is within the Snohomish County Fire District #4 service area. As may be referenced in the adopted codes for the City of Snohomish, known as the “Fire District.” (Ord. 2319, 2016)

19.04.033 Fire District Services Coordination.
The City is the official responsible party for administration and enforcement of all adopted codes. The Fire District may designate an agent to coordinate plan review, inspection, and enforcement activity with the City Building/Fire Official. Applicable fees shall be as established by City Council resolution. (Ord. 2319, 2016)

19.04.034 Policies and Procedures.
In addition to amendments located in the body of this chapter, the City Building/Fire Official may establish policies and procedures to clarify requirements for construction located within City limits. (Ord. 2319, 2016)

19.04.035 Appeals of Orders, Decisions, or Determinations to City Land Use Hearing Examiner.
Upon adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, all references to boards of appeals, building construction advisory and appeals board, hearing advisory and appeals board, or other appellate board in any code adopted by reference, shall be replaced with and shall refer to the City Land Use Hearing Examiner. The process for appeals shall be in accordance with SMC 19.04.310. Appeal fees shall be as established by City Council resolution. (Ord. 2319, 2016)

19.04.036 Work Exempt from Permits.
Where referenced in the adopted codes, provisions for work exempt from permits shall mean this section. Work exempt from permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. Unless regulated elsewhere, permits shall not be required for the following:
A. Building. 
    1. One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds in accordance with SMC 19.04.041; playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet; provided, that placement and setbacks of these structures are subject to the provisions of SMC Title 14, Land Use Development Code. A minimum separation of six feet shall be maintained between any structures and the accessory structure or required fire walls as provided by the applicable code.
    2. Residential fences, except those located within the Historic Business District, the Pilchuck District or located on or within City right-of-way.
    3. Oil derricks.
    4. Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, and similar finish work. In general, this includes like-for-like changes of cabinetry and laminate counter tops. A building permit may be required for new cabinetry where additional structural supports are required and for the installation of counter tops constructed of stone, granite, or similar heavier weight materials that can increase structural loading of existing floor systems and require additional structural support.
    5. Temporary motion picture, television, and theater stage sets and scenery unless regulated elsewhere.
    6. Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group R-3 occupancy, which are less than 24 inches deep, do not exceed 5,000 gallons, and are installed entirely above ground.
    7. Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or agricultural purposes, not including service systems unless regulated elsewhere.
    8. Swings and other playground equipment accessory to detached one- and two-family dwelling units unless regulated elsewhere.
    9. Limited grading of no more than six cubic yards cut or fill, related to lawn or garden care only and that involves no work performed within any critical areas or buffers.
B. Gas. 
    1. Portable heating appliance.
    2. Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or appliance or make such equipment or appliance unsafe.
C. Mechanical. 
    1. Portable heating appliance.
    2. Portable ventilation appliances, cooling units or evaporative cooling equipment.
    3. Portable fuel cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping system, no structural attachment and are not interconnected to a power grid.
D. Plumbing. 
    1. The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste, or vent pipe; provided, that if any concealed trap, drain pipe, water, soil, waste, or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this code.
    2. The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves, or fixtures, and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes, or fixtures causing such work to be considered new.
E. Emergency Repairs. Where equipment replacements and repairs must be performed in an emergency situation, the permit application shall be submitted within 24 hours or the next business day of the work being performed and the work shall be left exposed for inspection.
F. Ordinary Repairs – Limitations. Repairs shall not include the cutting away of any wall, partition, or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or load-bearing support, or the rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress requirements, or removal or change of any means of egress; nor shall ordinary repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement, or relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical, or other work affecting public health or general safety.
G. Public Service Agencies. A permit shall not be required for the installation, alteration, or repair of generation, transmission, distribution, or metering or other related equipment that is under the ownership and control of public service agencies by established right, except where regulated under other applicable codes or regulations governed under the Snohomish Municipal Code. (Ord. 2319, 2016)

19.04.038 Substantially Damaged Buildings, Substantially Improved Buildings – Adherence to Adopted Codes.
General: Where a building or structure has sustained substantial damage or where substantial improvements are proposed and the value of work exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the building or structure before the damage or the improvements, the entire building or structure shall be subject to and be brought into compliance with the applicable codes as for new construction.
For applications for reconstruction, rehabilitation, repair, alteration, addition or other improvement of existing buildings or structures located in flood hazard areas, the building official shall determine if the proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage. Where the building official determines that the proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage, and where required by this code, the building official shall require the building to meet the requirements of the International Building Code Section 1612, and where applicable, other provisions within the Snohomish Municipal Code apply.
Market value may be determined utilizing established Snohomish County Assessor’s Office, tax parcel assessed valuation, or an appraisal conducted on behalf of the applicant by a commercial appraisal service licensed to perform such work, and as approved by the Building/Fire Official.
Exceptions:
A. Work to Designated Historic Structures. Designated historic structures are an important expression of the City’s cultural history. To encourage preservation efforts and continued use of designated historic structures, where proposed work is estimated to exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the proposed work, the entire structure shall not have to be brought in compliance with current code requirements, provided the proposed work is done in accordance with the requirements provided below:
    1. The proposed work complies with the codes adopted by this chapter and all other applicable provisions of the Snohomish Municipal Code and other applicable state and federal laws and regulations.
    2. Where proposed work does not impact and/or require the removal and/or alteration of load-bearing members that are essential to the structural frame.
    3. Where proposed work does not involve all areas of the structure and the work does not impact load-bearing members or the structural frame.
    4. Where the proposed work involving load-bearing members and/or the structural frame is limited to the installation of drywall and/or insulation.
    5. To the extent that this chapter otherwise requires the installation of an automatic fire sprinkler system and/or automatic fire alarm system in the structure, that requirement(s) shall apply and no exception shall be made hereunder.
    6. If the proposed work involves a change in use of the structure and the change of use triggers additional exiting requirements, such exiting requirements shall apply and no exception shall be made hereunder.
    7. If the proposed work involves a change in use of the structure, the change of use shall be in accordance with the Snohomish Municipal Code, including but not limited to this chapter and the land use code contained in SMC Title 14.
    8. Where the proposed work has little likelihood of being accomplished because the existing structural conditions require the removal or alteration of a load-bearing member that is an essential part of the structural frame, or because other existing physical or site constraints prohibit modifications or addition of elements, spaces, or features which are in full and strict compliance with the minimum requirements for new construction and which are necessary to provide accessibility are technically infeasible. Alternate methods and materials may be utilized as approved by the Building/Fire Official.
    9. In no case shall the proposed work and/or change in use cause the structure to become unsafe, create an unsafe condition, and/or create a fire and life safety hazard.
B. Where substantial damage or substantial improvement does not include the removal or cutting away of any wall, partition, or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or load-bearing support, or the rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress requirements.
C. Where other regulations govern specific or more restrictive adherence to the codes as adopted by the City. (Ord. 2319, 2016)

19.04.039 Inspection Requirements, Process and Penalties.
It shall be the duty of the owner or their authorized agent to notify the Building/Fire Official when the work requiring inspection under the adopted Code is ready for inspection. It shall also be the duty of the owner or their duly authorized agent to provide access to and means for inspections of work.
The owner or their authorized agent shall make inspection requests in a form and/or process as designated by the City.
The owner or their authorized agent shall ensure the work to be inspected is complete and ready for the type of inspection requested and conforms to the approved construction drawings. It shall be the duty of the owner or their authorized agent to cause the work to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes, and shall not be covered or placed in service until the Building/Fire Official or his or her designee performs an inspection and the work is approved.
Whenever any work subject to inspection is covered or concealed without the benefit of inspection, the Building/Fire Official shall have the authority to require that such work be exposed for inspection. Where the work is placed in use, the Building/Fire Official shall have the authority to have the use discontinued, which may include disconnection of power or other public utilities. Neither the Building/Fire Official nor his or her designee, nor the City of Snohomish shall be liable for the expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any material required or the disconnection/reconnection of any public utilities or equipment, to allow inspection.
The Building/Fire Official shall have the authority to impose reinspection fees as adopted by City Council resolution or penalties as described in SMC 19.04.520, where an owner or their authorized agent violates provisions of the adopted codes. Where reinspection fees or penalties are imposed, the owner or their authorized agent is not relieved from correcting the violation. (Ord. 2319, 2016)

19.04.040 International Building Code and Appendices Adopted by Reference with Amendments.
WAC Chapter 51-50.
The following documents are hereby adopted by reference:
A. The International Building Code, 2015 Edition, including Appendix Chapters C, E, F, G, H, I, J and the 2015 Edition of the International Existing Building Code, that are published by the International Code Council.
B. The Twentieth Edition of the Fire Resistive Design Manual, published by the Gypsum Association.
C. Fees as established by City Council resolution.
The following amendments to the International Building Code are adopted:
Section [A] 101.4 Referenced Codes is amended as follows:The other codes listed in Sections 101.4.1 through 101.4.6 and referenced elsewhere in this code shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference.
101.4.1 Electrical.
Where referenced as the ICC Electrical Code shall be replaced with the National Electric Code. The authority having jurisdiction over this code is the Washington State Department of Labor and Industries, Electrical Division.
[A] 101.4.2 Gas.
The provisions of the 2015 International Fuel Gas Code, and where applicable, the 2015 National Fuel Gas Code (NFPA 54) and the 2015 Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code (NFPA 58) adopted under WAC Chapter 51-52.
[A] 101.4.3 Mechanical.
The provisions of the 2015 International Mechanical Code WAC Chapter 51-52 shall apply to the installation, alterations, repairs, and replacement of mechanical systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings, and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air-conditioning, and refrigeration and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy-related systems.
[A] 101.4.4 Plumbing.
Where referenced as the International Plumbing Code shall be replaced with the 2015 Uniform Plumbing Code. The provisions of the 2015 Uniform Plumbing Code, WAC Chapter 51-56, including Appendices A, B and I and exclude Chapters 12 and 14, and those requirements relating to venting and combustion air or fuel fire appliances as found in Chapter 5. The Uniform Plumbing Code shall apply to the installation, alteration, repair, and replacement of plumbing systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings, and appurtenances, and where connected to a water or sewage system and all aspects of a medical gas system. The authority having jurisdiction for regulation of private sewage disposal systems is the Snohomish Health District. The construction and installation of side sewers, water meter services, water, or sewer mains, or other related construction are also governed by the current adopted edition of the Snohomish Public Works Standards. Where, in any specific case, different sections of this code or other codes and standards adopted by the City specify different materials, methods of construction, or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where a conflict exists between the provisions of Appendix I and the manufacturer’s installation instructions, the conditions of the listing and manufacturer’s installation instructions shall apply. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable.
[A] 101.4.5 Property Maintenance.
The provisions of the 2015 International Property Maintenance Code shall apply to all existing residential and nonresidential structures and all existing premises and constitute minimum requirements and standards for premises, structures, equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, space, heating, sanitation, protection from the elements, life safety, safety from fire and other hazards, and for safe and sanitary maintenance; the responsibility of owners, operators and occupants; the occupancy of existing structures and premises, and for the administration, enforcement, and penalties.
[A] 101.4.6 Fire Prevention.
The provisions of the 2015 International Fire Code, WAC Chapter 51-54A, shall apply to matters affecting or relating to structures; processes and premises from the hazard of fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling, or use of structures, materials, or devices; from conditions hazardous to life, property, or public welfare in the occupancy of structures or premises; and from the construction, extension, repair, alteration, or removal of fire suppression and alarm systems or fire hazards in the structure or on the premises from occupancy or operation. Where, in any specific case, different sections of this code or other codes and standards adopted by the City specify different requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall apply.
[A] 101.4.7 Energy.
The provisions of the 2015 International Energy Conservation Code of the State of Washington adopted under WAC 51-11C and 51-11R shall apply to commercial and residential building sites and associated systems and shall be the maximum and minimum energy code for residential construction in each city, town, or county. The 2015 International Energy Conservation Code of the State of Washington is also referred to as the 2015 Washington State Energy Code. This code shall regulate the design and construction of buildings for the effective use and conservation of energy over the useful life of each building and is intended to provide flexibility to permit the use of innovative approaches and techniques to achieve this objective. This code is not intended to abridge safety, health or environmental requirements contained in other applicable codes or ordinances. Where conflicts arise, the provisions of WAC 51-11C and 51-11R shall govern.
Section [A] 103.3 Deputies is amended to add the following paragraphs:
Snohomish County Fire District #4, Chief Fire Officer or their designee, under the direction of the Building/Fire Official, is authorized and deputized to enforce the provisions of the fire and life safety requirements of this code. It shall be recognized that the City retains jurisdiction in all matters relating to the adopted codes.
Snohomish Police Department, the Police Chief or their designee, under the direction of the Building/Fire Official, is authorized and deputized to assist in the enforcement of this code, including but not limited to assisting in the enforcement of Notices of Violations and/or Orders issued by the Building/Fire Official, Courts, or other jurisdictional powers.
Section [A] 105.1 – Permits is amended to read as follows:
Section [A] 105.1 Required.
Except as specified in SMC 19.04.036, any owner or their authorized agent who intends to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert, or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by this code, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first submit a complete permit application with the City and obtain the required permit.
Section [A] 105.1.1 Annual Permit is not adopted.
Section [A] 105.1.2 Annual Permit Records is not adopted.
Section [A] 105.5 Expiration is amended by the addition of the following section:
Section [A] 105.5.1.
Detailed provisions for when a permit is considered valid, expired, and renewal requirements are provided in SMC 19.04.180, 19.04.181, 19.04.182, and 19.04.183.
Section [A] 107.1 Submittal Documents is amended by the addition of the following paragraph:
The applicant may be required to provide a survey of the property at the time of submittal. The survey shall be prepared by a surveyor, licensed by the State of Washington to perform such work. Where there is insufficient information regarding, including but not limited to, a legal lot, property lines, easements, rights of way, or other requirements of the Snohomish Municipal Code, a survey shall be required. The costs of the survey shall be borne by the permit applicant.
Section [A] 109.6 Refunds is amended by the addition of the following sentence:
The provisions applicable to refunds shall be in accordance with SMC 19.04.235.
Section [A] 110.3 Required Inspections is amended to read:
Section [A] 110.3 Required Inspections.
The Building/Fire Official or their designee, upon notification, shall make the inspections set forth in Sections 110.3.1 through 110.3.12. It shall be the duty of the owner or their authorized agent including person(s) performing the work to request required inspections in a timely manner and as the work progresses. For inspection requirements, process and penalties see Section 19.04.039. This duty is extended and applicable to all required inspections within the adopted referenced codes.
[A] 110.3.1 Footing and Foundation Inspection.
Footing and foundation inspections shall be made after excavations for footings are complete and any required reinforcing steel is in place. For concrete foundations, any required forms, reinforcing steel, anchor bolts, or hold-downs shall be in place prior to inspection. Materials for the foundation shall be on the job, except where concrete is ready mixed in accordance with ASTM C94, the concrete need not be on the job.
[A] 110.3.2 Concrete Slab and Under-Floor inspection.
Concrete slab and under-floor inspections shall be made after in-slab or under-floor reinforcing steel and building service equipment, conduit, piping accessories, insulation, and other ancillary equipment items are in place, but before any concrete is placed or floor sheathing installed, including the sub-floor.
[A] 110.3.3 Lowest Floor Elevation.
In flood hazard areas, upon placement of the lowest floor, including the basement, and prior to further vertical construction, the elevation certification required in Section 1612.5 shall be submitted to the Building/Fire Official.
[A] 110.3.4 Shear Walls.
Includes interior and/or exterior wall frame construction, covering, nailing, anchor bolt, or hold-down placement prior to placing permanent exterior or interior wall covering. Alternate brace wall construction is considered part of this required inspection.
[A] 110.3.5 Frame Inspection.
Framing inspections shall be made after the roof deck or sheathing, all framing, fire-blocking, and bracing are in place; and pipes, chimneys, ducts, and vents to be concealed are complete; and the rough electrical, plumbing, heating, pipes, and ducts are approved. Interior shear walls may be inspected either prior to or at the time of this inspection. The rough electrical is to be inspected and approved by the Washington State Department of Labor and Industries – Electrical Division prior to receiving a framing inspection by the City of Snohomish.
[A] 110.3.6 Fire and smoke-resistant penetrations.
Protection of joints and penetrations in fire-resistance-rated assemblies, smoke barriers and smoke partitions shall not be concealed from view until inspected and approved.
[A] 110.3.7 Insulation Placement.
Insulation inspection shall be made after placement of batt or other insulation to exterior walls, floors, attics, or other conditioned space. Baffles in attic spaces, under-floor where vents are placed in rim joists. An insulation certificate shall be on site at the time the final inspection is conducted.
[A] 110.3.8 Lath and Gypsum Board Inspection.
Lath and gypsum board and gypsum panel product inspections shall be made after lathing, gypsum board and gypsum panel products, interior and exterior, are in place, but before any plastering is applied or gypsum board and gypsum panel product joints and fasteners are taped and finished.
Exception: Gypsum board and gypsum panel products that are not part of a fire-resistance-rated assembly or a shear assembly.
[A] 110.3.9 Energy Efficiency Inspections.
As required by the International Energy Conservation Code for Washington State as adopted under RCW Chapter 19.27.
[A] 110.3.10 Other Inspections.
In addition to the inspections specified above, the Building/Fire Official is authorized to make or require other inspections of any construction work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this code and other laws that are enforced by the department of building safety.
[A] 110.3.11 Special Inspections.
For special inspections, see IBC Chapter 17. The Building/Fire Official shall also be notified when work requiring special inspection is ready for inspection to ensure compliance with adopted codes. IBC Chapter 1704 does not negate required inspections by the Building/Fire Official.
[A] 110.3.12 Final Inspection.
The final inspection shall be made after all work required by the building permit is completed. Prior to requesting a final inspection by the Building/Fire Official, the permit holder or their authorized agent shall obtain the following inspections:
1) A final electrical inspection and approval by the Washington State Department of Labor and Industries – Electrical Division; and
2) A final inspection and approval of any requirements imposed by a City Department(s) or Agency as a condition of project approval; and where applicable
3) Flood Hazard Documentation. Where located in a designated flood hazard area, documentation of the elevation of the lowest floor as required in Section 1612.5.
Section [A] 111.3 Temporary Occupancy is amended by the addition of the following paragraph:All requirements imposed or conditions of permit approval must be completed and approved by the City before the Building/Fire Official will grant occupancy of a building or structure. Temporary certificates of occupancy or temporary occupancy will not be approved by the Building/Fire Official without first obtaining the approval of the Planning and Development Services Director or Mayor.
Section 113 – Titled Board of Appeals is hereby amended to read:Section [A] 113 – Appeal of Orders, Decisions, or Determinations to City Land Use Hearing Examiner.
Section [A] 113.1 General is amended to read as follows:
Section [A] 113.1 General.
In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the Building/Fire Official relative to the application and interpretation of this code shall be made in writing to the City Land Use Hearing Examiner. Appeals shall be in accordance with Section 19.04.310.
Section [A] 113.2 Limitation on Authority.
An appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted there under have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or an equally code or better form of construction is proposed. The Hearing Examiner shall have no authority to waive requirements of this code.
Section [A] 114 Violations. Section [A] 114.4 Violation Penalties is amended to read as follows:
Section [A] 114.4 Violation Penalties.
Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters, or repairs a building or structure, occupies or uses a building or structure in violation of this code, or fails to comply with the approved construction documents including any conditions for approval, or directive of the Building/Fire official, or a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code shall be subject to penalties as prescribed in SMC 19.04.520.
Section [A] 115 Stop Work Order. Section [A] 115.3 is deleted and replaced by the following:
Section [A] 115.3 Unlawful Continuance.
Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except where a person is directed by the Building/Fire Official to perform work to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to the penalties as prescribed in SMC 19.04.520.
Section 117 Relocated or Moved Building(s) is hereby added to read as follows:
Section 117.1 Relocated or Moved Buildings.
Relocated or moved buildings or structures shall comply with the provisions of this code. A building permit is required to relocate or move a building(s) into or out of the City of Snohomish. The Building/Fire Official may not require compliance with all energy efficient standards where interior/exterior wall coverings are not removed, or other requirements for new construction except where the scope of work is considered a substantial improvement under SMC 19.04.038. Relocated or moved buildings shall meet the provisions of SMC Title 14 Land Use Code.
Section 117.2 Scope of Work.
Requirements based on the scope of work may be determined on a case by case basis prior to issuance of the building permit.
Section 117.3 Structural Evaluation.
Relocated or moved buildings shall be evaluated by a structural engineer licensed by the State of Washington to perform such work prior to the relocation or moving of a building. The Structural Engineer shall provide the Building/Fire Official with a written evaluation that includes: any existing structural defects that would prevent the proposed structure from being moved, temporary or permanent measures needed to make the structure sound to facilitate the move/relocation, and permanent structural corrections to make the structure occupiable. Buildings which are determined to be structural unsound shall not be relocated or moved until the building can be made structurally sound.
Section [F] 501.5 Fire District – Electronic/CAD Plan Set is hereby added to read as follows:
Section [F] 501.5 Fire District - Electronic/Cad Plan Set.
Prior to final approval and issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder or their authorized agent shall provide the Fire District with an electronic/CAD plan set on a format utilized by the Fire District. The electronic plan set shall contain detailed site plans, floor plans, fire protection/suppression systems, exiting systems, fire fighter hazards, fire hydrant locations and valves, fire department connections, and locations of any and all fire department emergency communication equipment, or other information as required by the Fire District. The building and/or property owner is responsible for providing updated electronic/CAD plan sets upon changes in occupancy, tenant improvement, or changes to the site.
Section [F] 504.3 Stairway Access to Roof is amended to read as follows:
Section [F] 504.3 Stairway Access to Roof.
New buildings three or more stories above grade plane, except those with a roof slope greater than four units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33.3 percent slope), shall be provided with a stairway to the roof. Stairway access to the roof shall be in accordance with Section 1011.12. Such stairway shall be marked at street and floor levels with a sign indicating that the stairway continues to the roof. Where roofs are used for roof gardens or for other purposes, stairways shall be provided as required for such occupancy classification.
Section [F] 505.1 Premises Identification is amended by the addition of the following paragraph:
Letters or numbers shall be a minimum of six inches high (6 inches, 78 mm) for residential and a minimum of twelve inches (12 inches) high for commercial. Note: For the purposes of adoption, an error in the published edition of the International Building Code references a section of the International Fire Code that is incorrect, namely Section [F] 501.2. Until the published edition of the International Building Code (IBC) is corrected, this paragraph shall also amend the erroneous section referenced as [F] 501.2, as published.
Section 901.2.1 Key Boxes is hereby added to read as follows:
Section 901.2.1 Key Boxes.
A key box shall be installed on all buildings, occupancies, or premises that are equipped with a fire protection system, and all other buildings or appurtenances where immediate access may be necessary. The key box shall be of the type approved by the Fire District. The key box shall be installed in a location recommended by the District, and shall contain keys necessary to gain access. The model number and type shall be determined by the Fire District. Also see additional requirements located in Section [F] 506 of the International Fire Code.
Exceptions: 1) Single family residences not used as bed and breakfast.
Section [F] 903 Automatic Sprinkler Systems. Section [F] 903.1 General is deleted and replaced by the following:
Section [F] 903.1 General.
An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed in all occupancies where the total gross floor area is 5,000 square feet or more regardless of fire barriers or fire walls and where specifically required in the code based on construction type, occupancy, or use. For the purposes of this section, fire barriers or fire walls shall not be used to define separate buildings or uses. Where the code requirements for automatic sprinkler systems are more restrictive than this section, the more restrictive requirements shall govern. Additional requirements are also located in the SMC 19.04.070 Section 508.1.1.
Sections [F] 903.2.1.1 through [F] 903.2.10.1 are amended to read as follows:
Section [F] 903.2.1.1 Group A-1
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group A-1 occupancies and intervening floors of the building where one of the following conditions exists:
1. The fire area or total gross floor area is 5,000 square feet or more pursuant to Section [F]903.1.
2. The fire area has an occupant load is 300 or more.
3. The fire area or occupancy is located on a floor other than a level of exit discharge serving such occupancies.
4. The fire area or occupancy contains a multi-theater complex.
Section [F] 903.2.1.2 Group A-2
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group A-2 occupancies and intervening floors of the building where one of the following conditions exists:
1. The fire area or total gross floor area is 5,000 square feet or more pursuant to Section [F]903.1.
2. The fire area has an occupant load is 100 or more.
3. The fire area or occupancy is located on a floor other than a level of exit discharge serving such occupancies.
Section [F] 903.2.1.3 Group A-3
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group A-3 occupancies and intervening floors of the building where one of the following conditions exists:
1. The fire area or total gross floor area is 5,000 square feet or more pursuant to Section [F] 903.1.
2. The fire area has an occupant load is 300 or more.
3. The fire area or occupancy is located on a floor other than a level of exit discharge serving such occupancies.
Section [F] 903.2.1.4 Group A-4
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group A-4 occupancies and intervening floors of the building where one of the following conditions exists:
1. The fire area or total gross floor area is 5,000 square feet or more pursuant to Section [F]903.1.
2. The fire area has an occupant load is 300 or more.
3. The fire area or occupancy is located on a floor other than a level of exit discharge serving such occupancies.
Section [F] 903.2.1.5 Group A-5
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group A-5 occupancies in concession stands, retail areas, press boxes, and other accessory use areas in excess of 1,000 square feet regardless of fire barriers or fire walls.
Section [F] 903.2.1.6 Assembly occupancies on roofs.
Where an occupied roof has an assembly occupancy with an occupant load exceeding 100 for Group A-3 and 300 for other Group A occupancies, all floors between the occupied roof and the level of exit discharge shall be equipped with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2.
Exception: Open parking garages of Type I or Type II construction.
Section 903.2.1.7 Multiple fire areas.
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided where multiple fire areas of Group A-1, A-2, A-3 or A-4 occupancies share exit or exit access components and the combined occupant load of those fire areas is 300 or more.
Section 903.2.1.8 Nightclubs.
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout Group A-2 Nightclubs as defined in this code.
Section [F] 903.2.2 Group B and Ambulatory Care Facilities.
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group B occupancies and Ambulatory Care Facilities where one of the following conditions exists:
1. The total gross floor area of the Group B Occupancy as defined in Section 304 except Ambulatory Care Facilities is 5,000 square feet or more pursuant to Section [F]903.1.
2. Ambulatory Care Facilities shall be provided with an automatic sprinkler system regardless of floor area or location.
3. Four or more care recipients are incapable of self-preservation, whether rendered incapable by staff or staff has accepted responsibility for care recipients already incapable.
4. One or more care recipients that are incapable of self-preservation are located at other than the level of exit discharge serving such a facility.
Section [F] 903.2.3 Group E.
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided in all Group E occupancies. This requirement includes:
1. Throughout existing Group E occupancies where substantial improvements or substantial damage has or is occurring.
2. Portable classrooms where a cluster of classrooms exceeds 5,000 square feet, and clusters of portable school classrooms shall be separated as required in Chapter 5 of the Building Code.
3. Portable classrooms regardless of floor area shall be provided with a UL listed monitored fire alarm system, and shall be interconnected to the fire alarm system of permanent buildings such that upon activation will cause the entire fire alarm system to initiate.
4. A minimum water supply and fire flow meeting the requirements of International Fire Code Appendix B shall be required.
Exceptions: Portable school classrooms, provided: 1) The aggregate area of clusters of portable classrooms does not exceed 5,000 square feet. 2) Cluster of portable classrooms shall be separated as required in Chapter 5. 3) Each portable classroom is equipped with a monitored, automatic fire alarm system interconnected to the main fire alarm control panel.
Section [F] 903.2.4 Group F.
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all Group F occupancies regardless of floor area, fire barriers, or fire walls, including the manufacturing or storage of upholstered furniture and mattresses.
Section [F] 903.2.4.1 Woodworking Operations.
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all occupancies that contain woodworking operations in excess of 2,500 square feet in area which generate finely divided combustible waste or use finely divided combustible materials.
Exceptions:
1. Where the scope of woodworking operations presents a fire hazard, an automatic sprinkler system may be required regardless of floor area.
2. Where existing woodworking operations are found to present a fire hazard and the fire hazard cannot be reduced or eliminated based on the scope of the operation, an automatic sprinkler system may be required regardless of floor area.
3. Where finely divided combustible waste or finely divided combustible materials are generated and the woodworking operation presents a fire hazard, an automatic sprinkler system may be required regardless of floor area.
Section [F] 903.2.5 Group H.
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all Group H occupancies regardless of floor area, fire barriers, or fire walls. Where buildings or structures contain an H occupancy, they shall also be provided with an automatic sprinkler system. The design of the sprinkler system shall not be less than that required by this code for the occupancy hazard classifications in accordance with Table 903.2.5.2. Where the design area of the sprinkler system consists of a corridor protected by one row of sprinklers, the maximum number of sprinklers required to be calculated is 13.

+----------------------------------+---------------------------------+
|             Location             | Occupancy Hazard Classification |
+----------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Fabrication Areas                | Ordinary Hazard Group 2         |
+----------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Service Corridors                | Ordinary Hazard Group 2         |
+----------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Storage rooms without dispensing | Ordinary Hazard Group 2         |
+----------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Storage rooms with dispensing    | Extra Hazard Group 2            |
+----------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Corridors                        | Ordinary Hazard Group 2         |
+----------------------------------+---------------------------------+
Section [F] 903.2.5.3 Pyroxylin Plastics.
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided in buildings, or portions thereof, where cellulose nitrate film or pyroxylin plastics are manufactured, stored, or handled in quantities exceeding 100 pounds (45 kg).
Section [F] 903.2.6 Group I.
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings containing Group I occupancies regardless of floor area, fire barriers, or fire walls.
Section [F] 903.2.7 Group M.
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings containing Group M occupancies regardless of floor area, fire barriers, or fire walls, including Group M occupancies used for the display and sale of upholstered furniture.
Section [F] 903.2.7.1 High-Piled Storage.
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided in accordance with the International Fire Code where storage of merchandise is in high piled or rack storage arrays. Where high piled storage is provided in other occupancies, regardless of floor area, an automatic sprinkler system shall be required.
Section [F] 903.2.8 Group R.
An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3 shall be provided throughout all buildings with a Group R occupancy regardless of floor area, fire barriers, or fire walls.
Section [F] 903.2.8.1 Group R-3.
An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.3 may be permitted in Group R-3 occupancies.
Section [F] 903.2.8.2 Group R-4 Condition 1.
An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed in accordance with Section 903.3.
Section [F] 903.2.8.3 Group R-4 Condition 2.
An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed in accordance with Section 903.3. Attics shall be protected in accordance with 903.2.8.3.1 or 903.2.8.3.2.
Section [F] 903.2.8.3.1
Attics used for living purposes, storage or fuel-fired equipment. Attics used for living purposes, storage or fuel-fired equipment shall be protected throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.
Section [F] 903.2.8.3.2
Attics not used for living purposes, storage or fuel-fired equipment. Attics not used for living purposes, storage or fuel-fired equipment shall be protected in accordance with one of the following:
1. Attics protected throughout by a heat detector system arranged to activate the building fire alarm system in accordance with Section 907.2.10.
2. Attics constructed of noncombustible materials.
3. Attics constructed of fire-retardant-treated wood framing complying with Section 2303.2.
4. The automatic sprinkler system shall be extended to provide protection throughout the attic space.
Section [F] 903.2.8.4 Care facilities.
An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3 shall be permitted in care facilities with five or fewer individuals in a single-family dwelling.
Section [F] 903.2.9 Group S-1.
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings containing Group S-1 occupancy where one of the following exists:
1. The fire area or total gross floor area is 5,000 square feet or more pursuant to Section [F]903.1.
2. A Group S-1 fire area is located more than three stories above grade plane.
3. A Group S-1 occupancy used for the storage of upholstered furniture or mattresses exceeds 2,500 square feet.
Section [F] 903.2.9.1 Repair Garages.
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings used as repair garages where:
1. The fire area or total gross floor area is 5,000 square feet or more pursuant to Section [F]903.1.
2. Buildings with a repair garage servicing vehicles parked in the basement.
3. Used for the repair or storage of vehicles including commercial trucks and buses.
4. A Group S-1 fire area used for the repair of commercial motor vehicles where the fire area is 5,000 square feet or more.
Section [F] 903.2.9.2 Bulk Storage of Tires.
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings where bulk storage of tires occurs regardless of gross floor area, fire barriers, or fire walls. The automatic sprinkler system shall be designed for the highest hazard.
Section [F] 903.2.10 Group S-2.
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings classified as enclosed parking garages in accordance with Section 406.4 or where located beneath other groups.
Exception: Enclosed parking garages located beneath R-3 occupancy as applicable in section 101.2.
Section [F] 903.2.10.1 Commercial Parking Garages.
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings used as commercial parking, including storage of commercial trucks and buses pursuant to Section [F] 903.1.
Section [F] 903.2.11.3 Buildings of Three Stories or 55 feet in Height or More is amended to read as follows:
Section [F] 903.2.11.3 Buildings of Three Stories or 35 feet in Height or More.
An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout buildings that have one or more stories with an occupant load of thirty (30) or more located 35 feet or 35 feet or more above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access, measured to the finished floor.
Exceptions:
1. Open parking structures.
2. Occupancies in Group F-2 unless regulated elsewhere.
Section [F] 903.3.1.3 NFPA 13D Sprinkler Systems is amended to read as follows:
Section [F] 903.3.1.3 NFPA 13D Sprinkler Systems.
Where allowed, automatic sprinkler systems in one and two family dwellings may comply with NFPA 13D provided the fire sprinkler system has a separate tap to the water main, and is not part of the domestic water supply or plumbing to or within the dwelling.
Section [F] 903.3.5 Water Supplies is amended to read:
Section [F] 903.3.5 Water Supplies.
Water supplies for automatic sprinkler systems shall comply with this section:
1. The automatic sprinkler system water supply shall have a separate tap to the City Water Main, and shall not be used in conjunction with, or part of, or as a domestic water service. The potable water supply shall be protected against backflow in accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code and Snohomish Municipal Code 15.10.
2. Where a dedicated fire main is provided, domestic water service or other potable water use connections shall be prohibited.
3. Where required fire flow demand exceeds the available water supply provided by the water purveyor, the applicant may be required to upgrade, extend, or construct the purveyors water mains to provide fire flow including the installation of additional hydrants or looping of water mains, except where regulated elsewhere. The water supply test used for design of fire protection systems shall be adjusted to account for seasonal and daily pressure fluctuations based on information from the water supply authority and as approved by the building/fire official.
4. Where automatic sprinkler systems are installed, the required fire flow demand may be reduced by fifty percent (50%) provided the available water supply can still provide the reduced fire flow demand.
5. Where the automatic sprinkler system, water supply shut off valves are installed or located below grade, a valve cover lid shall be provided and shall be accessible at all times. The valve cover lid shall be permanently marked with letters that read “Fire Sprinkler,” and be permanently marked with red paint.
Section [F] 903.3.5.1 Domestic Services is amended to read as follows:
Section [F] 903.3.5.1 Domestic Services.
Domestic water services shall not be used for the water supply for the automatic sprinkler system.
Section [F] 903.3.5.2 Residential Combination Services is amended to read as follows:
Section [F] 903.3.5.2 Residential Combination Services.
Where allowed, residential combination services that provide both residential domestic services and automatic sprinkler system supply shall be plumbed so that termination, shut-off, maintenance, or removal of the residential domestic water service shall not impair or prevent operation of the automatic sprinkler system. In any case, water supply for the automatic sprinkler system shall not supply or be capable of supplying residential domestic services, especially where the residential domestic water service has been interrupted by termination, shut-off, maintenance, or removal. Combination services shall be regulated as a required automatic sprinkler system and subject to the penalty section, including termination of occupancy until such time the system is brought into compliance.
Section [F] 903.3.7 Fire Department Connections (FDC) is hereby added to read as follows:
Section [F] 903.3.7 Fire Department Connections (FDC).
Fire department connections shall be a minimum distance of 50 feet from the building it serves. Where lot size may not allow the minimum distance to be met, an alternative location may be considered. The location of the FDC shall be approved by both the Building/Fire Official and the Fire District. Fire hose thread and fittings used in connection with or part of an automatic sprinkler system shall be as prescribed by the Fire District.
Section [F] 903.3.7.1 Locking Fire Department Connection (FDC) Caps.
Locking FDC caps are required on all fire department connections. The locking cap shall be of the type approved by Fire District #4.
Section [F] 903.3.7.2 Existing Fire Department Connections (FDC) Caps.
Where existing fire department connections are found to be unsecured, locking FDC caps shall be installed. Prior to installation of the locking FDC caps, the property owner shall have the FDC line flushed to ensure any or all obstructions are removed. The work shall be performed by a person, firm, or corporation licensed by the State of Washington to perform work on fire sprinkler systems. A written certification report indicating the FDC line is clear and operational shall be forwarded to the City.
Section [F] 907.1 Fire Alarm and Detection Systems Requirements, General is amended to read as follows:
Section [F] 907.1 General.
All occupancies hereinafter constructed, substantially damaged or improved, which exceed 3,000 square feet of gross floor area, and single family residences with bed and breakfast rooms regardless of floor area, shall be provided with a UL listed, monitored and approved automatic fire detection system. Where the occupancies listed under Section 907 require automatic fire detection systems/fire alarm systems more restrictive than 3,000 square feet, the most restrictive requirement shall govern. For the purposes of this subsection, the total gross floor area shall be based on the completed, attached building, regardless of any fire barriers or fire walls.
Where required under Section [F] 907 to install manual devices, those sections shall be amended to read both automatic and manual devices for the purposes of this section.
(Ord. 2319, 2016; Ord. 2341, 2017)

19.04.041 International Building/Residential Code – Exception – Residential Use Structures Less Than 120 Square Feet.
A structure less than 120 square feet in size, designed for use as a storage or tool shed, may be placed on a legal lot in Snohomish without a building permit provided the following provisions are met:
A. Applicable provisions of SMC Title 14, Land Use Development Code.
B. The structure does not create a fire and life safety hazard by virtue of the use, and a minimum six-foot clearance is provided between combustible construction and the structure.
C. The structure will not be fastened to a permanent foundation.
D. Only one unpermitted residential use structure shall be allowed on a legal lot unless allowed elsewhere. (Ord. 2319, 2016)

19.04.042 International Building/Residential Code – Nonresidential Use Structures – Other Requirements.
A permit is required for structures used for, but not limited to, espresso stands, temporary construction trailers, and similar uses, and must comply with subsections (A) through (D) of this section:
Exceptions: Mobile food vendors pursuant to Chapter 5.30 SMC.
A. The site and proposed structure shall comply with all applicable provisions of SMC Title 14.
B. The structure shall be connected to City of Snohomish water, sewer, and storm utilities including payment of applicable connection fees, and subject to applicable provisions of the City of Snohomish Public Works Standards.
C. Applicable provisions of the International Building, Fire, Mechanical, Uniform Plumbing Code, and the International Energy Conservation Code for the State of Washington.
D. Fees as established by City Council resolution. (Ord. 2319, 2016)

19.04.050 International Residential Code and Appendices Adopted by Reference with Amendments.
WAC Chapter 51-51. The 2015 Edition of the International Residential Code as published by the International Code Council is hereby adopted as amended herein and including Appendix Chapters G, H, and K. Adoption includes fees as established by City Council resolution.
Section R102.7 Existing Buildings is amended to read as follows:
Section R102.7 Existing Buildings.
The legal occupancy of any structure existing on the date of adoption of this code shall be permitted to continue without change, except as is specifically adopted, regulated under other requirements of the Snohomish Municipal Code, or as deemed necessary by the Building/Fire Official for the general safety and welfare of the occupants and the public.
Section R102.7.1 Additions.
Alterations or repairs to any structure shall conform to that required for a new structure and SMC 19.04.038. Additions, alterations, or repairs shall not cause an existing structure to become unsafe or adversely affect the performance of the building.
Section R110.2 Change of Use is amended to read as follows:
Section R110.2 Change of Use.
Changes in the character or use of an existing structure shall not be made without approval of the Building/Fire Official in accordance with the applicable adopted codes or other regulations of the Snohomish Municipal Code. Depending on the change of use, the existing structure may be required to meet the provisions of the International Building Code.
(Ord. 2319, 2016)

19.04.060 Uniform Plumbing Code and Appendices Adopted by Reference with Amendments. WAC Chapters 51-56.
The 2015 Edition of the Uniform Plumbing Code and Standards, as published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, excluding Chapters 12 and 14 and those requirements relating to venting and combustion air or fuel-fired appliances as found in Chapter 5, is hereby adopted including Appendix Chapters A, B, D, E, I, L. Adoption includes fees as established by City Council resolution.
Section 104.3.2 Plan Review Fees is amended by adding the following sentence:Plan review fees shall be assessed as established by City Council resolution.
Section 104.4.3 Expiration is amended by adding the following sentence:Expiration of permits shall be in accordance with SMC 19.04.180.
Section 104.5 Permit Fees is amended by adding the following sentence:Permit fees shall be assessed as established by City Council resolution, Table 104.5 is not adopted.
Section 104.5.3 Fee Refunds is amended to read:
Section 104.5.3 Fee Refunds.
Fee refunds shall be in accordance with SMC 19.04.235.
Section 106.3 Violations and Penalties is amended to read as follows:
Section 106.3 Violations and Penalties.
A person, firm, or corporation violating a provision of this code shall be subject to the penalty provisions of SMC 19.04.520.
Section 107.0 Board of Appeals is amended to read as follows:
Section 107.1 Appeals of Orders, Decisions or Determinations to City Land Use Hearing Examiner.
All persons shall have the right to appeal a decision of the Building/Fire Official. Appeals shall be made to the City Land Use Hearing Examiner in accordance with SMC 19.04.035 and SMC 19.04.310.
Section 107.2 Limitations of Authority.
The City Land Use hearing Examiner shall have no authority relative to interpretation of the administrative provisions of this code, nor shall they be empowered to waive requirements of this code.
Section 311 Independent Systems is amended to read:
Section 311 Independent Systems.
Section 311.1 Drainage Systems.
Drainage systems of each new building and of new work installed in any existing building shall be separate and independent from that of any other building and when available, every building shall have an independent connection to the public sewer or public storm system. Where public sewer is not available, a connection to a private sewer may be permitted by the City Engineer, provided that when the public sewer is available, the drainage system shall be connected to the public sewer in accordance with the Snohomish Municipal Code. Connection fees shall be as set forth by City Council resolution.
Section 311.2 Domestic Potable Water and Fire Sprinkler Water Supply.
Domestic potable water and fire sprinkler systems water supply shall be separate and independent of each other. A separate connection to the City public water supply shall be required. Where existing domestic potable water has been plumbed into a fire sprinkler system water supply, the connection shall be separated and plumbed to provide separate and independent systems. Domestic potable water shall be connected to a City water meter in accordance with the Snohomish Municipal Code.
Section 311.3 Water Meters.
The City may require separate water meter installation and services on multi-family or multi-tenant use buildings including properties where a condominium conversion has occurred. The costs of the installation and services shall be in accordance with SMC Chapter 15.04 and shall be borne by the applicant/property owners.
Section 311.4 Reclaimed Water Systems.
Where reclaimed water systems allow the introduction of potable water, such as engineered car wash equipment; each system shall be separate and independent of each other. The potable water system shall be protected by the installation of an approved RPBA backflow assembly in accordance with SMC Chapter 15.10. Piping for reclaimed water systems shall be labeled as “Non-Potable Water” to avoid confusion.
Reclaimed water systems shall only be installed and used for lawn irrigation systems, except that engineered car wash equipment that utilizes reclaimed water to reduce the demand on the City water supply is permitted.
Section 603.2 Approval of Devices or Assemblies is amended by adding the following paragraph:Tables 4-1 Relative Level of Protection, 4-2 Mandatory Service Isolation, 4-3 Recommended Service Isolation, and 4-4 Recommended Protection at Fixtures and Equipment as published by the Pacific Northwest Section, American Water Works Association adopted under SMC Chapter 15.10 are hereby adopted by reference. Where the Tables are more restrictive than the requirements of this code, the more restrictive requirements shall govern.
Section 608.3 Expansion Tank is amended by adding the following paragraph:
Section 608.3 Expansion Tanks.
The installation of an expansion tank shall be required for all hot water tanks, boilers, or other heating device of domestic potable water hereinafter installed, moved, or replaced. A pressure regulator or check valve is installed on the City supply side of the meter at the time of installation causing the water system to become a closed system.
Chapter 7 Sanitary Drainage is amended by adding the following paragraph:Chapter 7
Sanitary Drainage
NOTE: Where the adopted Snohomish Public Work Standards or SMC Title 15 does not provide design or regulatory requirements, this section will prevail. Where strict adherence is not feasible, the City Engineer, upon written application, may approve alternate methods of design and installation on a case by case basis. Where a conflict arises between this Chapter and the Public Work Standards, the most restrictive shall govern.
(Ord. 2319, 2016)

19.04.070 International Fire Code Adopted by Reference with Amendments.
WAC Chapter 51-54A. The 2015 Edition of the International Fire Code, published by the International Code Council, is adopted with the following amendments and including Appendix Chapters B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, and K. Adoption includes fees as established by City Council resolution.
Section [A] 102.6 Historic Buildings is amended to read as follows:
Section [A] 102.6 Historic Buildings.
The construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocated, or moved buildings or structures that are designated as historic buildings by the State of Washington or local ordinance, when such buildings or structures do not constitute a distinct hazard to life or property shall be in conformance with the provisions of the applicable governing code. Where substantially damaged or substantially improved, the requirements of SMC 19.04.038 may be used.
Section [A] 105.1.1 Permits Required is amended by adding the following paragraph:The City may institute an annual certificate of occupancy. Upon implementation occupancy permits shall be renewed annually and subject to an annual inspection. Fees shall be established by City Council resolution.
Section [A] 105.7.13 Private Fire Hydrants is amended to read:
Section [A] 105.7.13 Private Fire Hydrants.
All new fire hydrants and water mains are required to be constructed within City easements or rights-of-way. Private fire hydrants are generally discouraged. Where a private fire hydrant will be connected to a City water main, a construction permit must be obtained and a City water meter installed in accordance with SMC Chapter 15.04. The size of the water meter shall be no less than a 6 inch water meter. The costs of the City water meter and monthly utility rate shall be established by City Council resolution or ordinance. An approved backflow prevention assembly is required for all private fire hydrants. All private fire hydrants shall be accessible to the Fire District or Water Purveyor at all times and are solely for the use of fire protection activities.
Retroactive Application: When discovered, existing private fire hydrants may be required to comply with this section at the discretion of the City Engineer.
Section [A] 106.2 Inspections is amended by adding the following paragraph:Pursuant to Section 105.1.1, an annual operating permit and inspection may be conducted for operations as set forth in Section 105.6. Upon implementation of the annual Certificate of Occupancy/Annual Operating Permit program, fees collected may be used to offset the costs of staffing, resources, and enforcement.
Section [A] 108.1 Board of Appeals is amended to read as follows:
Section 108.1 Appeals to the Hearing Examiner.
Appeals of Orders, Decisions or Determinations shall be made to the City Land Use Hearing Examiner pursuant to SMC 19.04.035 and SMC 19.04.310.
Section [A] 111.4 Failure to Comply relative to stop work orders is amended to read:
Section [A] 111.4 Failure to Comply.
Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a Stop Work Order, or other means of notification to Stop Work, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to SMC 19.04.520 Violation – Penalty – Effective.
Section 308.1.4 Open Flame Cooking Devices is adopted and amended to read as follows:
Section 308.1.4 Open Flame Cooking Devices.
Charcoal burners and other open flame cooking devices shall not be operated on combustible balconies or decks or within 10 feet of combustible construction. This includes liquefied petroleum gas fired cooking devices having LP gas containers with a water capacity greater than 2.5 pounds (nominal 1 pound LP gas capacity).
Exceptions:
1. Detached one or two family dwellings, provided that the cooking equipment and ignition sources are maintained and controlled in a safe manner and does not create a fire and life safety hazard.
2. Where buildings, balconies, and decks are protected by an automatic fire sprinkler system.
Section 501.5 Electronic/CAD Plan Set is hereby added to read as follows:
Section 501.5 Fire Department Electronic/CAD Plan Set.
Prior to final approval or issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, the Fire District shall be provided with an electronic/CAD plan set. The CAD format shall be approved by the Fire District. The plan set shall contain detailed site plans, floor plans, fire protection/suppression systems, exiting systems, fire fighter hazards, fire hydrant locations and valves, fire department connections and locations of any and all fire department emergency communication equipment, or other information as required by the Fire District. The building and/or property owner is responsible for providing updated electronic/CAD plan sets due to changes in occupancy, tenant improvement, or changes to the site.
Section 502 Definition of Fire Apparatus Access Road is amended to read:Emergency Response Apparatus Access Road. A road that provides emergency fire apparatus or vehicle access from a fire station or police station to a facility, building, or portion thereof. This is a general term inclusive of all other terms such as fire lane, public street, private street, parking lot lane, and access roadway. Where the codes reference fire department apparatus access, shall mean emergency response apparatus access.
Section 503 Fire Apparatus Access is adopted.
Section 503.2 Specifications is amended to read as follows:
Section 503.2 Specifications.
Emergency response apparatus access roads shall be in conformance with Sections 503.2.1 through 503.2.9, and in accordance with the regulations based on the type of development pursuant to Section D104 Commercial and Industrial Development; Section D105 Aerial Fire Apparatus Access Roads, Required; Section D106 Multiple-Family Residential Development; and D107 One and Two Family Dwelling Residential Development.
Section 503.2.1 Dimensions is amended to read as follows:
Section 503.2.1 Dimensions.
Street design shall provide an unobstructed width of not less than twenty (20) feet, exclusive of shoulders, except for approved security gates in accordance with Sections 503.2.9 and 503.6, and an unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than 14 feet. Street design methods for local access street designations shall be in accordance with Section 503.2.1.1 and the provisions of this Chapter.
The purpose of this section is to allow performance-based requirements for street design and emergency response apparatus access, to achieve the following purposes:
1. A reasonable level of life safety and property protection from the hazards of fire, explosion, or dangerous conditions in new and existing buildings, structures, and premises, and to provide safety to fire fighters and emergency responders during emergency operations.
2. On new and existing fire apparatus access roads required by and regulated by this code, establish requirements consistent with nationally and internationally recognized good practice for achieving a reasonable level of overall life safety, by taking into account and balancing the need to prevent road traffic deaths and injuries and the need to safeguard against the hazards of fire, explosions, and other dangerous conditions.
Where an existing street is restricted or inaccessible due to terrain, grade, or location for emergency response apparatus access, and cannot be brought into conformance with this section, all buildings constructed that utilize the existing street shall be provided with an automatic fire sprinkler system.
Section 503.2.1.1 Local Access Street Designation is hereby added to read as follows:
Section 503.2.1.1 Local Access Street Designation.
In new development utilizing local access streets where the curb to curb width is twenty-eight feet with parking on both sides of the street, resulting in an unobstructed drivable width of twelve to fourteen feet, shall provide dedicated emergency response apparatus access in accordance with the following requirements:
A. At spaced intervals provided below, a minimum unobstructed drivable area that is twenty-foot wide by forty foot long by the use of:
1. Designated Driveways. Side by side driveways or side by side driveways with a landscape strip in between at spaced intervals every two hundred feet. Designated driveways shall be provided with an approved method of demarcation and maintained so that no encroachment into the emergency response apparatus access can occur.
2. Designate No Parking Areas. Appropriately signed no parking areas at spaced intervals of one hundred fifty feet. It is recognized that traffic cueing may utilize this area.
3. Violations of this provision. The Snohomish Police Department is authorized to issue traffic citations where violations of these provisions occur.
B. Street connectivity shall be accomplished by internal street grid systems or by connection to the City’s street grid system in accordance with the following:
1. Street connections that intersect with other streets to form a street grid system at spaced intervals every two hundred feet. Where buildings or structures are provided with automatic fire sprinkler systems, the spaced intervals may be increased to four hundred feet.
2. Street connection shall provide for primary and secondary emergency response apparatus access and circulation.
3. Remoteness Requirement. Depending on the type of development occurring, where two independent separate emergency response apparatus access points are required, they must be separate of each other by one half the diagonal distance of the development. Where interior street grids directly intersect the City’s public street grid system providing multiple separate and independent emergency response apparatus access points, the provisions for remoteness are considered to be met.
C. Fire Hydrants and Street Width Requirements. A twenty-six foot wide by forty foot long clear unobstructed width shall be provided at fire hydrants for Emergency Response Apparatus Access and operations.
1. Permitted temporary uses. Except for the first three feet around the fire hydrant, combined mail box units placement may be permitted and temporary vehicular traffic accessing the combined mail box units are allowed. Pursuant to the State of Washington Traffic Code, vehicles that are permitted to load and unload may utilize this area.
Section 503.2.2 Authority is amended to read as follows:
Section 503.2.2 Authority.
The Building/Fire Official or Fire District shall have the authority to require an increase in the minimum access widths where the street design is inadequate for fire or rescue operations.
Section 503.2.3 Surface is amended to read as follows:
Section 503.2.3 Surface.
Emergency response apparatus access roads shall be designed and maintained to support the imposed loads of emergency response apparatus and shall be surfaced to provide all-weather driving capabilities. The imposed load design shall be capable of supporting 75,000 pounds.
Section 503.2.4 Turning Radius is amended to read as follows:
Section 503.2.4 Turning Radius.
The required turning radius shall be no less than 25’, except that cul-de-sacs, hammerheads, and wye turnarounds shall provide a minimum of 28’.
Section 503.2.5 Dead Ends is amended to read as follows:
Section 503.2.5 Dead Ends.
Dead end emergency response apparatus access roads in excess of 150 feet in length shall be provided with an approved area for turning emergency response apparatus around. This shall be accomplished through an approved cul-de-sac, hammerhead, or wye.
Section 503.2.6 Bridges and Elevated Surfaces is amended to read as follows:
Section 503.2.6 Bridges and Elevated Surfaces.
Where a bridge or an elevated surface is part of an emergency response apparatus access road, the bridge or elevated surface shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with AASHTO HB-17. Bridges and elevated surfaces shall be designed for a live load sufficient to carry a minimum 75,000 pounds imposed loads. Vehicle load limits shall be posted at both entrances to bridges when required by the Building/Fire Official. Where elevated surfaces designed for emergency response apparatus or vehicle use are adjacent to surfaces which are not designed for such use, approved barriers, approved signs, or both shall be installed and maintained when required by the Building/Fire Official or Fire District.
Section 503.2.7 Grade is amended to read as follows:
Section 503.2.7 Grade.
The grade of the emergency response apparatus access road shall be no greater than ten (10) percent. Grades exceeding twelve percent (12) but no more than fifteen (15) percent shall require all buildings or structures to be provided with an automatic fire sprinkler system.
Section 503.2.8 Angles of Approach and Departures is amended to read as follows:
Section 503.2.8 Angles of Approach and Departures.
The angles of approach and departures for emergency response apparatus access roads shall be within the limits established by the fire code official based on the fire department’s apparatus.
Section 503.2.9 Single or Multiple Points of Access and Security Gates is hereby added to read as follows:
Section 503.2.9 Single or Multiple Points of Access and Security Gates.
Pursuant to Section 503.5 and Section 503.6, gates that obstruct emergency response, which includes fire and law enforcement services, are required to be equipped with an approved means to gain entry. Security gates that obstruct primary entrances shall be equipped with an opticom receiver that will automatically open the gate when activated by fire and police services opticom transmitters located within the emergency response apparatus emergency lighting system. Where one or more security gates are installed on an emergency response apparatus access, additional opticom receivers may be required. Prior to final inspection, the applicant/property owner shall obtain approval from the Fire District that the opticom receiver is operational. Opticom receivers shall be maintained by the property owner, and the Fire District may request operational inspections to ensure compliance. Security gates not required to have opticom receivers may utilize padlocks, provided they are approved by the Fire District prior to being installed. Where water, sewer, or storm utilities are constructed and dedicated to the City, the padlock shall be of the type approved for use by the City Public Works Department.
Section 503.4 Obstruction of fire apparatus access roads is adopted.
Section 504.3 Stairway Access to Roof is amended to read:
Section 504.3 Stairway Access to Roof.
New buildings three or more stories above grade plane, except those with a roof slope greater than four units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33.3 percent slope), shall be provided with a stairway to the roof. Stairway access to the roof shall be in accordance with Section 1011.12. Such stairway shall be marked at street and floor levels with a sign indicating that the stairway continues to the roof. Where roofs are used for roof gardens or for other purposes, stairways shall be provided as required for such occupancy classification.
Section 505.1 Premises Identification is amended to read as follows:
Section 505.1 Premises Identification.
Approved addresses shall be installed on all buildings, and shall be clearly visible and legible from the street or roadway fronting the property. Letters or numbers shall be a minimum of six inches high (6 inches, 78 mm) for residential and a minimum of twelve inches (12 inches) high for commercial. Residential and commercial letters and numbers shall have a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch (12.7 mm) and shall be of a contrasting color to the background itself. On existing buildings where the identification numbers or letters are being replaced or provided, they shall comply with this section.
Section 507.1 Required Water Supply is amended to read as follows:
Section 507.1 Required Water Supply.
An approved water supply capable of supplying the required fire flow for fire protection shall be provided to premises upon which facilities buildings or portions of buildings are hereafter constructed, substantially improved or moved in or within the jurisdiction. Where the required fire flow for development exceeds that available in the City’s water system, or as identified in the City of Snohomish Water Comprehensive Plan, the City of Snohomish Department of Public Works may impose additional requirements in addition to an approved automatic fire sprinkler system. Also refer to Water Supplies within Section 903.3.5.
Section 510 Emergency Radio Systems is hereby amended to read as follows:
Section 510 Emergency Radio Systems.
Section 510.1 General.
The Snohomish County Emergency Radio System (SERS) wireless communications networks are essential to the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Snohomish County and the City of Snohomish by providing communications for law enforcement activities, for emergency medical treatment, for fire suppression, for carrying on the business of government, and for providing communications in time of disasters. It is the intent of this section to ensure the uninterrupted operation of Snohomish County public safety, other emergency-related and county operational or planned wireless communications networks inside new and existing structures in the City of Snohomish. Existing buildings shall be provided with approved radio coverage for emergency responders when deficiencies are discovered.
Exceptions:
1. Where approved by the Building/Fire Official and Fire Chief of Snohomish County Fire District #4, a wired communication system in accordance with Section 907.2.13.2 shall be permitted to be installed or maintained instead of an approved radio coverage system.
2. Where it is determined by the Fire Chief of Snohomish County Fire District #4 that the radio coverage system is not needed.
3. In facilities where emergency responder radio coverage is required and such systems, components or equipment required could have a negative impact on the normal operations of that facility, the Building/Fire Official and Fire Chief of Snohomish County Fire District #4 shall have the authority to accept an automatically activated emergency responder radio coverage system.
Section 510.2 Definitions.
“Adequate radio coverage” is as specified in Section 510.4.
“Building owner” means the person responsible for making final decisions relating to additions or modifications to the building. “Building owner” may include a building owner’s property manager or agent.
“Person” includes individuals, corporations, limited liability companies, associations, and other forms of business organization.
“Substantially alter” means to modify a structure when such modifications could degrade SERS performance, either in the structure, or in the context of the current or planned SERS microwave paths.
“Cellular telephone jammer” means transmitters that are specifically intended to disrupt the reception of cellular telephone signals in the frequency range of 800 MHz to 900 MHz. Such devices may interfere with the proper operation of public safety radio systems operating at 800 MHz.
Section 510.3 Applicability.
Section 510.3.1 General.
No person shall erect, construct, change the use of, or substantially alter, any building or structure or any part thereof, or cause the same to be done which fails to support adequate radio coverage for SERS. Underground structures, whether separate or adjoining other structures, are required to comply with the requirements of this section. Parking structures and stairwells are included in the definition of “building” and stairwell shafts and elevators are included in the definition of “all parts of a building.”
Exceptions: This section shall not apply to buildings less than 5,000 gross square feet or any building constructed of wood frame, as long as none of the aforementioned buildings make use of any metal frame construction, high radio frequency attenuation glazing and window frames, or any below-grade storage or parking areas.
Section 510.3.2
Any person required to maintain adequate radio coverage as specified in Section 510.3.1 above shall provide prior written notification to the SERS System Manager at the time a building permit application is submitted to the City of Snohomish. Written evidence of such prior written notification shall be given to the City of Snohomish Building/Fire Official before a building permit application will be accepted.
Section 510.3.3
Persons constructing new or remodeled facilities which include systems intended for providing in-building service for other wireless services shall make provision for including public safety radio signals into such system. This capability shall at a minimum include provision of bidirectional amplification as required. This requirement shall apply to structures of all sizes whenever such in-building wiring or services are to be provided.
Section 510.3.4
No person shall install in buildings of any type or size devices specifically intended to prevent the reception of signals intended for cellular telephones, pagers, wireless communications devices, or public safety radios.
Section 510.3.5
No person shall install or use building materials specifically marketed or engineered to prevent the ingress of radio signals, except where such materials may be required to shield laboratory or research facilities. Use of any such materials in laboratory or research facilities shall be clearly noted in any construction permit application documents and written notification of the use of such materials shall be provided to SERS at the time of permit application submittal. Signs notifying occupants, emergency services, and law enforcement personnel of such shielding conditions shall be conspicuously posted both at the entrance(s) and on the interior of such areas.
Section 510.4 Performance.
The building permit applicant shall submit a study/report prepared by a qualified person for review by the City prior to building permit approval. The signal levels within the proposed structure must meet or exceed the criteria established below. When measuring the performance of a bidirectional amplifier, signal strength measurements are based on an input signal from the SERS system adequate to obtain a maximum continuous operating output level. Multiple carrier environments shall take into account the presence of non-SERS signals in the design of the amplifier system. Adequate radio coverage shall include all of the following measurement requirements:
1. A minimum signal strength of -95 dBm available in 90% of the area of each floor of the building when transmitted to a belt-worn portable radio equipped with a speaker microphone, from the closest SERS site.
2. A minimum signal strength of -95 dBm received at the closest SERS site when transmitted from a belt-worn portable radio equipped with a speaker microphone from 90% of the area of each floor of the building.
3. The frequency ranges which must be supported shall be 746-824 MHz and 851-869 MHz.
4. The signal strengths shall be present at a 100% reliability factor at the -95 dBm level.
Section 510.5 Amplification Systems.
Section 510.5.1 General.
Buildings and structures that cannot support adequate radio coverage, as identified, shall be equipped with either a radiating cable system or an internal multiple antenna system with FCC type accepted bidirectional amplifiers as needed.
Section 510.5.2
If any part of the installed system or systems contains an electrically powered component, the system shall be capable of operating on an independent battery system for a period of at least twelve (12) hours without external power input. The battery system shall automatically charge in the presence of an external AC power input.
Section 510.5.3
SERS may require that bidirectional amplifiers include filters to reduce adjacent band frequency interference at least 35 dB below the channels placed in operation by SERS. Consultation with the SERS System Manager shall be required to determine if the specific installation requires this additional filtering.
Section 510.5.4
The SERS System Manager shall be notified in writing two weeks in advance of when an amplification system is installed and operational.
Section 510.6 Alternative Methods.
Other acceptable methods of providing in-building coverage may also include construction of low-power filler trunked radio sites that are integrated into the SERS. These alternative approaches may be considered where the use of bidirectional amplifiers proves impractical. Such alternative methods will require the involvement of SERS representatives in the design process. The requirements established by Sections 510.4, 510.5.2, 510.5.3, and 510.5.4 apply to any such alternate method.
Section 510.7. Additional Requirements for New Construction or Substantial Revisions to Structures.
Any person who constructs or develops a commercial or industrial building or structure of any size and type of construction that is likely to attenuate radio frequency signals shall provide two-inch non-conductive raceways in the walls into which radiating or coaxial cable may be laid. Such raceways shall include an easily accessible opening to the roof surface that allows for placement of an exterior antenna and riser access within the building core to each floor within the structure.
Section 510.8 Initial Inspection and Signal Strength Acceptance Test Procedures.
Section 510.8.1
Initial Inspection and Test Procedures. When an engineering study performed for the building contractor or owner has determined that an in-building radio system is required, and upon completion of installation, it will be the building owner’s responsibility to have the radio system tested to ensure that two-way communications coverage on each floor of the building meets the requirements of Sections 510.4 and 510.5. Each floor of the building shall be divided into a grid of approximately 20 equal areas. A maximum of two nonadjacent areas will be allowed to fail the test by not meeting the minimum signal levels established in Section 510.4. Testing of parking garages, stairwells, and non-enclosed areas will be performed as separate tests with statistics gathered separately for signal levels in the primary structure and parking areas. Signal levels shall meet the requirements of Section 510.4 for all areas enclosed by the structure and statistical methods shall not be used to dilute the intent of the coverage requirements established in Section 510.4.
Section 510.8.2
In the event that three of the areas fail the test, in order to be more statistically accurate, the floor may be divided into 40 equal areas. In such an event, a maximum of four non-adjacent areas will be allowed to fail the test. After the 40 area test, if the system continues to fail, the building owner shall have the system altered to meet the coverage requirement established in Section 510.4.
Section 510.8.3
The test shall be conducted using a SERS approved portable radio communicating through the SERS system as specified by the authority having jurisdiction. A spot located approximately in the center of a grid area will be selected for the test, then the radio transmitter will be activated to verify two-way communications to and from the outside of the building through the SERS system. Once the spot has been selected, prospecting for a better spot within the grid area will not be permitted.
Section 510.8.4
The gain values of all systems used to support the signal level requirements of Section 510.4 shall be measured and the test measurement results shall be kept on file with the building owner so that the measurements can be verified each year during the annual tests. In the event that the measurements become lost, the building owner will be required to rerun the acceptance test to re-establish that the facility provides the signal levels established in Section 510.4.
Section 510.9 Annual Equipment Condition Testing.
Section 510.9.1 General.
When an in-building radio system is required, the building owner shall test all active components of the system, including but not limited to amplifiers, power supplies, backup batteries, and related equipment, a minimum of once every 12 months. Amplifiers shall be tested to ensure that the gain is the same as it was upon initial installation and acceptance. These annual tests shall apply to both the bidirectional amplifier method of enhancing signal strength, as well as to any alternative methods that might be employed. The building owner shall notify SERS System Manager in writing two (2) weeks in advance of when annual tests occur, and shall also notify SERS and the Fire District, Fire Marshal by certified mail of the results of the tests. Test records shall be retained on the inspected premises by the building owner.
Section 510.9.2
Backup batteries and power supplies shall be tested under full load for a period of one hour to verify that they will properly operate during an actual power outage. If within the one-hour test period, in the opinion of the testing technician, the battery exhibits symptoms of failure, the test shall be extended for an additional one-hour period until the testing technician confirms the integrity of the battery. Alternative load testing which places a higher short-term demand on the battery system may be required upon verbal request and retested within 10 working days.
Section 510.9.3
All other active components shall be checked to determine that they are operating within the manufacturer’s specifications for the intended purpose.
Section 510.10 Five Year Signal Strength Testing.
Section 510.10.1 General.
In addition to the annual test, the building owner shall perform a radio coverage test a minimum of once every five years to ensure that the radio system continues to meet the signal strength requirements of the original acceptance test. The signal levels established in Section 510.4 and the procedures established in Section 510.8 shall apply to such tests. The results of the five-year test will be provided to SERS System Manager and the Fire District by certified mail. Test reports shall also be retained and be readily available for inspection on the premises by the building owner.
Section 510.10.2
The building owner shall notify SERS System Manager in writing two weeks in advance of the initial, annual, and five year tests.
Section 510.11 Qualifications of Testing Personnel.
Tests shall be conducted, documented, and signed by a person in possession of a current FCC license, or a current technician certification issued by the Associated Public-Safety Communications Officials International (APCO), the Personal Communications Industry Association (PCIA), or a technician employed by SERS.
Section 510.12 Field Testing.
Public safety personnel, after providing reasonable notice to the building owner or his/her representative, shall have the right to enter onto the property to conduct ad-hoc field testing to be certain that the required level of radio coverage is present.
Section 510.13 Additional Frequencies.
The building owner shall modify or expand the emergency responder radio coverage system at his or her expense in the event frequency changes are required by the FCC or additional frequencies are made available by the FCC. Prior approval of a public safety radio coverage system on previous frequencies does not exempt this section.
Section 901.11 Problematic Systems – False Alarms is hereby added to read as follows:
Section 901.11 Problematic Systems – False Alarms.
Where the Fire District, Snohomish Police Department, or City Building/Fire Official determines that a problematic system and/or system out of service results in three (3) or more false alarms within a six (6) month period, the District or Police Department may bill the owner or occupant of the premises the cost for emergency response to problematic systems. Police services contracted through the Snohomish County Sheriff’s Office may bill the cost of the emergency response directly to the owner or occupant of the premises.
Section 903.1 General is amended to read as follows:
Section 903.1 General.
An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed in all occupancies where the total gross floor area is 5,000 square feet or more regardless of fire barriers or fire walls. For the purposes of this section, fire barriers or fire walls shall not be used to define separate buildings or uses. Where the code requirements for automatic sprinkler system are more restrictive than this section, the more restrictive requirement shall govern. Additional requirements are also located in SMC 19.04.070, Section 508.1.1.
Sections 903.2.1.1 through 903.2.10.1 are amended to read as follows:
Section 903.2.1.1 Group A-1.
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group A-1 occupancies and intervening floors of the building where one of the following conditions exists:
1. The fire area or total gross floor area is 5,000 square feet or more pursuant to Section 903.1.
2. The fire area has an occupant load is 300 or more.
3. The fire area or occupancy is located on a floor other than a level of exit discharge serving such occupancies.
4. The fire area or occupancy contains a multi-theater complex.
Section 903.2.1.2 Group A-2.
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group A-2 occupancies and intervening floors of the building where one of the following conditions exists:
1. The fire area or total gross floor area is 5,000 square feet or more pursuant to Section 903.1.
2. The fire area has an occupant load is 100 or more.
3. The fire area or occupancy is located on a floor other than a level of exit discharge serving such occupancies.
Section 903.2.1.3 Group A-3.
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group A-3 occupancies and intervening floors of the building where one of the following conditions exists:
1. The fire area or total gross floor area is 5,000 square feet or more pursuant to Section 903.1.
2. The fire area has an occupant load is 300 or more.
3. The fire area or occupancy is located on a floor other than a level of exit discharge serving such occupancies.
Section 903.2.1.4 Group A-4.
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group A-4 occupancies and intervening floors of the building where one of the following conditions exists:
1. The fire area or total gross floor area is 5,000 square feet or more pursuant to Section 903.1.
2. The fire area has an occupant load is 300 or more.
3. The fire area or occupancy is located on a floor other than a level of exit discharge serving such occupancies.
Section 903.2.1.5 Group A-5.
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group A-5 occupancies in concession stands, retail areas, press boxes, and other accessory use areas in excess of 1,000 square feet regardless of fire barriers or fire walls.
Section 903.2.1.6 Assembly occupancies on roofs.
Where any occupied roof has an assembly occupancy with an occupant load exceeding 100 for Group A-3 and 300 for other Group A occupancies, all floors between the occupied roof and the level of exit discharge shall be equipped with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2.
Section 903.2.1.7 Multiple fire areas.
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided where multiple fire areas of Group A-1, A-2, A-3 or A-4 occupancies share exit or exit access components and the combined occupant load of those fire area is 300 or more.
Section 903.2.1.8 Nightclubs.
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout Group A-2 Nightclubs as defined in this code.
Section 903.2.2 Group B and Ambulatory Care Facilities.
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group B occupancies and Ambulatory Care Facilities where one of the following conditions exists:
1. The total gross floor area of the Group Occupancy as defined in Section 304 except for Ambulatory Care Facilities is 5,000 square feet or more pursuant to Section 903.1.
2. Ambulatory Care Facilities shall be provided with an automatic sprinkler system regardless of floor area or location.
3. Four or more care recipients are incapable of self-preservation, whether rendered incapable by staff or staff has accepted responsibility for care recipients already incapable.
4. One or more care recipients that are incapable of self-preservation are located at other than the level of exit discharge serving such a facility.
Section 903.2.3 Group E.
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided in all Group E occupancies. This requirement includes:
1. Throughout existing Group E occupancies where substantial improvements or substantial damage has or is occurring.
2. Portable classrooms where a cluster of classrooms exceeds 5,000 square feet, and clusters of portable school classrooms shall be separated as required in Chapter 5 of the Building Code.
3. Portable classrooms regardless of floor area shall be provided with a UL listed monitored fire alarm system, and shall be interconnected to the fire alarm system of permanent buildings such that upon activation will cause the entire fire alarm system to initiate.
4. A minimum water supply and fire flow meeting the requirements of International Fire Code Appendix B shall be required.
Exceptions: Portable school classrooms, provided: 1) The aggregate area of clusters of portable classrooms does not exceed 5,000 square feet. 2) Cluster of portable classrooms shall be separated as required in Chapter 5. 3) Each portable classroom is equipped with a monitored, automatic fire alarm system interconnected to the main fire alarm control panel.
Section 903.2.4 Group F.
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all Group F occupancies regardless of floor area, fire barriers, or fire walls, including the manufacturing or storage of upholstered furniture and mattresses.
Section 903.2.4.1 Woodworking Operations.
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all occupancies that contain woodworking operations in excess of 2,500 square feet in area which generate finely divided combustible waste or use finely divided combustible materials.
Exceptions:
1. Where the scope of woodworking operations presents a fire hazard, an automatic sprinkler system may be required regardless of floor area.
2. Where existing woodworking operations are found to present a fire hazard and the fire hazard cannot be reduced or eliminated based on the scope of the operation, an automatic sprinkler system may be required regardless of floor area.
3. Where finely divided combustible waste or finely divided combustible materials are generated and the woodworking operation presents a fire hazard, an automatic sprinkler system may be required regardless of floor area.
Section 903.2.5 Group H. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all Group H occupancies regardless of floor area, fire barriers, or fire walls. Where buildings or structures contain an H occupancy, they shall also be provided with an automatic sprinkler system. The design of the sprinkler system shall not be less than that required by this code for the occupancy hazard classifications in accordance with Table 903.2.5.2. Where the design area of the sprinkler system consists of a corridor protected by one row of sprinklers, the maximum number of sprinklers required to be calculated is 13.
+----------------------------------+---------------------------------+
|             Location             | Occupancy Hazard Classification |
+----------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Fabrication Areas                | Ordinary Hazard Group 2         |
+----------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Service Corridors                | Ordinary Hazard Group 2         |
+----------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Storage rooms without dispensing | Ordinary Hazard Group 2         |
+----------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Storage rooms with dispensing    | Extra Hazard Group 2            |
+----------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Corridors                        | Ordinary Hazard Group 2         |
+----------------------------------+---------------------------------+
Section 903.2.5.3 Pyroxylin Plastics.
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided in buildings, or portions thereof, where cellulose nitrate film or pyroxylin plastics are manufactured, stored or handled in quantities exceeding 100 pounds (45 kg).
Section 903.2.6 Group I.
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings containing Group I occupancies regardless of floor area, fire barriers, or fire walls, including Group I-4 daycares.
Section 903.2.7 Group M.
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings containing Group M occupancies regardless of floor area, fire barriers, or fire walls, including Group M occupancies used for the display and sale of upholstered furniture.
Section 903.2.7.1 High Piled Storage.
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided in accordance with the International Fire Code where storage of merchandise is in high piled or rack storage arrays. Where high piled storage is provided in other occupancies, regardless of floor area, an automatic sprinkler system shall be required.
Section 903.2.8 Group R.
An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3 shall be provided throughout all buildings with a Group R occupancy regardless of floor area, fire barriers, or fire walls.
Section 903.2.8.1 Group R-3.
An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.3 may be permitted in Group R-3 occupancies.
Section 903.2.8.2 Group R-4 Condition 1.
An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed in accordance with Section 903.3.
Section 903.2.8.3 Group R-4 Condition 2.
An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed in accordance with Section 903.3. Attics shall be protected in accordance with Section 903.2.8.3.1 or 903.2.8.3.2.
Section 903.2.8.3.1
Attics used for living purposes, storage or fuel-fired equipment. Attics used for living purposes, storage, or fuel-fired equipment shall be protected throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.
Section 903.2.8.3.2
Attics not used for living purposes, storage or fuel-fired equipment. Attics not used for living purposes, storage or fuel-fired equipment shall be protected in accordance with one of the following:
1. Attics protected throughout by a heat detector system arranged to activate the building fire alarm system in accordance with Section 907.2.10.
2. Attics constructed of noncombustible materials.
3. Attics constructed of fire-retardant-treated wood framing complying with Section 2303.2.
4. The automatic sprinkler system shall be extended to provide protection throughout the attic.
Section 903.2.8.4 Care facilities.
An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3 shall be permitted in care facilities with five or fewer individuals in a single-family dwelling.
Section 903.2.9 Group S-1.
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings containing Group S-1 occupancy where one of the following exists:
1. The fire area or total gross floor area is 5,000 square feet or more pursuant to Section 903.1.
2. A Group S-1 fire area occupancy is used for the storage of upholstered furniture or mattresses that exceeds 2,500 square feet.
3. A Group S-1 is located more than three stories above grade plane.
Section 903.2.9.1 Repair Garages.
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings used as repair garages where:
1. The fire area or total gross floor area is 5,000 square feet or more pursuant to Section 903.1.
2. Buildings with a repair garage servicing vehicles parked in the basement.
3. Used for the repair or storage of vehicles including commercial trucks and buses.
4. A Group S-1 fire area used for the repair of commercial motor vehicles where the fire area is 5,000 square feet or more.
Section 903.2.9.2 Bulk Storage of Tires.
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings where bulk storage of tires occurs regardless of gross floor area, fire barriers or fire walls. The automatic sprinkler system shall be designed for the highest hazard.
Section 903.2.10 Group S-2.
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings classified as enclosed parking garages in accordance with Section 406.4 or where located beneath other groups.
Exception: Enclosed parking garages located beneath R-3 occupancy as applicable in section 101.2.
Section 903.2.10.1 Commercial Parking Garages.
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings used as commercial parking, including storage of commercial trucks and buses pursuant to Section 903.1.
Section 903.2.11.3 Buildings of Three Stories or 55 feet in Height or More is amended to read:
Section 903.2.11.3 Buildings of three stories or 35 feet in height or more.
An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout buildings that have one or more stories with an occupant load of thirty (30) or more located 35 feet or 35 feet or more above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access measured to the finished floor. For standpipe requirements, reference Chapter 905.
Exceptions:
1. Open parking structures.
2. Occupancies in Group F-2 unless regulated elsewhere.
Section 903.3.1.3 NFPA 13D Sprinkler Systems is amended to read:
Section 903.3.1.3 NFPA 13D Sprinkler Systems.
Where allowed, automatic sprinkler systems in one and two family dwellings may comply with NFPA 13D, provided the fire sprinkler system has a separate tap to the water main, and is not part of the domestic water supply or plumbing to or within the dwelling.
Sections 903.3.5 Water Supplies is amended to read as follows:
Section 903.3.5 Water Supplies.
Water supplies for automatic sprinkler systems shall comply with this section:
1. The automatic sprinkler system water supply shall have a separate tap to the City water main, and shall not be used in conjunction with, or part of, or as a domestic water service. The potable water supply shall be protected against backflow in accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code and Snohomish Municipal Code 15.10.
2. Where a dedicated fire main is provided, domestic water service or other potable water use connections shall be prohibited.
3. Where required fire flow demand exceeds the available water supply provided by the water purveyor, the applicant may be required to upgrade, extend, or construct the purveyors water mains to provide fire flow including the installation of additional hydrants or looping of water mains, except where regulated elsewhere. The water supply test used for design of fire protection systems shall be adjusted to account for seasonal and daily pressure fluctuations based on information from the water supply authority and as approved by the building/fire official. Where automatic sprinkler systems are installed, the required fire flow demand may be reduced by fifty percent (50%) provided the available water supply can still provide the reduced fire flow demand.
4. Where the automatic sprinkler system water supply shut off valves are installed or located below grade, a valve cover lid shall be provided and shall be accessible at all times. The valve lid shall be permanently marked with letters that read “Fire Sprinkler,” and be permanently marked with red paint.
Section 903.3.5.1 Domestic Services is amended to read:
Section 903.3.5.1 Domestic Services.
Domestic water services shall not be used for the water supply for the automatic sprinkler system.
Section 903.3.5.2 Residential Combination Services is amended to read:
Section 903.3.5.2 Residential Combination Services.
Where allowed, residential combination services that provide both residential domestic services and automatic sprinkler system supply shall be plumbed so that termination, shut-off, maintenance, or removal of the residential domestic water service shall not impair or prevent operation of the automatic sprinkler system. In any case, water supply for the automatic sprinkler system shall not supply or be capable of supplying residential domestic services, especially where the residential domestic water service has been interrupted by termination, shut-off, maintenance, or removal. Combination services shall be regulated as a required automatic sprinkler system and subject to the penalty section, to and including termination of occupancy until such time the system is brought into compliance.
Section 903.3.7 Fire Department Connections (FDC) is amended to read as follows:
Section 903.3.7 Fire Department Connections (FDC).
Fire department connections shall be a minimum distance of 50 feet from the building it serves. Where lot size may not allow the minimum distance to be met, an alternative location may be considered. The location of the FDC shall be approved by both the Building/Fire Official and Fire District. Fire hose thread and fittings used in connection with automatic sprinkler systems shall be as prescribed by the Fire District.
Section 903.3.7.1 Locking Fire Department Connection (FDC) Caps.
Locking FDC caps are required on all fire department connections. The locking cap shall be of the type approved by Fire District.
Section 903.3.7.2 Existing Fire Department Connections (FDC) Caps.
Where existing fire department connections are found to be unsecured, locking FDC caps shall be installed. Prior to installation of the locking FDC caps, the property owner shall have the FDC line flushed to ensure any or all obstructions are removed. The work shall be performed by a person, firm or corporation, licensed by the State of Washington to perform work on fire sprinkler systems. A written certification report indicating the FDC line is clear and operational shall be forwarded to the City.
Section 907.1 Automatic Fire Detection System Requirements is amended to read as follows:
Section 907.1 General Automatic Fire Detection System Requirements.
All occupancies hereinafter constructed, substantially damaged, or improved, which exceed 3,000 square feet of gross floor area, and single family residences with bed and breakfast rooms regardless of floor area shall be provided with a UL listed, monitored, and approved automatic fire detection system, provided that occupancies listed under Section 907 require automatic fire detection systems/fire alarm systems more restrictive than 3,000 square feet shall govern those occupancies. For the purposes of this subsection, the total gross floor area shall be based on the completed, attached building regardless of any fire barriers or fire walls.
Where required under Section 907 to install manual devices, those sections shall mean both automatic and manual devices for the purposes of this section.
Section 912.2 Location – Fire Department Connections is amended by adding the following paragraph:
Fire department connections where possible are to be located within 50’ of a hydrant and the building served. The Fire District shall approve the location of the fire department connection. Fire department connections are generally prohibited from being installed on a building except that existing buildings may not meet this requirement and a feasible location will be determined.
Under Appendix D, the following subsections of Section D104 Commercial and Industrial Developments are amended to read as follows:
D104.1 Buildings Exceeding Three Stories or 30 Feet in Height.
Buildings or facilities exceeding 30 feet or three stories in height shall have at least two means of apparatus access for each structure. Overhead utility or power lines shall not be located within the emergency response apparatus access road.
D104.2 Buildings Exceeding 62,000 Square Feet.
Buildings or facilities having a gross building area of more than 62,000 square feet shall have two separate and approved apparatus access roads.
D104.3 Remoteness.
Where two access roads are required, they shall be placed a distance apart equal to not less than one half of the length of the maximum overall diagonal dimension of the property or area to be served, measured in a straight line between accesses.
Exceptions:
1. Where street connectivity is provided in accordance with Section 503.2.1.1, Section B3.
2. Where buildings are provided with automatic fire sprinkler systems designed for the highest hazard, the distance between access roads may be increased provided the access roads are designed for the highest peak traffic demands and allow emergency response apparatus unimpeded access to the development.
Under Appendix D, Section D105 Aerial Fire Apparatus Access Roads is amended to read as follows:
Section D105 Aerial Fire Apparatus Access Roads, Required.
D105.1 Where Required.
Where the vertical distance between the grade plane and the highest roof surface exceeds 30 feet, approved aerial fire apparatus access roads shall be provided with a minimum 26 foot wide unobstructed width exclusive of shoulders, in the immediate vicinity of the building or portion thereof. For purposes of this section, the highest roof surface shall be determined by measurement to the eave of a pitched roof, the intersection of the roof to the exterior wall, or the top of parapet walls, whichever is greater. Overhead utility and power lines shall not be located within the aerial fire apparatus access roadway.
D105.2 Proximity to Building.
At least one of the required access routes shall be located within a minimum of 15 feet and a maximum of 30 feet from the building, and shall be positioned parallel to one entire side of the building. The side of the building on which the aerial fire apparatus access road is positioned shall be approved by the Fire District.
Under Appendix D, the following subsections of Section D106 Multiple-Family Residential Developments are amended to read as follows:
D106.1 Projects Having More than 30 Dwelling Units.
Multiple-family residential projects having more than 30 dwelling units shall have two separate access roads. Entrance roads must provide sufficient width to accommodate maximum peak traffic demands and allow emergency response apparatus unimpeded access to the development. Overhead utility or power lines shall not be located within the emergency response apparatus access roadway.
D106.1.1. Automatic fire sprinkler systems.
Pursuant to SMC 19.04.040 International Building Code Section [F] 903.2.8 Group R, all multiple-family residential dwelling units shall be equipped with automatic fire sprinkler systems regardless of floor area.
D106.1.2. Street Connectivity.
Street connectivity shall be in accordance with Section 503.2.1.1, Section B.
D106.1.3. Access Road Remoteness.
A second access road shall be a remote distance apart equal to or not less than one half of the maximum overall diagonal dimension of the property served, measured in a straight line between accesses.
Exceptions:
1. Where street connectivity is provided in accordance with Section 503.2.1.1, Section B3.
2. Where buildings are provided with automatic fire sprinkler systems designed for the highest hazard, the distance between access roads may be increased provided the access roads are designed for the highest peak traffic demands and allow emergency response apparatus unimpeded access to the development.
D106.1.4. Street Designation – Local Access Street Design.
The provisions of Section 503.2.1.1 shall apply to local access street designations.
Under Appendix D, the following subsections of Section D107 One- or Two-Family Dwelling Residential Developments are amended to read as follows:
D107.1 One or Two Family Dwelling Residential Developments.
Developments of one or two family dwellings where the number of dwelling units exceeds 30 shall have two separate apparatus access roads. Entrance roads must provide sufficient width to accommodate maximum peak traffic demands, and allow emergency response apparatus unimpeded access to the development. Overhead utility or power lines shall not be located within the emergency response apparatus access roadway.
D107.1.2. Street Connectivity.
Street connectivity shall be in accordance with Section 503.2.1.1, Section B.
D107.1.3 Access Road Remoteness.
A second access road shall be a remote distance apart equal to or not less than one half of the maximum overall diagonal dimension of the property served, measured in a straight line between accesses.
Exceptions:
1. Where street connectivity is provided in accordance with Section 503.2.1.1, Section B3.
2. Where buildings are provided with automatic fire sprinkler systems designed for the highest hazard, the distance between access roads may be increased provided the access roads are designed for the highest peak traffic demands and allow emergency response apparatus unimpeded access to the development.
D107.1.4. Street Designation – Local Access Street Design.
The provisions of Section 503.2.1.1 shall apply to local access street designations.
(Ord. 2319, 2016)

19.04.080 International Mechanical Code and Appendices Adopted by Reference with Amendments. WAC Chapter 51-52.
The 2015 Edition of the International Mechanical Code, as published by the International Code Council, is adopted. Included in this adoption is Appendix Chapter A, the 2015 Edition of the International Fuel Gas Code and the 2014 Edition of the Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code (NFPA 58) adopted under WAC Chapter 51-52. Adoption includes fees as established by City Council resolution.
Section [A] 106.2 Permits Not Required is deleted and replaced with:
Section [A] 106.2 Permits Not Required.
Exemption from the permit requirements of this code under SMC 19.04.036 shall not be deemed to grant authorization for work to be done in violation of the provisions of this code or other laws or ordinances of the jurisdiction.
Section [A] 106.6.3 Fee Refund is deleted and replaced with:
Section [A] 106.6.3 Fee Refund.
Fee refunds shall be in accordance with SMC 19.04.235.
Section 109 Means of Appeal is deleted and replaced with:
Section 109.1 Means of Appeal.
All appeals shall be in accordance with SMC 19.04.035, SMC 19.04.300 and SMC 19.04.310.
(Ord. 2319, 2016)

19.04.090 International Property Maintenance Code and Appendix Adopted by Reference.
The City adopts by reference the 2015 International Property Maintenance Code, including Appendix Chapter A, as published by the International Code Council (ICC). (Ord. 2319, 2016)

19.04.140 International Energy Conservation Code of the State of Washington with Appendices Adopted by Reference with Amendments.
The 2015 Edition of the International Energy Conservation Code of the State of Washington pursuant to WAC Chapters 51-11C and 51-11R, including Appendix C of the Residential Provisions. (Ord. 2319, 2016)

19.04.170 Permit to Construct.
For the purposes of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, no person, firm, or corporation shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, remove, repair, move, improve, and convert or demolish any building or structure in the City, or cause the same to be done without obtaining a separate building permit for each such building or structure from the Building/Fire Official. (Ord. 2319, 2016)

19.04.180 Validity of Permit – No Authority to Violate Codes or Ordinances.
The issuance or granting of a permit shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this code or of any other ordinance of the jurisdiction. Permits presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code or other ordinances of the City of Snohomish shall not be valid. The issuance of a permit based on construction documents and other data shall not prevent the building/fire official from requiring the correction of errors in the construction documents or other data. The building/fire official is also authorized to prevent occupancy or use of a structure where in violation of this code or of any other ordinances of the City of Snohomish. (Ord. 2319, 2016)

19.04.181 Permit Payment of Fees, Work Commencement to Be Considered Valid.
To be considered valid, every permit shall have all applicable fees paid at the time of issuance and work authorized by the permit shall commence within 180 days of issuance, and a minimum of one inspection shall be requested and approved by the City during each 180-day period to show continued progress. The work authorized by the permit shall continue to progress to completion without any work suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days. Permits for which no inspections have been requested and approved by the City within 180-day period shall be considered invalid, null, and void. (Ord. 2319, 2016)

19.04.182 Permit Expiration and New Permit Application Requirements.
Provided the issued permit remains valid in accordance with SMC 19.04.181, all permits shall expire by limitation two years or 24 months from the date of issuance, except where a renewal has been obtained in accordance with SMC 19.04.183. Where a valid permit has been allowed to expire, a new permit shall be obtained.
Where a new permit application is required, the permit shall include the payment of all applicable fees at 100 percent of the fee schedule as approved by City Council resolution and submission of construction plans and other supporting documentation that reflects City ordinances regulating construction requirements, land use, design requirements, and/or other applicable laws and regulations in effect at the time of submission of the new completed permit application.
Where the work previously authorized has not been completed at the time the permit expires by limitation, the plans shall be revised to reflect the most recent adoption of regulations for those portions of work not yet completed. (Ord. 2319, 2016)

19.04.183 Permit Renewal Requirements.
A valid permit that has not expired may be renewed one time for a period not to exceed 12 months, provided a permit renewal application is submitted and received by the Building/Fire Official within 30 days prior to the permit expiration.
A renewal fee shall be assessed that is one-half of the amount as required for a new permit for such work, provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications.
The applicant shall demonstrate good and justifiable cause why the renewal is appropriate. The Building/Fire Official or their designee will approve or deny the application, and calculate the renewal fees. Upon approval and payment of required fees, the permit will remain valid for an additional 12 months, subject to the provisions of SMC 19.04.181.
Permits which have already expired will not be considered for permit renewal. (Ord. 2319, 2016)

19.04.190 Permit Issuance Prerequisite – Private Sewage Disposal Permit.
In cases of new construction where City services are not yet available, no building permit shall be issued in the City without the applicant having secured a private sewage disposal permit from the Snohomish Health District, Wastewater Section. As a condition of the building permit approval, at the time City services become available, the private sewage disposal system shall be discontinued and connection made to City services including payment of applicable connection fees in accordance with Chapter 15.04 SMC. Failure to comply with this condition may result in revocation of certificate of occupancy by the City, and/or other appropriate legal action by the City to obtain compliance. (Ord. 2319, 2016)

19.04.200 Permit Fees – Generally.
The fee for each permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be as set forth in the fees as established by City Council resolution. The determination of value or valuation of construction shall be made by the Building/Fire Official or their designee. The valuation to be used in computing the permit and plan checking fee shall be the total value of all construction work, painting, roofing, electrical, plumbing, heating, air conditioning, elevators, fire suppression/detection systems, and any other permanent equipment. (Ord. 2319, 2016)

19.04.210 Fees.
Fees for work performed under the adopted codes, including applicable plan review fees, shall be as established by City Council resolution. (Ord. 2319, 2016)

19.04.220 Permit Fees – Waived.
The codes as adopted by this chapter do not contain provisions for waiving building permit fees, unless the scope of work is minor in nature and the Building/Fire Official determines that a permit is not required. (Ord. 2319, 2016)

19.04.230 Permit Fees – Basics.
The codes as adopted by this chapter do not contain provisions for waiving fees for structures repetitively built within City limits. Each application for a construction permit will be required to pay full fees for each structure. (Ord. 2319, 2016)

19.04.235 Permit Fees – Refunds.
It shall be the policy of the Department of Building Safety, as authorized by City Council, to authorize refunds of permit fees in accordance with the requirements listed in this Section. Where not specifically provided for, requests for refunds shall be considered on a case-by-case basis.
A. Refunds – Plan Review. 
    1. The applicant shall file a written request for a refund that demonstrates justifiable cause within five working days of the date the application plan review fees were paid. The Building/Fire Official shall investigate the request, and where the plan review process has not begun, the Building/Fire Official is authorized to refund up to 80 percent of the plan review fee paid.
    2. Where the plan review process has begun, the amount of the refund may be prorated; provided, that if the review has been completed, no refund shall be authorized.
    3. In the event that the plan review fee exceeds the amount paid at the time of submittal, and before any written request for refund is received, the applicant shall pay the additional fees and no refund shall be authorized.
    4. Where the plan review is completed and the plan review period expires by limitation, no refund shall be authorized.
    5. In all cases, the amount of the refund shall be determined by the Building/Fire Official. The time period to process refund payments is dependent upon the City Treasurer processing time. Once a refund is given, the entire permit application shall be considered null and void.
B. Refunds – Valid Permits. 
    1. Where a permit has been approved for issuance, and all required fees paid, the applicant shall file a written request for a refund that demonstrates justifiable cause within five working days of the date the fees paid. The Building/Fire Official shall investigate the request, and where no work has commenced and no City inspections have been requested or conducted, the Building/Fire Official is authorized to refund up to 80 percent of the building permit fees paid at the time of issuance, excluding applicable plan review fees.
    2. Where inspections have been requested and conducted by the City, the amount of the refund may be prorated except where work authorized under the permit has been completed and a final inspection conducted.
    3. Where the permit has expired by limitation and is considered null and void, no refund shall be authorized.
    4. In all cases, the amount of the refund shall be determined by the Building/Fire Official. The time period to process refund payments is dependent upon the City Treasurer processing times. Once a refund is given, the entire permit application shall be considered null and void.
C. Refunds – Fee(s) Erroneously Paid or Collected. Where erroneous fees have been paid or collected, after investigating the basis for which the fees were paid or collected, the Building/Fire Official is authorized to refund 100 percent of the erroneous fee paid or collected. (Ord. 2319, 2016)

19.04.240 Permit Fees – Contributed.
The Snohomish City Council may contribute the fees associated with this chapter for municipal purpose projects of other governmental units and nonprofit corporations by resolution and written agreement with the applicant entity. Contained within the body of the resolution and the written agreement shall be provisions that identify the specific types of fees or charges being contributed, provide an estimate for the dollar value of the contribution, and address the contribution of the public service for a defined period of time. The City’s contribution of such fees is solely a contribution of financial resources. The City shall not exempt, modify, or create a special relationship or class of customer in the application of the laws and regulations of the City, State, or the United States. (Ord. 2319, 2016)

19.04.300 Approval of Application and Appeals.
The building permit application shall be reviewed by City Department Heads and the Fire District as applicable. The application shall be approved or denied by the Building/Fire Official. If the application is denied, the permit applicant may appeal to the City Land Use Hearing Examiner. (Ord. 2319, 2016)

19.04.310 Appeals.
Appeals of the Building/Fire Official shall be in accordance with Chapter 14.20 SMC, Permit Classifications and Development Review Process. (Ord. 2319, 2016)

19.04.400 Code Adoption – Purpose.
The purpose of the codes is to establish minimum requirements to safeguard the public health, safety, and general welfare through structural strength, means of egress facilities, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, energy conservation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment, and to provide safety to firefighters and emergency responders during emergency operations. The codes set out in this chapter are hereby adopted as the code of the City of Snohomish for regulating the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area, and maintenance of all buildings or structures in the City of Snohomish; providing for issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor, and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions, and terms of such International and Uniform Codes, 2015 Editions, as published by the International Code Council; and the secondary publications referenced above, all of which are on file in the office of the Building/Fire Official as hereby referred to, are adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter. (Ord. 2319, 2016)

19.04.500 Disclaimer of Liability.
A. The City of Snohomish is not responsible for the accuracy of plans (preliminary or final) submitted for approval to the building department and does not guarantee that plan reviews and/or inspections will detect any hazard, design defect, or code violations.
B. The applicant or his agent shall be solely responsible for verification of all property lines and setbacks in all cases involving new construction, remodel, or addition which would change the footprint of an existing structure, for construction of new fences or replacement of existing fences, and all other circumstances which may impact setback requirements and/or property lines between one or more legal lots or parcels. The Building/Fire Official may require verification of property lines and setbacks prior to permit issuance by having the property owner or his agent stake the corners of his property. Where required, the Building/Fire Official may require the applicant or his agent to provide a survey by a professional land surveyor licensed by the state of Washington. (Ord. 2319, 2016)

19.04.510 Validity.
That if any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter is, for any reason, held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of the remaining portions of this chapter. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed the ordinance codified in this chapter, and each section, subsection, clause, or phrase hereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsection, sentences, clauses, and phrases be declared unconstitutional.
Whenever any conflict arises between the referenced codes, the Washington State Building Codes shall take precedence. (Ord. 2319, 2016)

19.04.520 Violation – Penalty – Effective.
A. It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect, construct, alter, repair, move, remove, improve, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy, or maintain any building, structure, or land in the City, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this title.
B. Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this title is committed, continued, or permitted, and upon conviction of any such violation such violation shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
C. The rules, regulations, provisions, requirements, orders, and matters established and adopted hereby shall be in full force and effect in accordance with the State Building Code Council adoption, and effective date of the referenced Washington State Building Codes, on July 1, 2016, and will continue to remain in full force and effect from and after the date of its final passage and adoption by the City Council. (Ord. 2319, 2016)

Title 20 HOUSE TRAILERS
Chapter 20.04 Trailer Camps
    20.04.010    Definitions
    20.04.020    Building Inspector's Duty to Enforce – Right of Entry
    20.04.030    Parking Trailer Other than in Camp
    20.04.040    Permitted Parking
    20.04.050    License to Operate Camp Required
    20.04.060    License – Application – Contents – Inspection Fee
    20.04.070    License – Fee
    20.04.080    Inspection – Action for Approval or Disapproval
    20.04.090    Notification of Violation – License Suspension, Revocation
    20.04.100    License – Transferability
    20.04.110    License – Posting
    20.04.120    Sanitary Facilities Required
    20.04.130    Compliance with City Codes Required
    20.04.140    Sewer Connections Required – Sanitary Facilities
    20.04.150    Waste Deposit
    20.04.160    Sewer Connections Required – Individual Trailers
    20.04.170    Dimensions of Trailer Spaces
    20.04.180    Removal of Wheels
    20.04.190    Lighting Camp
    20.04.200    Grounding Trailers
    20.04.210    Fire Fighting Equipment
    20.04.220    Site Standards
    20.04.230    Planting Green Belt
    20.04.240    Animals
    20.04.250    Manager Required – Register Required
    20.04.270    Penalty for Violations

Chapter 20.04 TRAILER CAMPS

Sections:
20.04.010    Definitions
20.04.020    Building Inspector's Duty to Enforce – Right of Entry
20.04.030    Parking Trailer Other than in Camp
20.04.040    Permitted Parking
20.04.050    License to Operate Camp Required
20.04.060    License – Application – Contents – Inspection Fee
20.04.070    License – Fee
20.04.080    Inspection – Action for Approval or Disapproval
20.04.090    Notification of Violation – License Suspension, Revocation
20.04.100    License – Transferability
20.04.110    License – Posting
20.04.120    Sanitary Facilities Required
20.04.130    Compliance with City Codes Required
20.04.140    Sewer Connections Required – Sanitary Facilities
20.04.150    Waste Deposit
20.04.160    Sewer Connections Required – Individual Trailers
20.04.170    Dimensions of Trailer Spaces
20.04.180    Removal of Wheels
20.04.190    Lighting Camp
20.04.200    Grounding Trailers
20.04.210    Fire Fighting Equipment
20.04.220    Site Standards
20.04.230    Planting Green Belt
20.04.240    Animals
20.04.250    Manager Required – Register Required
20.04.270    Penalty for Violations

20.04.010 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter the following terms are defined as follows:
“Person” means and includes both singular and plural and individuals, firms, corporations, co partnerships, associations, clubs, societies, and other organizations.
“Camper” or “camp trailer” is a temporary living quarters used for outdoor recreation purposes only.
“Trailer” is any camp car, house car, mobile home, or trailer used for living and/or sleeping purposes equipped with wheels or similar devices used for the purpose of transporting the unit from place to place, whether by motive power or otherwise. (Ord. 922, 1962; Ord. 1089, 1969)

20.04.020 Building Inspector's Duty to Enforce – Right of Entry.
It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and for the purpose of securing enforcement thereof, the Building Inspector or his duly authorized representative shall have the right, and they are hereby empowered to enter upon the premises of any campgrounds, trailer house, mobile home, or house car now or hereafter operated within the City for the purposes of inspection and of carrying out the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 922, 1962)

20.04.030 Parking Trailer Other than in Camp.
It is unlawful for any person to camp, place, stand, park, or locate any occupied trailer (or mobile home) within the City except within a trailer camp; a camper or camp trailer which is not used for living and/or sleeping quarters may be parked on private property within the building setback limits, provided in Title 21. (Ord. 922, 1962; Ord. 966, 1965; Ord. 1089, 1969)

20.04.040 Permitted Parking.
Any trailer, boat trailer, camper, trailer, and/or mobile home, while attached or unattached to the vehicle providing motive power thereof or, may be parked on any street, alley, or highway within the City for a period of twenty-four hours only, subject to any other regulations or restrictions for that street, alley, or highway and may not be used for living and/or sleeping accommodations. (Ord. 922, 1962; Ord. 1089, 1969)

20.04.050 License to Operate Camp Required.
It is unlawful for any person to operate, maintain, and/or offer for public use within the City a trailer camp without first applying for and receiving from the City a license to do so to be issued on authority of the City Council as herein provided. (Ord. 922, 1962)

20.04.060 License – Application – Contents – Inspection Fee.
Every application for a license to operate a trailer camp in the City shall be in writing upon a form provided by the City for that purpose and shall state the name and mailing address of the applicant, a description of the property whereon and wherein it is proposed to conduct such a trailer camp, the name and address of the person who will be manager of and responsible for same, and all other information as required by the application form, which application shall be filed with the City Clerk not less than ten days before the trailer campground is to be made ready for use, and shall be accompanied by an inspection fee set by resolution of the City Council, for which the City Treasurer shall issue a receipt to the applicant. (Ord. 922, 1962; Ord. 2299, 2016)

20.04.070 License – Fee.
The fee for a trailer camp license shall be set by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 922, 1962; Ord. 2299, 2016)

20.04.080 Inspection – Action for Approval or Disapproval.
Upon receipt by the City of such application accompanied by such inspection fee, it shall be the duty of the Building Inspector or his authorized representative to investigate the premises and determine whether said proposed camp or the site selected therefor conforms with the requirements of this chapter, and also whether same comply with the rules and regulations of the Snohomish Health District and laws of the State of Washington applicable thereto and in force at the time, and no license shall be issued unless such trailer camp or the site selected therefor fully complies with all such requirements. Provided, however, any applicant may within ten days following rejection of such application apply to the City Council for a hearing, whereupon a time for hearing shall be set not later than the next regular Council meeting thereafter, at which time a full and complete hearing shall be had before the City Council, which shall either confirm, modify or disapprove the action of the Building Inspector.
In the event the Building Inspector approves the issuance of a license to such applicant, he shall submit the application with his approval in writing to the City Council at its next regular meeting at which time the City Council shall confirm, modify or disapprove the action of the Building Inspector. (Ord. 922, 1962)

20.04.090 Notification of Violation – License Suspension, Revocation.
Whenever inspection by the Building Inspector of any trailer camp indicates that unsanitary conditions exist or that any other provision of this chapter or applicable rules and regulations of the Snohomish Health District or laws of the State of Washington applicable thereto and in force at the time are being violated, the Building Inspector shall notify the manager thereof in writing of such fact, setting forth the alleged violation, and shall further direct that all such violations be remedied forthwith commencing within twenty-four hours from and after the receipt of such notice and to continue thereafter diligently until such violations have been eliminated.
If after the giving of such notice the alleged violations have not been remedied, it shall be the duty of the Building Inspector and the Building Inspector may in addition to other penalties provided by this chapter suspend or recommend that said license be revoked, but no such license shall be revoked until after a hearing before the City Council at its next regular meeting following due notice given to the manager of the trailer camp prior to such hearing, and in the event the manager cannot be located, then a copy of the notice shall be served upon him by mailing by United States mail, with postage prepaid, to the address given in the application for such trailer camp license. (Ord. 922, 1962)

20.04.100 License – Transferability.
A trailer camp license may be transferred to a transferee approved by the City Council upon payment of a fee set by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 922, 1962; Ord. 2299, 2016)

20.04.110 License – Posting.
No trailer camp shall be operated unless such trailer camp license is un-revoked and is posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. (Ord. 922, 1962)

20.04.120 Sanitary Facilities Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or maintain any trailer camp within the City which does not have adequate toilet facilities separately for men and women, equipped with water flush type toilets, one water closet for each sex for every seven trailer units or less, or fractional part thereof in excess of seven not having self contained toilet facilities within which toilet facilities shall not be more than one hundred feet away from any trailer intended to use the same; adequate shower facilities separately for men and women; adequate metal type receptacles for garbage and rubbish; an adequate supply of pure water for drinking purposes by use of sanitary drinking fountains and an adequate supply of pure water for domestic purposes, to be obtained from faucets only, located conveniently within said trailer camp, and no dipping vessels or common cups shall be permitted. (Ord. 922, 1962)

20.04.130 Compliance with City Codes Required.
No license shall be issued to carry on a trailer camp unless the applicant complies with all of the sanitation, electrical, sewer, health, plumbing, fire and building codes, and City ordinances and applicable county and state regulations. (Ord. 922, 1962; Ord. 1089, 1969)

20.04.140 Sewer Connections Required – Sanitary Facilities.
Every toilet, shower, slop sink, and every other container used for the purpose of discharging or drainage of wastes and waste water shall be connected with the City sewer system. (Ord. 922, 1962)

20.04.150 Waste Deposit.
It is unlawful for any person to deposit any garbage wastes upon the premises of any trailer camp, except in the proper receptacles therefor. (Ord. 922, 1962)

20.04.160 Sewer Connections Required – Individual Trailers.
Every trailer camp operator shall provide immediate sewer drainage connections from each trailer to permit the flow from the trailer of any waste substances and water directly to the City sewer system. (Ord. 922, 1962)

20.04.170 Dimensions of Trailer Spaces.
Every trailer camp shall provide available unoccupied space of not less than one thousand two hundred square feet together with a three foot side yard for each trailer, and shall be arranged in rows abutting on a driveway or clear unoccupied space of not less than sixteen feet in width, which space shall have an unobstructed access to a public street or alley, and it is unlawful for any person to stand or locate or permit the standing or location of any trailer at a distance of less than twelve feet from any other trailer. (Ord. 922, 1962; Ord. 1089, 1969)

20.04.180 Removal of Wheels.
It is unlawful for any person owning or operating a trailer in the City to remove or cause to be removed the wheels or any similar transportation device from the trailer or to otherwise permanently fix it to the ground in a manner that would prevent ready removal except trailers in a licensed trailer camp. (Ord. 922, 1962)

20.04.190 Lighting Camp.
Every trailer camp shall be provided with sufficient means of lighting the camp at night, and all roadways, water closets, and bath units shall be kept lighted during time from one half hour after sunset until one half hour before sunrise. The lighting plan must be approved by the Building Inspector and must conform with the City electrical code. (Ord. 922, 1962)

20.04.200 Grounding Trailers.
Each trailer shall be provided with grounding facilities to carry off electrical charges, and it is unlawful for any person to use a trailer unless such grounding connections are affixed at all times. (Ord. 922, 1962)

20.04.210 Fire Fighting Equipment.
Each trailer camp shall be provided with adequate fire fighting and fire prevention facilities to be approved by the fire chief. (Ord. 922, 1962)

20.04.220 Site Standards.
All land used as a trailer camp shall be located on a well drained site of ample size free from heavy or dense growth of brush or weeds and free from marsh, and shall be graded to insure rapid drainage during and following rain, and it is unlawful to permit water to accumulate or stand upon the ground of any trailer camp. (Ord. 922, 1962)

20.04.230 Planting Green Belt.
The City Council reserves the right after any trailer camp has been in operation for a period of one year within the City to require the owner and/or operator thereof to plant a green belt within the outside boundaries thereof of such width and of such species of bushes and/or trees as shall be specified by the City Council at the time. (Ord. 922, 1962)

20.04.240 Animals.
No dogs or other animals shall be permitted to run at large in any trailer camp. (Ord. 922, 1962)

20.04.250 Manager Required – Register Required.
Every trailer camp shall maintain a manager in charge thereof, the name and address of such manager to be furnished to the City in the office of the City Clerk at all times during the operation of such trailer camp, which manager shall require all persons using such trailer camp to register in a book kept for that purpose, showing the date of registration, the names of all persons occupying such trailer, the license numbers of the trailer and/or automobile accompanying same, and the date of departure, which records shall be available at all times to the Building Inspector and/or members of the City Police Department, and it shall be unlawful for any person to make or permit any false entry, any alteration or erasure of any part of such record. (Ord. 922, 1962)

20.04.270 Penalty for Violations.
Violation of this Chapter shall be considered a civil violation pursuant to SMC 1.01.080 and Chapter 1.14 SMC, except as otherwise provided therein. (Ord. 922, 1962; Ord. 1927, 1999; Ord. 2155, 2008)

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Snohomish Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 2375, and legislation passed through June 18, 2019.
Disclaimer: The city clerk’s office has the official version of the Snohomish Municipal Code. Users should contact the city clerk’s office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited above.

City Website: www.snohomishwa.gov
City Telephone: (360) 568-3115
Code Publishing Company