


Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Chapters:

1.01    Code Adoption

1.03    General Penalty

1.05    Repealed

1.06    Code Enforcement

1.07    Repealed

1.08    Junk Vehicles

1.09    Unfit Structures

1.10    Official Posting Places

1.11    City Office Hours


Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION

Sections:

1.01.010    Woodinville Municipal Code adopted.

1.01.020    Title – Citation – Reference.

1.01.030    Codification authority.

1.01.040    Definitions.

1.01.050    Grammatical interpretation.

1.01.060    Reference applies to all amendments.

1.01.070    Title, chapter and section headings.

1.01.080    Reference to specific ordinances.

1.01.090    Effect of code on past actions and obligations.

1.01.100    Constitutionality.

1.01.110    Effective date.


1.01.010 Woodinville Municipal Code adopted.

The City Council of the City of Woodinville hereby adopts the Woodinville Municipal Code, dated 1996, as published and edited by the Code Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington, as the official code of the City, and is hereby incorporated in full by this reference. One copy of the Woodinville Municipal Code is on file in the office of the City Clerk for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 145 § 1, 1996)


1.01.020 Title – Citation – Reference.

This code shall be known as the “Woodinville Municipal Code” and it shall be sufficient to refer to said code as the “Woodinville Municipal Code” in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the “Woodinville Municipal Code”. Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the “Woodinville Municipal Code” and such references shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in the code. (Ord. 145 § 2, 1996)


1.01.030 Codification authority.

This code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the administrative ordinances of the City of Woodinville, Washington, codified pursuant to the provisions of RCW 35.21.500 through 35.21.570. (Ord. 145 § 3, 1996)


1.01.040 Definitions.

The following words and phrases whenever used in this code shall be construed as defined in this section unless from the context a different meaning is intended, or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases:

(1) “City” means the City of Woodinville, Washington, or the area within the territorial City limits of the City of Woodinville, Washington, and such territory outside of the City over which the City has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional provision or any law.

(2) “City Council” means the City Council of the City of Woodinville.

(3) “County” means the County of King.

(4) “Mayor” means the Mayor of the City of Woodinville.

(5) “Oath” includes affirmation.

(6) “Office.” The use of the title of any officer, employee, or any office, or ordinance means such officer, employee, office, ordinance of the City, unless otherwise specifically designated.

(7) “Person” means natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them.

(8) “State” means the State of Washington.

(9) “Shall” and “Must.” Each is mandatory.

(10) “May” is permissive.

(11) “Written” includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed or multigraphed. (Ord. 145 § 4, 1996)


1.01.050 Grammatical interpretation.

The following grammatical rules shall apply in this code unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 

(1) Gender. Any gender includes the other gender.

(2) Singular and Plural. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular.

(3) Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and the future tenses and vise versa.

(4) Use of Words and Phrases. Words and phrases used in this code and not specifically defined shall be construed according to the context and approved usage of the language. (Ord. 145 § 5, 1996)


1.01.060 Reference applies to all amendments.

Whenever a reference is made to this code as the “Woodinville Municipal Code” or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the City of Woodinville, Washington, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. (Ord. 145 § 6, 1996)


1.01.070 Title, chapter and section headings.

Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof. (Ord. 145 § 7, 1996)


1.01.080 Reference to specific ordinances.

The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with, ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 145 § 8, 1996)


1.01.090 Effect of code on past actions and obligations.

Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendment hereby of any ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the City shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee, or penalty at said effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee, or penalty, or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof, required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 145 § 9, 1996)


1.01.100 Constitutionality.

If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The Council hereby declares that it would have passed this code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this code should be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full force and effect. (Ord. 145 § 10, 1996)


1.01.110 Effective date.

The ordinance codified in this chapter or a summary thereof consisting of the title shall be published in the official newspaper of the City, and shall take effect and be in full force five days after publication. The Woodinville Municipal Code shall become effective on April 20, 1996. (Ord. 145 § 11, 1996)


Chapter 1.03 GENERAL PENALTY

Sections:

1.03.010    General penalties.

1.03.020    Separate offense.

1.03.030    Nuisance.


1.03.010  General penalties.

 Unless otherwise specified by City ordinance, anyone who violates the provisions of any ordinance shall be punished pursuant to the general penalty provision set forth below:

(1) Criminal Penalty. Unless otherwise provided, any person violating any of the provisions of any ordinance of the City is guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under this code shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $5,000 or by imprisonment not to exceed one year, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

(2) Civil Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of any ordinance of the City which is designated a civil offense, shall have committed a civil infraction. Unless otherwise provided, any such person shall be assessed a monetary penalty not to exceed $250.00 for each day that the violation occurs. (Ord. 16 § 1, 1993)


1.03.020 Separate offense.

Every person violating any of the provisions of any ordinance of the City is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which the violation is committed, continued or permitted by any such person. (Ord. 16 § 2, 1993)


1.03.030 Nuisance. 

In addition to the penalties set forth above, all remedies given by law for the prevention and abatement of nuisances shall apply regardless of any other remedy. (Ord. 16 § 3, 1993)


Chapter 1.05 DEFINITIONS

(Repealed by Ord. 685)


Chapter 1.06 CODE ENFORCEMENT

Sections:

1.06.010    Purpose and intent.

1.06.020    Guidance for enforcement actions.

1.06.030    Definitions.

1.06.040    Applicability.

1.06.050    Remedies not exclusive.

1.06.060    Types of enforcement action.

1.06.070    Initiation – Investigation.

1.06.080    First contact – Warning notice.

1.06.090    Stop work order.

1.06.100    Correction agreement.

1.06.110    Citation.

1.06.120    Contents of a citation.

1.06.130    Response to a citation.

1.06.140    Mitigation of fines.

1.06.150    Contested citation hearing.

1.06.160    Notice of violation.

1.06.170    Effective date and content of a notice of violation.

1.06.180    Appeal of a notice of violation.

1.06.190    Appeal hearing for a notice of violation.

1.06.200    Failure to appear at a contested hearing or appeal hearing.

1.06.210    Final order for enforcement.

1.06.220    Method of service.

1.06.230    Monetary penalties.

1.06.240    Collection of monetary penalties.

1.06.250    Emergency order.

1.06.260    Criminal violations.

1.06.270    Abatement by the City.

1.06.280    Financial performance guarantee authorized.

1.06.290    Entry to buildings and premises – Warrants.

1.06.300    Declaration of public nuisance.

1.06.310    Lien authorized.

1.06.320    Duty not creating liability.

1.06.330    Special enforcement provisions.


1.06.010 Purpose and intent. 

(1) The purpose of this chapter is to provide authority and procedures for enforcing the provisions prescribed by this chapter. 

(2) The intent of this chapter is to: 

(a) Prevent harm to the public and the environment of the City of Woodinville by safeguarding compliance with development regulations, health, safety and welfare regulations, and other regulations referenced in this chapter; and

(b) Provide for restoration where damage has occurred; and

(c) Establish penalties to deter future violations and prevent unjust enrichment of those who violate these regulations. (Ord. 685 § 3 (Att. A), 2019)


1.06.020 Guidance for enforcement actions.

Whenever a violation occurs, the primary goal of enforcement is to correct the violation by achieving compliance with the regulations. When determining the assessment of penalties, including whether to assess them, the following should be considered: 

(1) Whether the violation constitutes a first violation, or constitutes repeated violations; 

(2) Whether the violation was inadvertent and was done without oral or written warning or notice from City staff; 

(3) Whether the person responsible for the violation cooperates fully and truthfully with staff in its investigations; 

(4) Whether the person stops the violation immediately when informed of the violation; 

(5) Whether the person corrects the violation and any resulting damage promptly and in compliance with any agreements with the City; and 

(6) Whether significant damage occurs. 

These policies shall not be enforceable by any private party. (Ord. 685 § 3 (Att. A), 2019)


1.06.030 Definitions.

(1) Words in this chapter used in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall include the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.

(2) The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:

“Abate” means to repair, replace, remove, destroy or otherwise remedy a condition that constitutes a violation by such means, in such manner, and to such an extent as the Code Enforcement Officer or the Hearing Examiner determines is necessary in the interest of the general health, safety and welfare of the community.

“Citation” means an order that represents a decision by a Code Enforcement Officer that a violation has been committed.

“City” means City of Woodinville.

“City Manager” means the person appointed pursuant to WMC 2.09.010. 

“Code Enforcement Officer” means the Director, or a person or persons designated by the Director, to enforce this chapter. The Code Enforcement Officer shall have knowledge of the principles, practices, methods and techniques of code violation investigation and enforcement.

“Costs of abatement” means the costs of any abatement action taken by the City to abate the violation using lawful means in the event that the person responsible for the violation fails to do so. The term includes incidental expenses including, but not limited to, personnel costs, both direct and indirect and including attorney’s fees; costs incurred in documenting the violation; hauling, storage and disposal expenses; and actual costs and expenses of the City in preparing notices, specifications and contracts, and in accomplishing and/or contracting and inspecting the work; the costs of any required printing and mailing; and costs of enforcement.

“Days” means calendar days.

“Director” means the person or persons designated by the City Manager to administer this chapter. 

“Fine” means a monetary sum imposed as punishment for an offense.

“Fire Department” means Woodinville Fire and Rescue.

“Incidental expenses” means personnel costs, both direct and indirect, attorneys’ fees, costs incurred in documenting the violation, hauling, storage and disposal expenses, restoration costs, and actual expenses and costs of the City in preparing notices, specifications and contracts, and in accomplishing and/or contracting and inspecting the work and the costs of any required printing and mailing, and other expenses prescribed by law.

“Notice of violation” means a notification that denotes an activity and/or condition is in violation of the law.

“Nuisance” means anything specifically enumerated by the Woodinville City Council as a public nuisance or all actions or lack thereof as defined in Chapter 8.07 WMC.

“Omission” means a failure to act.

“Person responsible for the violation” means any person who commits any act or omission which is a violation or causes or permits a violation of the City code to occur or remain upon property in the City, and includes but is not limited to owners, lessees, tenants, contractors, subcontractors or other persons entitled to control, use and/or occupy property where a violation occurs.

“Repeat violations” means:

(a) The same or similar violation, as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer, occurring on the same property within a consecutive 24-month time period; or

(b) The same person committing the same violation or similar violation, as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer, on a different property within the jurisdiction of the City within a consecutive 24-month time period.

“Restoration” means to take steps determined necessary by the Code Enforcement Officer to return a property to the condition in which it existed before a violation occurred. 

“Violation” means an act or omission contrary to an adopted regulation. A violation continues to exist until abated and each day, or a portion thereof, that a violation exists constitutes a separate and distinct offense. (Ord. 685 § 3 (Att. A), 2019)


1.06.040 Applicability.

This chapter applies to any violations of:

(1) All Woodinville Municipal Code provisions referenced by or making reference to this chapter;

(2) Chapter 8.08 WMC, Noise Regulations; 

(3) Chapter 13.05 WMC, Stormwater Runoff and Surface Water and Erosion Control; 

(4) Shoreline Master Program as adopted by the City Council and approved by the Department of Ecology; 

(5) All standards, regulations and procedures adopted by the City Council referenced by or making reference to this chapter; and

(6) The terms and conditions of any permit or approval issued by the City, or any concomitant or development agreement with the City. (Ord. 685 § 3 (Att. A), 2019)


1.06.050 Remedies not exclusive.

The procedures set forth in this chapter are not exclusive and shall not in any manner limit or restrict the City from remedying violations or abating violations in any manner authorized by law. (Ord. 685 § 3 (Att. A), 2019)


1.06.060 Types of enforcement action.

(1) The following are enforcement actions set forth under this chapter:

(a) Warning notice issued pursuant to WMC 1.06.080;

(b) Citation issued pursuant to WMC 1.06.110;

(c) Notice of violation issued pursuant to WMC 1.06.160;

(d) Misdemeanor pursuant to WMC 1.06.260.

(2) A citation and a notice of violation shall not both be issued for the same violation. However, citations and notice of violations can be issued for the same activity or condition if there are multiple violations provided each citation and notice of violation is issued for each violation consistent with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 685 § 3 (Att. A), 2019)


1.06.070 Initiation – Investigation.

The Code Enforcement Officer may initiate an investigation of a violation in response to receipt of a complaint, field observations, or other reliable information. (Ord. 685 § 3 (Att. A), 2019)


1.06.080 First contact – Warning notice.

(1) When a Code Enforcement Officer confirms a violation exists, the Code Enforcement Officer may issue a warning notice to secure correction of the violation by contacting the person responsible for the violation, explaining the violation, and requesting corrective action within a reasonable time period.

(2) When written notice is provided, it shall be in the form of a warning notice and contain the following information:

(a) The tax parcel number or street address where the violation occurred or is located;

(b) A statement describing the violation and referencing the code section violated;

(c) The date of the violation;

(d) A date by which the violation must be corrected;

(e) A statement of potential consequences for failure to complete the corrective action; and

(f) Other information, as determined necessary by the Code Enforcement Officer.

(3) A stop work order or an emergency order may serve as first contact in lieu of a warning notice. (Ord. 685 § 3 (Att. A), 2019)


1.06.090 Stop work order.

(1) Whenever a Code Enforcement Officer finds any work or activity being performed in a manner that violates any provisions referenced in WMC 1.06.040, or is dangerous or unsafe, the Code Enforcement Officer can issue a stop work order.

(2) The stop work order can require all or part of the work or activity to be stopped or that a use be discontinued. The scope of work or activity covered by a stop work order shall be determined at the Code Enforcement Officer’s discretion. 

(3) A stop work order shall be in writing on a form determined by the Code Enforcement Officer and shall state the reason for the stop work order, the conditions under which the work or activity cited in the order will be permitted to resume, and a statement of each dangerous or unsafe condition, or a statement and description of each code section or requirement that was violated.

(4) Service of the stop work order may be given in person, by conspicuously posting the stop work order on the property or a public right-of-way adjacent to the property, by giving a copy of the stop work order to the person on the property who appears to be in charge, or by certified mail.

(5) Upon issuance of a stop work order, the work, activity or use cited shall immediately cease until such time as the Code Enforcement Officer authorizes the work, activity or use to proceed. 

(6) The removal, mutilation, alteration or tampering with a stop work order is not authorized without the expressed authorization of the Code Enforcement Officer. (Ord. 685 § 3 (Att. A), 2019)


1.06.100 Correction agreement.

(1) A correction agreement is a voluntary mechanism where the person responsible for the violation agrees to correct a violation within a specified time period and in accordance with specified conditions. 

(2) The City and the person responsible for the violation may enter into a correction agreement at any time.

(3) A correction agreement shall be in a form agreed to by the parties and should contain the following information:

(a) The name and address of the person responsible for the violation;

(b) The street address, legal description or other description that is sufficient to identify the location of the violation;

(c) A statement of each code section or requirement violated, and a description of the violation;

(d) The date the violation was observed;

(e) A list of required corrective actions to remedy the violation, and a date and time by which the corrective actions must be completed;

(f) A statement by the person responsible for the violation that:

(i) They committed the violation;

(ii) They agree to waive the right to appeal the determination of a violation and the specified corrective action;

(iii) The City may recover its costs and expenses, and monetary penalties from the person responsible for the violation if the terms of the correction agreement are not satisfied;

(g) A statement that the Code Enforcement Officer may inspect the location of the violation as necessary to determine compliance with the correction agreement; and

(h) Signature of the person to whom the correction agreement is directed and/or the property owner, as applicable.

(4) If the Code Enforcement Officer is not satisfied that the terms of the correction agreement are being followed, any penalties and consequences specified in the agreement may be applied.

(5) The Code Enforcement Officer may grant a time extension for correcting a violation, or may modify the conditions for corrective action, if:

(a) The person responsible for the violation has shown due diligence or substantial progress towards correcting the violation; and

(b) Unforeseen circumstances delayed correction under the original conditions; and

(c) The person responsible for the violation requests in writing and establishes a clear need for a time extension or modification of the original conditions. (Ord. 685 § 3 (Att. A), 2019)


1.06.110 Citation.

(1) The following violations are subject to the citation and/or criminal provisions set forth in this chapter:

(a) Exceeding noise standards established in Chapter 8.08 WMC;

(b) Failure to install erosion control measures and follow erosion best management practices as prescribed in Chapter 13.05 WMC;

(c) Any illicit discharges of or into stormwater, illegal dumping of or into stormwater and/or illicit connections to a stormwater facility as prescribed in Chapter 13.04 WMC;

(d) The act of failing to comply with a stop work order issued pursuant to WMC 1.06.090;

(e) Any unauthorized removal, mutilation, alteration or tampering with a posted stop work order notice; 

(f) The act of removing a tree without a tree permit pursuant to WMC 21.50.050;

(g) Failure to obtain and/or comply with the terms and conditions of a right-of-way permit issued pursuant to WMC 21.80.170;

(h) Failure to obtain an annual fire inspection when required for occupied spaces; or

(i) Signs illegally erected on public property or within a public right-of-way or public easement. 

(2) A citation shall be issued in writing and carry a fine pursuant to WMC 1.06.230(A). Payment of the fine shall not relieve the person responsible for a violation from the obligation to correct, abate or stop the violation.

(3) Each day a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate violation upon which a new citation may be issued and another fine assessed. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to restrict the City’s ability to issue a new citation or pursue other enforcement actions prescribed by this chapter as long as the violation continues to exist. (Ord. 685 § 3 (Att. A), 2019)


1.06.120 Contents of a citation.

(1) A citation shall contain the following:

(a) The name and address of the person being cited;

(b) The street address, tax parcel number or other description that is sufficient to identify the location of the violation;

(c) A statement of each code section or requirement violated and a description of the violation;

(d) The date of the violation;

(e) A statement of the fine being imposed pursuant to WMC 1.06.230(A);

(f) A statement that the person named in the citation must respond within 14 days after the citation was served;

(g) A statement of the options to respond and the procedures to exercise these options;

(h) A statement that the citation represents a final decision, unless contested as provided for in this chapter;

(i) A certified statement by the Code Enforcement Officer, authorized by RCW 9A.72.085, setting forth facts supporting the citation; and

(j) Other pertinent information, as determined by the City.

(2) The Code Enforcement Officer may amend the citation at any time to correct clerical errors or to cite additional authority for a stated violation.

(3) The citation shall be served upon persons responsible for a violation by one of the methods prescribed in WMC 1.06.220. 

(4) The Code Enforcement Officer may withdraw a citation at any time if it was issued in error or a settlement of the offense is reached. (Ord. 685 § 3 (Att. A), 2019)


1.06.130 Response to a citation.

(1) A person named in a citation must respond to the citation by one of the following methods:

(a) Pay the fine, in which case the record shall show the person named has committed the violation; or

(b) Request a mitigation of the fine, in which case the person named agrees they committed the violation, but want to present mitigating circumstances in determining the fine; or

(c) Request a contested hearing and appeal the issuance of the citation and fine.

(2) When requesting a mitigation of the fine, or a contested hearing, the person named in the citation shall make the request in writing and include an address and contact information where notices should be sent.

(3) A response to a citation must be received by the Department no later than 14 days after the date the citation was served. The response shall be delivered by mail or by hand to the address listed on the citation. If mailed, the date post marked shall be considered the date the response was received by the Department. The response shall be considered untimely if it is not received by the Department at the address indicated on the notice of violation no later than 14 days after the date the notice of violation was served.

(4) Failure to respond to the citation within the specified time period shall result in a final order being entered that the person named in the citation committed the violation stated and that the fine specified shall be assessed.

(5) Payment of a fine shall not relieve the person named in the citation of the responsibility to cure, abate or stop the violation.

(6) A request for a contested hearing shall not stay further enforcement action or relieve the person responsible for the violation from correcting the violation. (Ord. 685 § 3 (Att. A), 2019)


1.06.140 Mitigation of fines.

(1) If a person named in a citation responds with a request for a mitigation of the fine, the person shall include a written explanation of the circumstances why the fine should be reduced.

(2) By requesting a mitigation of the fine, the person named in the citation agrees to waive the right to appeal the citation and final determination of the fine.

(3) The Director, after considering the written explanation of the circumstances, may reduce the fine by not more than 50 percent; provided, that the person named in the citation has:

(a) Corrected the violation within the 14 days set forth in WMC 1.06.130(3); and

(b) Contacted the Code Enforcement Officer to verify that the violation has been corrected.

(4) The person named in the citation has the burden of proof to demonstrate the violation has been corrected.

(5) The Director’s decision to mitigate a fine shall be based on an evaluation of individual circumstances including, but not limited to:

(a) Severity of the violation;

(b) Repeat violations;

(c) The public interest being protected; and

(d) The person named in the citation’s responsiveness to correct, abate, or stop the violation.

(6) The decision to mitigate the fine shall be made in writing. A copy of the decision shall be sent to the person named in the citation and any other party who requests in writing a copy of the decision. (Ord. 685 § 3 (Att. A), 2019)


1.06.150 Contested citation hearing.

(1) If a person named in a citation responds with a request for a contested hearing, they shall specify the reason why the cited violation did not occur, or why the person named in the citation is not responsible for the violation.

(2) The Hearing Examiner shall hold a hearing within 60 days after the City’s receipt of the response unless otherwise agreed by the City and the person named in the citation.

(3) Notice of the time, place and date of the hearing shall be sent by the City by first class mail at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing to the address provided in the response.

(4) A contested hearing shall be conducted as an open record hearing in accordance with the rules set forth in Chapter 2.27 WMC, any rules adopted pursuant to Chapter 2.31 WMC, and supplemented by this chapter.

(5) Each party to the hearing shall be allowed to:

(a) Call, examine and cross-examine witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing, subject to reasonable limitation by the Hearing Examiner;

(b) Offer evidence;

(c) Rebut evidence; and

(d) Represent themselves or be represented by anyone of their choice who is lawfully permitted to do so.

(6) The City may petition the Hearing Examiner for dismissal of a request, or for dismissal of a portion of a request, for a contested hearing, and the Hearing Examiner is authorized to grant such dismissal, if the response to the citation is untimely, incomplete, frivolous, beyond the Hearing Examiner’s jurisdictional authority, or the matter can be resolved as a matter of law with no genuine issues of material fact.

(7) The City has the burden of proof by a preponderance of the evidence that the person named in the notice of violation committed the violation.

(8) The certified statement or declaration, authorized by RCW 9A.72.085, submitted by the Code Enforcement Officer shall be prima facie evidence that the stated violation occurred and that the person named is responsible. The certified statement or declaration of the Code Enforcement Officer authorized under RCW 9A.72.085 and any other evidence accompanying the report shall be admissible without further evidentiary foundation.

(9) The person named in the citation may rebut the City’s evidence and establish that the cited violation did not occur or that the person named is not responsible for the violation.

(10) The Hearing Examiner shall consider the evidence and testimony presented at the hearing and based on this information shall reverse or affirm the citation and/or fine in whole or in part. The Hearing Examiner shall issue a written decision with findings and conclusions within 10 working days following the close of the hearing.

(11) The Hearing Examiner’s decision is a final order pursuant to WMC 1.06.210. Any judicial review must be commenced in King County superior court within 21 days in accordance with RCW 36.70C.040.

(12) A copy of the Hearing Examiner’s decision shall be sent to the person named in the citation and any party requesting in writing a copy of the decision. (Ord. 685 § 3 (Att. A), 2019)


1.06.160 Notice of violation.

(1) All violations of the Woodinville Municipal Code set forth in WMC 1.06.040, except as otherwise provided in WMC 1.06.110, shall be subject to the notice of violation and/or criminal provisions set forth in this chapter.

(2) The issuance of a notice of violation shall be in writing and shall carry monetary penalties pursuant to WMC 1.06.230(2). Payment of a monetary penalty shall not relieve the person responsible for the violation from the obligation to correct, abate or stop the violation.

(3) The notice of violation represents a determination that the person named in the notice is responsible for the violation and must correct the violation by the date stated in the notice. A correction agreement as set forth in WMC 1.06.100 may be offered along with the notice of violation at the discretion of the Code Enforcement Officer.

(4) Failure to respond to the notice of violation within the time period specified in WMC 1.06.180 shall result in the person named in the notice of violation being found to have committed the violation stated in the notice and are responsible for paying any monetary penalties assessed in the notice. The Code Enforcement Officer shall note in writing the failure to respond and this shall constitute a final order pursuant to WMC 1.06.210.

(5) The Code Enforcement Officer may at any time add to, rescind in part, or otherwise modify a notice of violation by issuing a supplemental notice of violation. The supplemental notice of violation shall be governed by the same procedures applicable to all notice of violations set forth in this chapter.

(6) The Code Enforcement Officer may withdraw a notice of violation if it was issued in error or the violation is otherwise settled to the satisfaction of the City.

(7) The notice of violation shall be served by one of the methods prescribed in WMC 1.06.220.

(8) Each day a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate violation. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to restrict the City’s ability to issue a new notice of violation or pursue other enforcement actions prescribed by this chapter as long as the violation continues to exist. (Ord. 685 § 3 (Att. A), 2019)


1.06.170 Effective date and content of a notice of violation.

(1) A notice of violation shall be effective on the date it is served.

(2) A notice of violation shall contain the following:

(a) The name and address of the person being cited;

(b) The street address or other description that is sufficient to identify the location of the violation;

(c) A statement of each code section or requirement that was violated and a description of the violation;

(d) The date the violation was observed and a time and date for compliance;

(e) A list of suggested corrective actions to remedy the violation;

(f) A statement that the notice of violation shall become a final decision, unless appealed pursuant to WMC 1.06.180;

(g) A statement of the appeal procedures consistent with WMC 1.06.180;

(h) A statement that failure to file a timely and complete appeal shall constitute a waiver of the right to appeal the notice of violation;

(i) The signature of the Code Enforcement Officer issuing the notice of violation; and

(j) Other pertinent information, as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer. (Ord. 685 § 3 (Att. A), 2019)


1.06.180 Appeal of a notice of violation.

(1) Upon service of a notice of violation, the person named in the notice of violation shall have 14 days to request an appeal hearing before the Hearing Examiner. The appeal shall be considered untimely if it is not received by the Department at the address indicated on the notice of violation no later than 14 days after the date the notice of violation was served. If mailed, the date post marked shall be considered the date the appeal was received by the Department.

(2) The request for an appeal hearing must be in writing and must be accompanied by the appropriate fee. 

(3) The content of the appeal must include the following information:

(a) A brief statement of the grounds for the appeal, including why the violation did not occur or why the person named in a notice of violation is not responsible for the violation;

(b) Facts or evidence upon which the appeal is based;

(c) A complete copy of the notice of violation; and

(d) The mailing address and contact information, including an email address if available, where notices can be sent.

(4) If an appeal is filed during the pendency of the appeal hearing, all activities associated with the alleged violation cited on the notice of violation shall cease. Any penalty accruing shall be stayed pending the outcome of the appeal hearing. (Ord. 685 § 3 (Att. A), 2019)


1.06.190 Appeal hearing for a notice of violation.

(1) The Hearing Examiner shall hold the appeal hearing within 90 days after the City’s receipt of the request for an appeal hearing unless otherwise agreed by the City and the appellant.

(2) Notice of the time, place and date of the hearing will be sent by the City by first class mail at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing to the address provided in the appeal.

(3) The appeal hearing shall be conducted as an open record hearing in accordance with the rules for hearings set forth in Chapter 2.27 WMC, any rules adopted pursuant to Chapter 2.31 WMC, and supplemented by this chapter.

(4) Each party to the hearing shall be allowed to:

(a) Call, examine and cross-examine witnesses on any matter relevant to the issue of the hearing, subject to reasonable limitations by the Hearing Examiner.

(b) Introduce evidence.

(c) Rebut evidence.

(d) Represent themselves or be represented by anyone of their choice who is lawfully permitted to do so.

(5) The City may request dismissal of a request or portions of a request for an appeal hearing, and the Hearing Examiner is authorized to grant such dismissal, if the filing of the appeal is untimely, incomplete, frivolous, beyond the Hearing Examiner’s jurisdictional authority, or the matter can be resolved as a matter of law with no genuine issues of material fact.

(6) The City has the burden of proof by a preponderance of the evidence that the person named in the notice of violation committed the violation.

(7) The person named in the notice of violation may rebut the City’s evidence and establish that the cited violation did not occur or that the person named is not responsible for the violation.

(8) Following review of the submitted evidence, the Hearing Examiner shall make written findings and conclusions:

(a) Affirming or modifying the notice of violation if the Hearing Examiner finds that a violation occurred, and the person named in the notice of violation is responsible for the violation; or

(b) Reversing the notice of violation if the Hearing Examiner finds that either no violation occurred, or the person named in the notice of violation did not commit the violation.

(9) The Hearing Examiner’s decision is a final order pursuant to WMC 1.06.210. Any judicial review of the final order must be filed in King County superior court within 21 days in accordance with RCW 36.70C.040.

(10) A copy of the Hearing Examiner’s decision shall be provided to all parties involved in the appeal hearing and any party requesting in writing a copy of the decision.

(11) Optional Hearing Examiner Prehearing Briefing Process.

(a) A prehearing briefing process may be conducted:

(i) By agreement of the parties to the appeal; or

(ii) At the Hearing Examiner’s own initiative.

(b) The purpose of a prehearing briefing is to facilitate a full and fair hearing on the merits in cases that may involve complex or confusing factual issues or legal arguments. (Ord. 685 § 3 (Att. A), 2019)


1.06.200 Failure to appear at a contested hearing or appeal hearing.

(1) Failure to appear at a hearing to contest a citation or appeal of a notice of violation shall result in a final order entered finding the person named to have committed the violation and the penalties assessed. In addition, the Hearing Examiner may include in the order an administrative fee for the cost of scheduling and conducting the hearing.

(2) For good cause shown and upon terms the Hearing Examiner finds just, the Hearing Examiner may set aside an order entered for failure to appear. (Ord. 685 § 3 (Att. A), 2019)


1.06.210 Final order for enforcement.

(1) A final order constitutes a final determination that a violation has occurred, the person named is responsible for the violation, and administrative options to contest the decision are exhausted.

(2) If after any order duly issued by the Code Enforcement Officer or Hearing Examiner becomes final, and the person, firm or corporation to whom the order is directed does not obey the order, including refusal to pay monetary penalties assessed under the order, the City may:

(a) Cause such person, firm, or corporation to be prosecuted under the provisions of this chapter;

(b) Institute appropriate action to collect monetary penalties in accordance with the provisions of this chapter;

(c) Abate the violation in accordance with provisions of this chapter and State law;

(d) Pursue other reasonable remedies as allowed by law. (Ord. 685 § 3 (Att. A), 2019)


1.06.220 Method of service.

(1) Warning notices, citations and notice of violations shall be served upon the responsible person to whom it is directed by one or more of the following methods:

(a) Personal service, or by leaving a copy at the person’s usual abode with a person over the age of 18 who resides there;

(b) Mailing a copy of the notice to such person at his/her last known address; and/or

(c) Posting a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place on the affected property or structure.

(2) Proof of service shall be made by a written declaration under penalty of perjury by the person serving the notice, declaring the date and time of service and the manner by which service was made.

(3) Service by mail shall be effective on the date of postmark.

(4) Failure of any person to actually receive the warning notice, citation, or notice of violation shall not invalidate any code enforcement action. (Ord. 685 § 3 (Att. A), 2019)


1.06.230 Monetary penalties.

(1) Monetary penalties for a citation shall be in accordance with Table 1.06.230:

Table 1.06.230  

	Code Provision	First Violation	Second Violation	Third and Subsequent Violations

	Exceeding noise standards	$125	$175	$250

	Failure to comply with erosion control measures and best management practices	$125	$175	$250

	Illicit discharges of or into stormwater, illegal dumping of or into stormwater and/or illicit connections to a stormwater facility	$300	$600	$900

	Failure to comply with a stop work order	$500	$1,000	$1,500

	Unauthorized removal, mutilation, alteration or tampering with a stop work order notice	$1,000	$1,000	$1,500

	Failure to obtain a tree removal permit (penalty per each tree)	$1,000 for the first tree	$1,500 for a second tree	$2,000 for a third and each additional tree

	Failure to obtain and/or comply with a right-of-way permit	$125	$250	$375

	Failure to obtain an annual fire inspection	$250	$500	$750

	Illegal sign in a public right-of-way	$125	$175	$250

(2) Monetary penalties for a notice of violation shall be as follows:

(a) First day of each violation, $200.00;

(b) Second day of each violation, $300.00;

(c) Third day of each violation, $400.00;

(d) Fourth day and each additional day of violation beyond four days, $500.00 per day. (Ord. 685 § 3 (Att. A), 2019)


1.06.240 Collection of monetary penalties.

(1) When an order becomes final, the City at its option may:

(a) Collect the monetary penalties through its own efforts;

(b) Assign to a collection agency the collection of any monetary penalties or cost of abatement that have been assessed under the provisions of this chapter; and/or

(c) Commence a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction to collect the monetary penalties and abatement costs assessed under the provisions of this chapter.

(2) The monetary penalties and abatement costs are deemed public debt and the City may retain collection agencies to collect such debt pursuant to RCW 19.16.500, as presently existing or as subsequently may be amended.

(3) The City may convert the Hearing Examiner’s order or final order into a judgment. 

(4) If a collection agency is used to collect any monetary penalties or cost of abatement: 

(a) The collection agency may add fees or interest charges to the original amount assigned to collections as allowed by law; and 

(b) No debt may be assigned to a collection agency until at least 30 days have elapsed from the time that the City attempts to notify the person responsible for the debt of the existence of the debt and that the debt may be assigned to a collection agency for collection if debt is not paid; and 

(c) Notice of potential assignment to collections shall be made by regular first-class mail to the last known address of the person responsible for the violation; and 

(d) The inability to ascertain a current mailing address shall not prohibit the debt from being assigned to collections. (Ord. 685 § 3 (Att. A), 2019)


1.06.250 Emergency order.

(1) The Code Enforcement Officer may issue an emergency order whenever the City becomes aware of a condition or activity that creates an immediate and emergent threat to the public health, safety or welfare or to the environment.

(2) The emergency order shall state the reason for the order and the conditions that must be remedied.

(3) Upon issuance of an emergency order, the cited activity shall cease, and any unsafe or dangerous condition shall be immediately remedied, including by immediate abatement by the City if the Code Enforcement Officer finds it necessary.

(4) The person named in the emergency order may appeal the order within 14 days from the date of issuance of the order in accordance with the same procedures for appealing a notice of violation set forth in WMC 1.06.180.

(5) An appeal of an emergency order shall not stay the requirement to immediately act to remedy any dangerous or unsafe conditions. (Ord. 685 § 3 (Att. A), 2019)


1.06.260 Criminal violations.

(1) In addition to, or as an alternative to, the civil violation actions prescribed by this chapter, the Code Enforcement Officer may refer a violation to the City Prosecuting Attorney who shall have the ability to file the violation as a criminal misdemeanor in a court of competent jurisdiction.

(2) Any person who willfully or knowingly violates any City code or regulation by way of repeat violations, or by any act of commission or omission procures, aids or abets such violation, is guilty of a criminal misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000, or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or both. Each day during which a violation continues to exist shall be considered an additional violation. (Ord. 685 § 3 (Att. A), 2019)


1.06.270 Abatement by the City.

(1) The City may abate a condition which was caused by, or continues to be, a code violation when:

(a) The terms of a correction agreement prescribed by this chapter have not been satisfied; or

(b) A citation was issued pursuant to this chapter, the period for filing a contested hearing has expired, and the required correction has not been completed; or

(c) A notice of violation was issued pursuant to this chapter, the period for filing an appeal has expired, and the required correction has not been completed; or

(d) The condition is subject to an emergency order and summary abatement as prescribed by this chapter, or other specific provisions of City or State law.

(2) Whenever a violation of a regulation causes a condition, of which the continued existence constitutes an immediate and emergent threat to the public health, safety or welfare or to the environment, the City may summarily, and without prior notice, abate the condition.

(a) Notice of the summary abatement shall be given after the abatement to the person responsible for the violation as soon as reasonably possible. The notice shall include the reason for the summary abatement.

(b) No right of action shall lie against the City or its agents, officers, or employees for actions reasonably taken to prevent or cure any such immediate threats.

(3) Using any lawful means, the City or its agents may enter upon the subject property for summary abatement and may remove or correct the condition which is subject to the abatement. The City may seek such judicial process as it deems necessary to affect the removal or correction of such condition.

(4) Any person who knowingly obstructs, impedes or interferes with the City or its agents, or with the person responsible for the violation, in the performance of duties imposed by this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable pursuant to WMC 1.06.260.

(5) The costs of the abatement, including incidental expenses, of correcting the violation shall be billed to the person responsible for the violation and shall become due and payable to the City within 30 days. All such costs and expenses shall constitute a lien against the affected property. (Ord. 685 § 3 (Att. A), 2019)


1.06.280 Financial performance guarantee authorized. 

(1) As part of any enforcement action requiring restoration as a term for correcting a violation, the Code Enforcement Officer may require a financial performance guarantee to be provided to ensure that the correction or restoration is completed. 

(2) The person required to correct the violation or conduct the restoration shall provide an estimate of the cost of the work or the likely cost of maintaining the work after completion. The Code Enforcement Officer shall review, and if acceptable, approve the cost estimates.

(3) The financial performance guarantee shall be at least 150 percent of the cost of the work it is to guarantee. The form of, terms and conditions of the financial performance guarantee shall be determined by the City. 

(4) The City shall hold the financial performance guarantee and it shall not be released until the terms and conditions of the financial performance guarantee are satisfied. If after the time period specified in the financial performance guarantee work is not completed, the City may use the funds to complete the work. (Ord. 685 § 3 (Att. A), 2019)


1.06.290 Entry to buildings and premises – Warrants.

(1) Whenever it is necessary to inspect to determine if a violation has occurred or is occurring, or to enforce any provision of the Woodinville Municipal Code, or enforce any corrective actions issued under this chapter, the Code Enforcement Officer may enter any building or premises at any reasonable time, provided:

(a) If the subject building or premises is occupied, the Code Enforcement Officer shall first present credentials and request entry; or

(b) If the subject building or premises is not occupied, the Code Enforcement Officer shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge of the building or premises and request entry.

(c) If such entry is refused or the owner or other person having charge of the building or premises cannot be located, the Code Enforcement Officer shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry, including recourse to a court of competent jurisdiction for issuance of a warrant authorizing such entry and inspection.

(d) If the Code Enforcement Officer believes that the conditions create an immediate and irreparable health or life safety hazard, the Code Enforcement Officer may make entry.

(2) It is unlawful for any owner, occupant or any other person having charge, care or control of any building, structure, property or portion thereof to fail or neglect to permit the Code Enforcement Officer prompt entry following presentment of a valid warrant or a statement by the Code Enforcement Officer that he or she considers the conditions create an immediate and irreparable health or life safety hazard. (Ord. 685 § 3 (Att. A), 2019)


1.06.300 Declaration of public nuisance.

All civil violations subject to this chapter are determined to be detrimental to the public health, safety, and environment, and are declared to be public nuisances. (Ord. 685 § 3 (Att. A), 2019)


1.06.310 Lien authorized.

The City shall have a lien to the extent authorized by RCW 35A.21.405 and any other applicable law for any monetary penalty imposed, the cost of any abatement work done pursuant to this chapter, together with any costs including personnel costs, both direct and indirect, and attorney and expert witness fees against the real property on which the monetary penalty was imposed or any abatement work performed. The Code Enforcement Officer shall follow the procedures required by RCW 35A.21.405 as now or hereafter amended in order to file such a lien. (Ord. 685 § 3 (Att. A), 2019)


1.06.320 Duty not creating liability.

No provision or term used in this chapter is intended to impose any duty upon the City or any of its officers or employees which would subject them to damages in a civil action. (Ord. 685 § 3 (Att. A), 2019)


1.06.330 Special enforcement provisions. 

The following enforcement provisions are additional to other enforcement actions set forth in this chapter:

(1) Illegal Signs on Public Property.

(a) Any sign on public property or within a public right-of-way or public easement that violates Chapter 21.35 WMC (Signs) may be removed by a Code Enforcement Officer without notice.

(b) The City may store confiscated signs for 30 days after the day the sign was removed and will notify the advertiser that the City is storing the sign and the time and location where the sign can be retrieved. The advertiser may retrieve the sign during any work days within this 30-day period.

(c) If the advertiser cannot be determined or the sign is not picked up by the advertiser within the time period set by subsection (1)(b) of this section, the City may dispose of the sign. The removal and disposal of an illegal sign is an enforcement mechanism and not a penalty.

(d) The City and its officers, employees, or contractors are not responsible for any lost or damaged sign on public property, public rights-of-way, or public easements, while on the property, right-of-way or easement, or in City custody. 

(2) Fire Department. 

(a) The City Manager may authorize Woodinville Fire and Rescue Fire Chief, or a person designated by the Fire Chief, to have some or all of the authority and powers of the Code Enforcement Officer as provided for in this chapter as it pertains to enforcing fire regulations adopted by the City. 

(b) Any code enforcement undertaken by Woodinville Fire and Rescue pursuant to this chapter must be coordinated with and approved by the City Manager or Director. (Ord. 685 § 3 (Att. A), 2019)


Chapter 1.07 CIVIL VIOLATIONS

(Repealed by Ord. 685)


Chapter 1.08 JUNK VEHICLES

Sections:

1.08.010    Definitions.

1.08.020    Abatement and removal of unauthorized junk motor vehicles or parts thereof from private property.

1.08.030    Owner of record presumed liable for costs when vehicle abandoned – Exceptions.

1.08.040    Owner or agent required to pay charges – Lien.

1.08.050    Written impound authorization form.

1.08.060    Hearing Examiner to hear impound.


1.08.010 Definitions.

The following definitions apply to this chapter:

(1) “Abandoned junk vehicle” or “junk vehicle” shall mean a vehicle meeting any two of the following: 

(a) Is three years or older; 

(b) Is extensively damaged, such damage including, but not limited to, any of the following: a broken window or windshield, missing wheels, tires, motor or transmission; 

(c) Is apparently inoperable; 

(d) Is without a valid, current registration plate; 

(e) Has an approximate fair market value equal only to the approximate value of the scrap in it; and 

(f) Excluding farm tractors and farm vehicles.

(2) “Abandoned vehicle” means any abandoned vehicle, any abandoned automobile hulks and any other vehicle or parts thereof not defined as or amounting to abandoned vehicle or automobile hulk, whether on public or private property, whether or not so left with or without the permission of the property owner thereof.

(3) “City” means City of Woodinville.

(4) “City Manager” means the person appointed pursuant to WMC 2.09.010. 

(5) “Code” shall mean the Woodinville Municipal Code.

(6) “Code Enforcement Officer” means a person authorized to enforce the provisions of this title.

(7) “Costs” means, but is not limited to, contract expense and City employee labor expense incurred in abating a nuisance, a rental fee for City equipment used in abatement, costs of storage, disposal or destruction, legal expenses and attorneys’ fees associated with civil judicial enforcement of abatement orders or in seeking abatement orders, and any other costs incurred by the City excluding, however, fees and expenses associated with appeals authorized by this chapter or by State law.

(8) “Director” means the person or persons designated by the City Manager to administer this chapter.

(9) “Discarded” shall mean cast off, thrown away or abandoned.

(10) “Motor vehicle wrecker” means every person, firm, partnership, association, or corporation engaged in the business of buying, selling, or dealing in vehicles of a type required to be licensed under the laws of the City of Woodinville or of this State, for the purpose of wrecking, dismantling, disassembling, or substantially changing the form of any motor vehicle, or who buys or sells integral secondhand parts of component material thereof, in whole or in part, and deals in secondhand motor vehicle parts.

(11) “Person” shall mean any natural person, any corporation, any unincorporated association or partnership, or any other business entity.

(12) “Scrap processor” means any person, firm or corporation legally and currently licensed to demolish or destroy automobiles or automobile hulks by lawful means including, but not limited to, crushing, shearing, hydraulic baling or shredding, for recycling automobile salvage. (Ord. 686 § 1, 2019)


1.08.020 Abatement and removal of unauthorized junk motor vehicles or parts thereof from private property. 

(1) The storage or retention of an abandoned or unauthorized junk motor vehicle or parts thereof, as defined herein, on private property is prohibited and declared to constitute a public nuisance subject to removal and impoundment. The Code Enforcement Officer shall inspect and investigate complaints relative to unauthorized junk motor vehicles or parts thereof on private property. Upon discovery of such nuisance, the Code Enforcement Officer shall give notice in writing to the last registered owner of record, if identifiable, and to the property owner on whose land it is located, of the violation of the nuisance provisions and demand that either or both of them abate the nuisance or subject the vehicle to removal at their expense. Notice shall also be posted at the property where the vehicle is located. The notice shall also inform both that a hearing before the Hearing Examiner may be requested in writing, directed to the City Clerk within 10 days of said notice, and that if no hearing is requested within 10 days, the vehicle will be removed at either or both of their expense.

(2) If a request for a hearing is received, a notice giving the time, location, and date of the hearing on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle or parts thereof as a public nuisance shall be mailed, by certified mail with a five-day return receipt requested, to the owner of the land as shown on the last assessment roll and to the vehicle’s last registered and legal owner of record unless the vehicle is in such condition that the identification numbers are not available to determine ownership.

(3) The owner of the land on which the vehicle is located may appear in person at the hearing or present a written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with reasons for the denial and that he has not given consent for the vehicle to be there. If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the landowner and that he has not subsequently acquiesced to its presence, then the court shall not assess costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the owner of the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect the cost from the owner of the property.

(4) Costs of removal of vehicles or parts thereof under this section shall be assessed against the last registered owner of the vehicle if the identity of the owner can be determined, unless the owner in the transfer of ownership of the vehicle has complied with RCW 46.12.101, or the costs may be assessed against the owner of the property on which the vehicle is stored, unless the property owner establishes the facts set forth in subsection (3) of this section.

(5) This section shall not apply to: 

(a) A vehicle or part thereof that is kept within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property except through an open garage door; or 

(b) A vehicle or part thereof that is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler or licensed vehicle dealer and is fenced according to RCW 46.80.130.

(6) After notice has been given of the City’s intent to dispose of the vehicle and after a hearing, if requested, has been held, the vehicle or parts thereof shall be removed at the request of the Code Enforcement Officer and disposed of to a licensed motor vehicle wrecker or hulk hauler with written notice being provided to the Washington State Patrol and the Department of Licensing that the vehicle has been wrecked. (Ord. 367 § 2, 2004; Ord. 350 § 5, 2003)


1.08.030 Owner of record presumed liable for costs when vehicle abandoned – Exceptions. 

(1) The abandonment of any junk vehicle or parts thereof shall constitute a prima facie presumption that the last owner of record is responsible for such junk vehicle and thus liable for any costs incurred in removing, storing and disposing of said vehicle less amounts realized at auction. 

(2) A registered owner transferring a vehicle shall be relieved from personal liability under this chapter if within five days of the transfer he transmits to the Department a seller’s report of sale on a form prescribed by the Director to show that the vehicle had been transferred prior to the date notice was given to him of the need to abate. (Ord. 350 § 5, 2003)


1.08.040 Owner or agent required to pay charges – Lien. 

(1) Any costs incurred in the removal and storage of an impounded vehicle shall be a lien upon the vehicle. All towing and storage charges on such vehicle impounded shall, to the extent authorized by law, be paid by the owner or his agent if the vehicle is redeemed. In the case of abandoned vehicles, all costs of removal and storage shall be paid by the owner or his agent if the vehicle is redeemed, but if not redeemed, such costs shall be received from the proceeds of sale and deficiencies assessed against the registered owner of the vehicle.

(2) Either a registered or legal owner may claim an impounded vehicle by payment of all charges that have accrued to the time of reclamation. If the vehicle was impounded at the direction of a law enforcement agency, the person in possession of the vehicle prior to the time of reclamation shall notify such agency of the fact that the vehicle has been claimed, and by whom. (Ord. 350 § 5, 2003)


1.08.050 Written impound authorization form. 

Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer impounds a vehicle pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the Officer shall complete an authorization form approved by the Chief of Police which specifies the section of this chapter or Chapter 46.55 RCW authorizing the impound. In the alternative, a notice of infraction or citation for an offense which authorizes the impound may be substituted. (Ord. 350 § 5, 2003)


1.08.060 Hearing Examiner to hear impound. 

All abatement hearings required under this chapter shall be conducted by the Hearing Examiner. A decision made by the Hearing Examiner under this chapter regarding abatement shall be final, as to abatement. (Ord. 350 § 5, 2003)


Chapter 1.09 UNFIT STRUCTURES

Sections:

1.09.010    Intent.

1.09.015    Definitions.

1.09.020    Delegation of authority.

1.09.030    Service.

1.09.040    Alternative service.

1.09.050    Complaint and hearing.

1.09.055    Recording.

1.09.060    Unfit determination.

1.09.065    Minimum standards.

1.09.070    Repealed.

1.09.080    Order.

1.09.085    Time to comply.

1.09.090    Appeal to Hearing Examiner.

1.09.100    Failure to comply.

1.09.110    Costs assessed against property.

1.09.120    Injunction.

1.09.130    Alternative enforcement.

1.09.140    Alternative abatement.


1.09.010 Intent.

It is hereby found that there sometimes exist, within the City of Woodinville, buildings, structures, and premises which are unfit for human habitation, or portions thereof which are unfit for other uses due to dilapidation, disrepair, structural defects, defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities, inadequate ventilation and uncleanliness, inadequate light or sanitary facilities, inadequate drainage, overcrowding, or due to other conditions which are inimical to the health and welfare of the residents of such municipalities and counties. It is the intent of this chapter to address such problems. (Ord. 686 § 3, 2019; Ord. 350 § 6, 2003)


1.09.015 Definitions.

The following definitions apply to this chapter:

(1) “City” means City of Woodinville.

(2) “City Manager” means the person appointed pursuant to WMC 2.09.010. 

(3) “Code” shall mean the Woodinville Municipal Code.

(4) “Code Enforcement Officer” means a person authorized to enforce the provisions of this title.

(5) “Costs” means, but is not limited to, contract expense and City employee labor expense incurred in abating a nuisance, a rental fee for City equipment used in abatement, costs of storage, disposal or destruction, legal expenses and attorneys’ fees associated with civil judicial enforcement of abatement orders or in seeking abatement orders, and any other costs incurred by the City excluding, however, fees and expenses associated with appeals authorized by this chapter or by State law.

(6) “Dangerous machine” shall mean any machine that has the potential to cause serious bodily harm to any person.

(7) “Director” means the person or persons designated by the City Manager to administer this chapter.

(8) “Discarded” shall mean cast off, thrown away or abandoned.

(9) “Household equipment” shall mean any apparatus, tool or similar item that is intended for a use in a dwelling, including but not limited to cooking utensils, appliances, and furniture. 

(10) “Neglected equipment” shall mean any machinery, tool or similar item that is left in a state of disrepair.

(11) “Person” shall mean any natural person, any corporation, any unincorporated association or partnership, or any other business entity. (Ord. 686 § 4, 2019)


1.09.020 Delegation of authority.

The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby designated and appointed to exercise the powers specified in this chapter. The City Council hereby authorizes the Code Enforcement Officer to exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this chapter. These powers shall include the following in addition to others herein granted:

(1)(a) To determine which dwellings within the City are unfit for human habitation;

(b) To determine which buildings, structures, or premises are unfit for other use;

(2) To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and receive evidence; and

(3) To investigate the dwelling and other property conditions in the City and to enter upon premises, with the consent of the occupant, for the purpose of making examinations when the Code Enforcement Officer has reasonable grounds for believing they are unfit for human habitation, or for other use, or for believing that conditions on property constitute a nuisance; provided, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the occupant; and provided further, that in the event entry is denied or resisted, an order for this purpose be obtained after submitting evidence in support of an application which is adequate to justify such an order from a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 686 § 5, 2019; Ord. 350 § 6, 2003)


1.09.030 Service.

If, after a preliminary investigation of any dwelling, building, structure, or premises, the Code Enforcement Officer finds that it is unfit for human habitation or other use, or that conditions thereon constitute a nuisance, he shall cause to be served either personally or by certified mail, with return receipt requested, upon all persons having any interest therein, as shown upon the records of the Auditor’s office of the County in which such property is located, and shall post in a conspicuous place on such property, a complaint stating in what respects such dwelling, building, structure, or premises is unfit for human habitation or other use, or in what respect the conditions thereon constitute a nuisance. (Ord. 350 § 6, 2003)


1.09.040 Alternative service.

If the whereabouts of any of such persons is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the Code Enforcement Officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and the Code Enforcement Officer makes an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of such complaint or order upon such persons may be made by mailing a copy of the complaint and order by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to each such person at the address of the building involved in the proceedings, and by mailing a copy of the complaint and order by first class mail to any address of each such person in the records of the County Assessor or the County Auditor for the County where the property is located and by posting such complaint and order in a conspicuous place on such property. (Ord. 350 § 6, 2003)


1.09.050 Complaint and hearing.

Such complaint shall contain a notice that a hearing will be held before the Code Enforcement Officer, at a place therein fixed, not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days after the serving of said complaint; and that all parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint, to appear in person, or otherwise, and to give testimony at the time and place in the complaint. The rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the Code Enforcement Officer. (Ord. 350 § 6, 2003)


1.09.055 Recording.

A copy of such complaint shall also be filed with the Auditor of the County in which the dwelling, building, structure, premises or property is located, and such filing of the complaint or order shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. (Ord. 350 § 6, 2003)


1.09.060 Unfit determination.

The Code Enforcement Officer may determine that a dwelling, building, structure, or premises is unfit for human habitation or other use if it finds that conditions exist in such dwelling, building, structure, or premises which are dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of the occupants of such dwelling, building, structure, or premises, the occupants of neighboring dwellings, or other residents of the City. Such conditions may include the following, without limitation: defects therein increasing the hazards of fire or accident; inadequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities, dilapidation, disrepair, structural defects, uncleanliness, overcrowding, or inadequate drainage. (Ord. 350 § 6, 2003)


1.09.065 Minimum standards.

(1) The 2003 International Property Maintenance Code is hereby declared to be the reasonable and minimum standards with respect to the conditions listed in WMC 1.09.060. The Code Enforcement Officer shall refer to these standards in determining the fitness of a dwelling for human habitation, or building, structure, or premises for other use.

(2) The determination of whether a dwelling, building, structure, or premises should be repaired or demolished shall be based on the specific standards above on the degree of structural deterioration of the dwelling, building, structure, or premises or upon the extent to which the dwelling, building, structure, or premises violates the above standards. (Ord. 350 § 6, 2003)


1.09.070 Nuisance determination.

Repealed by Ord. 686. (Ord. 350 § 6, 2003)


1.09.080 Order.

If, after the required hearing, the Code Enforcement Officer determines that the dwelling is unfit for human habitation, that the building, structure or premises is unfit for other use, or that the conditions on the property constitute a nuisance, he shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of such determination, and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner or occupant thereof, as is provided above, and shall post in a conspicuous place on said property, an order which: 

(1) Requires the owner or occupant, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, structure, or premises to render it fit for human habitation, or for other use, or to vacate and close the dwelling, building, structure, or premises, if such course of action is deemed proper on the basis of the standards set forth above; or

(2) Requires the owner or occupant, within the time specified in the order, to remove or demolish such dwelling, building, structure, or premises, if this course of action is deemed proper on the basis of said standards; or

(3) Otherwise requires the owner or occupant, within the time specified in the order, to abate the nuisance. If no appeal is filed, a copy of such order shall be filed with the Auditor of the County in which the dwelling, building, structure, or premises is located. (Ord. 350 § 6, 2003)


1.09.085 Time to comply.

(1) Determination of Time. When calculating a reasonable time for abating a nuisance, the Director shall consider the following criteria:

(a) The type and degree of violation cited in the notice as it relates to public health, safety and welfare;

(b) The stated intent, if any, of a responsible party to take steps to abate the nuisance;

(c) The procedural requirements for obtaining a permit to carry out corrective action;

(d) The complexity of the corrective action, including seasonal considerations, construction requirements and the legal prerogatives of landlords and tenants; and

(e) Any other circumstances beyond the control of the responsible party. (Ord. 350 § 6, 2003)


1.09.090 Appeal to Hearing Examiner.

(1) The owner or any occupant, within 30 days from the date of service and posting of an order issued by the Code Enforcement Officer under the provisions of this chapter, may file an appeal with the Hearing Examiner.

(2) The City Council hereby designates and establishes the Hearing Examiner to serve as the administrative appeals body for the purposes of this chapter. The City Council also hereby establishes the following rules of procedure to assure a prompt and thorough review of matters submitted to the Hearing Examiner: 

(a) All matters submitted to the Hearing Examiner must be resolved by the Hearing Examiner within 60 days from the date of filing therewith; and

(b) A transcript of the findings of fact of the Hearing Examiner shall be made available to the owner or other occupant upon demand.

(3) The findings and orders of the Hearing Examiner shall be the final administrative ruling, shall be reported in the same manner and shall bear the same legal consequences as if issued by the Code Enforcement Officer, and shall be subject to review only before a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 350 § 6, 2003)


1.09.100 Failure to comply.

If the owner or occupant, following exhaustion of his rights to appeal, fails to comply with the final order to repair, alter, improve, vacate, close, remove, or demolish the dwelling, building, structure, or premises, or to otherwise abate the nuisance, the Code Enforcement Officer may direct or cause such dwelling, building, structure, or premises to be repaired, altered, improved, vacated, and closed, removed, or demolished, or may direct or cause the nuisance to be abated. (Ord. 350 § 6, 2003)


1.09.110 Costs assessed against property.

(1) The amount of the cost of such repairs, alterations or improvements; or vacating and closing; or removal, demolition or abatement under the direction of the Code Enforcement Officer shall be assessed against the real property upon which such cost was incurred unless such amount is previously paid.

(2) The Finance Director shall certify the amount of any assessment to the County Treasurer who then, pursuant to RCW 35.80.030 and/or pursuant to RCW 35.23.440(10), enters the amount of such assessment upon the tax rolls against the property for the current year and the same shall become a part of the general taxes for that year to be collected at the same time and with interest at such rates and in such manner as provided for in RCW 84.56.020, as now or hereafter amended, for delinquent taxes. When collected, such assessment is to be deposited in the City’s general fund. 

(3) If the dwelling, building, structure, or premises is removed or demolished under the direction of the Code Enforcement Officer, the Code Enforcement Officer shall, if possible, sell the materials of such dwelling, building, structure, or premises in accordance with procedures set forth below, and shall credit the proceeds of such sale against the cost of the removal, demolition, or abatement and if there be any balance remaining, it shall be paid to the parties entitled thereto, as determined by the City Attorney, after deducting the costs incident thereto. (Ord. 350 § 6, 2003)


1.09.120 Injunction.

(1) Any person affected by an order issued by the Hearing Examiner pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, within 30 days after the posting and service of the order, may petition to the superior court for an injunction restraining the Code Enforcement Officer from carrying out the provisions of the order.

(2) In the event that the Hearing Examiner overturns the Code Enforcement Officer’s determination on appeal, the City Attorney may, pursuant to permission from the City Council, bring an action in superior court to overturn the Hearing Examiner’s decision, to obtain an injunction requiring abatement of the unfit structure or other nuisance and/or to seek any other appropriate legal or equitable relief available. (Ord. 350 § 6, 2003)


1.09.130 Alternative enforcement.

Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of any department of the City to enforce any provisions of its ordinances or regulations, nor to prevent or punish violations thereof; and the powers conferred by this chapter shall be in addition and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law. (Ord. 350 § 6, 2003)


1.09.140 Alternative abatement.

(1) Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the City to cause nuisances to be removed or abated by summary proceedings in the case of emergency or through any other lawful means.

(2) One alternative procedure that is hereby specifically reserved is that procedure referred to in RCW 7.48.260 whereby the City would seek a warrant of abatement from superior court along with an order awarding all costs and expenses to the City over and above any fine imposed by the court. (Ord. 350 § 6, 2003)


Chapter 1.10 OFFICIAL POSTING PLACES

Sections:

1.10.010    Designated.

1.10.020    Additional forms of notice.


1.10.010 Designated.

The following public places in the City are designated as the official posting places for all City notices and other documents required by law to be posted under RCW 35A.12.160:

(1) Woodinville City Hall, 17301 133rd Avenue NE, Woodinville, WA; bulletin board located on the exterior wall of the City Council Chambers by the main City Hall entrance; and

(2) United States Post Office, 17610 Woodinville Snohomish Road NE, Woodinville, WA; bulletin board located on the exterior wall by the main entrance. (Ord. 522 § 1, 2011)


1.10.020 Additional forms of notice.

Whenever possible the City shall utilize additional forms of notice including, but not limited to, the City of Woodinville official website. (Ord. 522 § 2, 2011)


Chapter 1.11 CITY OFFICE HOURS

Sections:

1.11.010    Hours offices open.


1.11.010 Hours offices open. 

All offices and departments of the City shall be kept open for the transaction of business with the public from the hours of 7:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday; and 7:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on Fridays, excepting legal holidays, provided the City Manager may authorize any office or department to vary from these hours where it will promote the efficiency of the office or department and provide adequate service to the public. (Ord. 562 § 1, 2013)


Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL

Chapters:

2.03    Oath and Bond Requirements

2.06    Salaries for City Councilmembers

2.09    City Manager

2.10    City Clerk

2.11    Finance Director

2.12    Planning Commission

2.15    Repealed

2.18    Legal Actions Against City Officials and Employees

2.21    Disclosure of Public Records

2.22    Public Spaces Commission

2.23    Repealed

2.24    Public Trees

2.25    Repealed

2.27    Hearing Examiner

2.30    Appeal Procedures

2.31    Amendment of Administrative Rules

2.33    Power of Initiative and Referendum 

2.36    Code of Ethics

2.37    Rules of Procedure

2.39    Employees’ Retirement System

2.42    Municipal Court

2.45    Annexation to King County Library District

2.48    Credit Card Regulations for City Officials and Employees


Chapter 2.03 OATH AND BOND REQUIREMENTS

Sections:

2.03.010    Oath required.

2.03.020    Bond required.


2.03.010 Oath required.

Any City officer, before entering upon the performance of the duties of office, shall be required to take an oath or affirmation for the faithful performance of his or her duties. The oath or affirmation shall be filed with the King County Department of Records and Elections. (Ord. 15 § 1, 1993)


2.03.020 Bond required.

Prior to entering upon the performance of duties, the City Manager, the City Clerk and the Finance Director shall be required to furnish an official bond, to be renewed annually, conditioned on the honest and faithful performance of their official duties.

The premium on the bond(s) shall be paid by the City. The amount of the bond(s) shall be at least:

(1) City Manager – $50,000;

(2) Finance Director – $50,000;

(3) City Clerk – $50,000. (Ord. 604 § 2, 2015; Ord. 530 § 3, 2012; Ord. 15 § 2, 1993)


Chapter 2.06 SALARIES FOR CITY COUNCILMEMBERS

Sections:

2.06.010    Council salaries.

2.06.020    Councilmember waiver and election not to receive compensation.


2.06.010 Council salaries.

The salaries to be paid to Woodinville City Councilmembers shall be $400.00 per month plus an additional $100.00 per month for serving as Mayor until January 1, 2000, at which time the salaries shall be increased to $600.00 per month with an additional $100.00 for serving as Mayor. (Ord. 192 § 1, 1997; Ord. 62 § 1, 1993)


2.06.020 Councilmember waiver and election not to receive compensation.

A Councilmember may voluntarily waive and elect not to be paid all or any portion of the salaries set forth in WMC 2.06.010 during their term of office. Notice of waiver and election must be:

(1) In writing and delivered to the Finance Director prior to the effective date;

(2) Signed by the Councilmember and their spouse, if married, as required by RCW 49.48.100. Signature(s) shall be before a notary public.

The waiver shall be effective for all salary earned following the effective date and continue in effect until withdrawn by a writing signed by the Councilmember or their spouse delivered to the Finance Director. Councilmembers’ salaries that are declined or waived shall be used for any general fund purpose. (Ord. 501 § 1, 2010; Ord. 458 § 1, 2008)


Chapter 2.09  CITY MANAGER

Sections:

2.09.010    Office of City Manager established – Appointment.

2.09.020    Duties of City Manager.

2.09.030    City organization.


2.09.010 Office of City Manager established – Appointment.

Pursuant to RCW 35A.13.010 and 35A.13.090 there is hereby established for the City of Woodinville, the office of City Manager. Such office shall be appointive and all appointments to such office shall be made by the City Council. (Ord. 23 § 1, 1993)


2.09.020 Duties of City Manager.

The City Manager shall be the Chief Executive Officer and head of the administrative branch of the City. The City Manager shall be responsible to the Council for the proper administration of all affairs of the City. The City Manager shall have all of the powers and shall perform each and all of the duties specified by Chapter 35A.13 RCW, together with any other duties or authority which may be conferred upon such office by the City Council or by the laws of the State of Washington or the laws of the City as they now exist or may hereafter be amended. (Ord. 23 § 2, 1993)


2.09.030 City organization.

The City Manager is authorized to create, eliminate, consolidate and modify such departments, offices and employment as from time to time he or she may find necessary or advisable for the efficient operations of the City and may determine the powers and duties of each department or office. The City Manager may delegate to such officer any duties required or authorized to be performed by the City Manager. (Ord. 23 § 3, 1993)


Chapter 2.10 CITY CLERK

Sections:

2.10.010    Office of City Clerk established – Appointment.

2.10.020    Duties.


2.10.010 Office of City Clerk established – Appointment.

The office of City Clerk is hereby established for the City of Woodinville. Such office shall be appointive and all appointments to such office shall be made by the City Manager. (Ord. 530 § 1, 2012)


2.10.020 Duties. 

The City Clerk shall perform all of the duties of the City Clerk as prescribed by State statutes, City ordinances, and as assigned by the City Manager. (Ord. 530 § 1, 2012)


Chapter 2.11 FINANCE DIRECTOR

Sections:

2.11.010    Office of Finance Director established – Appointment.

2.11.020    Duties.


2.11.010 Office of Finance Director established – Appointment.

The office of Finance Director is hereby established for the City of Woodinville. Such office shall be appointive and all appointment to such office shall be made by the City Manager. (Ord. 530 § 2, 2012)


2.11.020 Duties.

The Finance Director shall perform all the duties of the office of Finance Director, Auditing Officer, and the office of Treasurer as prescribed by State statute, City ordinance and as assigned by the City Manager. (Ord. 593 § 1, 2014; Ord. 530 § 2, 2012)


Chapter 2.12 PLANNING COMMISSION

Sections:

2.12.010    Planning Commission created.

2.12.020    Membership.

2.12.030    Meetings.

2.12.040    Duties and responsibilities.


2.12.010 Planning Commission created.

There is hereby created a Planning Commission consisting of seven members to provide guidance and direction to the City Council on Woodinville’s future growth through continued review and improvement to the City’s Comprehensive Plan and related land use documents. (Ord. 55 § 1, 1993)


2.12.020 Membership.

(1) The Planning Commission shall consist of seven members, each of whom shall be appointed for a term of four years. Any member whose term is expiring or has expired may be reappointed for a subsequent four-year term with no break in service required; provided, that each seat must be subject to an open application and Council appointment process prior to each subsequent term after the first two full terms. Terms shall expire on July 1st. 

(2) Appointment. Members of the Planning Commission shall be appointed by the City Council. Members of the Planning Commission must reside within the City limits. Planning Commission members shall be selected without respect to political affiliation and shall serve without compensation.

(3) Removal. Members of the Planning Commission may be removed by a majority vote of the entire City Council for neglect of duty, conflict of interest, malfeasance in office or other just cause, or for unexcused absence for more than three consecutive regular meetings. The decision of the City Council shall be final and there shall be no appeal therefrom.

(4) Vacancies. Vacancies occurring other than through the expiration of term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as for appointments as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 682 § 1, 2019; Ord. 320 § 1, 2002; Ord. 184 § 1, 1997; Ord. 85 § 1, 1994; Ord. 55 § 2, 1993)


2.12.030 Meetings.

(1) The Planning Commission shall elect from among its members a chair who shall preside at all meetings and a vice chair who shall preside in the absence of the chair. A majority of the Planning 

Commission members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business and a majority vote of those present shall be necessary to carry any motion.

(2) The Planning Commission shall adopt such rules and regulations as are necessary for the conduct of its business. (Ord. 55 § 3, 1993)


2.12.040 Duties and responsibilities.

The Planning Commission shall be an advisory body to the City Council responsible for providing guidance and direction for Woodinville’s future growth. Duties of the Planning Commission shall include:

(1) Review and recommendations relating to the City of Woodinville’s comprehensive land use plan.

(2) Review and recommend approval of changes to the official zoning map and the zoning code.

(3) Such other and further duties as assigned by the City Council. (Ord. 55 § 4, 1993)


Chapter 2.15 EMERGENCY SERVICES

(Repealed by Ord. 248)


Chapter 2.18 LEGAL ACTIONS BROUGHT AGAINST CITY OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES

Sections:

2.18.010    Definitions.

2.18.020    Legal representation.

2.18.030    Exclusions.

2.18.040    Determination of exclusion.

2.18.050    Representation and payment of claims – Conditions.

2.18.060    Effect of compliance with conditions.

2.18.070    Failure to comply with conditions.

2.18.080    Reimbursement of incurred expenses.

2.18.090    Conflict with provisions of insurance policies.

2.18.100    Pending claims.


2.18.010 Definitions.

Unless the context indicates otherwise, the words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:

(1) “Official” means any person who is serving or has served as an elected or appointed City official or officer, and any person who is serving or has served as an appointed member of any City board, commission, committee or other appointed position with the City. The term appointed as used herein shall mean a person formally appointed by the City Council or authorized by State law or City law.

(2) “Employee” means any person who is or has been employed by the City. (Ord. 6 § 1, 1993)


2.18.020 Legal representation.

(1) As a condition of service or employment the City shall provide to an official or employee, subject to the conditions and requirements of this chapter, and notwithstanding the fact that such official or employee may have concluded service or employment with the City, such legal representation as may be reasonably necessary to defend a claim or lawsuit filed against such official or employee resulting from any conduct, act or omission of such official or employee performed or omitted on behalf of the City in their capacity as a City official or employee, which act or omission is within the scope of their service or employment with the City.

This chapter is subject to repeal or modification at the sole discretion of the City Council; provided, that such repeal or modification shall apply prospectively only, and shall have no effect upon the obligation to indemnify and/or defend against any claim which is based, in whole or in part, upon any act or omission of an official occurring prior to the effective date of the repeal or modification.

(2) The legal services shall be provided by the office of the City Attorney unless:

(a) Any provision of an applicable policy of insurance provides otherwise; or

(b) A conflict of interest or ethical bar exists with respect to said representation.

(3) In the event that outside counsel is retained under subsection (2)(a) above, the City shall indemnify the employee from the reasonable costs of defense; provided, that in no event shall the officer or employee be indemnified for attorney’s fees in excess of the hourly rates established by the City’s contract with the attorney selected by the City. The officer or employee shall be liable for all hourly charges in excess of said rate. (Ord. 6 § 2, 1993)


2.18.030 Exclusions.

(1) In no event shall protection be offered under this chapter by the City to:

(a) Any dishonest, fraudulent, criminal, willful, intentional or malicious act or course of conduct of an official or employee;

(b) Any act or course of conduct of an official or employee which is not performed on behalf of the City;

(c) Any act or course of conduct which is outside the scope of an official’s or employee’s service or employment with the City; and/or

(d) Any lawsuit brought against an official or employee by or on behalf of the City.

(2) Nothing herein shall be construed to waive or impair the right of the City Council to institute suit or counterclaim against any official or employee nor to limit its ability to discipline or terminate an employee.

(3) The provisions of this chapter shall have no force or effect with respect to any accident, occurrence or circumstance for which the City or the official or employee is insured against loss or damages under the terms of any valid insurance policy; provided, that this chapter shall provide protection, subject to its terms and limitations, above any loss limit of such policy. The provisions of this chapter are intended to be secondary to any contract or policy of insurance owned or applicable to any official or employee. The City shall have the right to require an employee to utilize any such policy protection prior to requesting the protection afforded by this chapter. (Ord. 6 § 3, 1993)


2.18.040 Determination of exclusion.

The determination of whether an official or employee shall be afforded a defense by the City under the terms of this chapter shall be made by the City Council on the recommendation of the City Manager.

The decision of the City Council shall be final as a legislative determination and shall be based upon a finding that the claim or suit against an official or employee meets or does not meet the criteria of this chapter. Nothing herein shall preclude the City from undertaking an officer’s or employee’s defense under a reservation of rights. The determination as to whether to furnish a defense as provided under this chapter to a member or members of the City Council shall be made without the vote of such member or members of the City Council unless the inclusion of such member or members is required for a quorum; provided, that if a claim or lawsuit affects a quorum or greater number of the members of the City Council, all such affected members shall retain their voting privileges under this section. (Ord. 6 § 4, 1993)


2.18.050 Representation and payment of claims – Conditions.

The provisions of this chapter shall apply only when the following conditions are met:

(1) In the event of any incident or course of conduct potentially giving rise to a claim for damage, or the commencement of a suit, the official or employee involved shall, as soon as practicable, give the City Attorney written notice thereof, identifying the official or employee involved, all information known to the official or employee involved, all information known to the official or employee with respect to the date, time, place and circumstances surrounding the incident or conduct giving rise to the claim or lawsuit, as well as the names and addresses of all persons allegedly injured or otherwise damaged thereby, and the names and addresses of all witnesses.

(2) Upon receipt thereof, the official or employee shall forthwith deliver any claim, demand, notice or summons or other process relating to any such incident or conduct to the City Attorney, and shall cooperate with the City Attorney or an attorney designated by the City, and, upon request, assist in making settlement of any suit and enforcing any claim for any right of subrogation against any persons or organizations that may be liable to the City because of any damage or claim of loss, arising from said incident or course of conduct, including, but not limited to, rights of recovery for costs and attorneys’ fees arising out of State or Federal statute upon a determination that the suit brought is frivolous in nature.

(3) Such official or employee shall attend interviews, depositions, hearings and trials and shall assist in securing and giving evidence and obtaining attendance of witnesses all without any additional compensation to the official or employee and, in the event that an employee has left the employ of the City, no fee or compensation shall be provided; and

(4) Such official or employee shall not accept nor voluntarily make any payment, assume any obligation, or incur any expense relating to said claim or suit, other than for first aid to others at the time of any incident or course of conduct giving rise to any such claim, loss, or damage. (Ord. 6 § 5, 1993)


2.18.060 Effect of compliance with conditions.

If legal representation of an official or employee is undertaken by the City Attorney, all of the conditions of any representation are met, and a judgment is entered against the official or employee, or a settlement made, the City shall pay such judgment or settlement not otherwise covered by insurance; provided, that the City may at its discretion appeal as necessary such judgment. (Ord. 6 § 6, 1993)


2.18.070 Failure to comply with conditions.

In the event that any official or employee fails or refuses to comply with any of the conditions of WMC 2.18.040, or elects to provide his/her own representation with respect to any such claim or litigation, then all of the provisions for indemnification in this chapter shall be inapplicable, and have no force or effect with respect to any such claim or litigation. (Ord. 6 § 7, 1993)


2.18.080 Reimbursement of incurred expenses.

(1) If the City determines that an official or employee does not come within the provisions of this chapter, and a court of competent jurisdiction later determines that such claim does come within the provisions of this chapter, then the City shall pay any judgment rendered against the official or employee and reasonable attorney’s fees incurred in defending against the claim.

The City shall pay any costs and reasonable attorney’s fees incurred in obtaining the determination that such claim is covered by the provisions of this chapter; provided, if a court of competent jurisdiction determines that such claim does not come within the provisions of this chapter, then the official or employee shall pay the City’s costs and reasonable attorney’s fees incurred in obtaining the determination that such claim is not covered under the provisions of this chapter.

(2) If the City determines that a claim against a City official or employee does come within the provisions of this chapter, and a court of competent jurisdiction later finds that such claim does not come within the provisions of this chapter, then the City shall be reimbursed for costs or expenses incurred in obtaining the determination that such claim is not covered by the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 6 § 8, 1993)


2.18.090 Conflict with provisions of insurance policies.

The indemnification provisions of this chapter do not constitute a policy of insurance, and nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to modify or amend any provisions of any policy of insurance where any City official or employee thereof is the named insured.

In the event of any conflict between this chapter and the provisions of any such policy of insurance, the policy provisions shall be controlling; provided, however, that nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to limit or restrict any employee’s or official’s right to full coverage pursuant to this chapter, it being the intent of this chapter and section to provide the coverage detailed in this chapter only outside and beyond insurance policies which may be in effect, while not compromising the terms and conditions of such policies by any conflicting provision contained in this chapter. (Ord. 6 § 9, 1993)


2.18.100 Pending claims.

The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any pending claim or lawsuit against an official or employee, or any such claim or lawsuit thereafter filed, without regard to the date of the events or circumstances which are the basis of such claim or lawsuit. (Ord. 6 § 10, 1993)


Chapter 2.21 DISCLOSURE OF PUBLIC RECORDS

Sections:

2.21.010    Relationship to Public Records Act.

2.21.020    Public Records Officer.

2.21.030    Maintenance of records.

2.21.040    Index of public records – Findings.

2.21.050    Index of public records – Order.

2.21.060    Disclosure of public records.

2.21.070    Procedure for inspection or copying.

2.21.080    Processing public records requests – Review of decision.

2.21.090    Exemptions.

2.21.100    Reimbursement for copying costs.

2.21.110    Model Rules and administrative procedures.


2.21.010 Relationship to Public Records Act.

This chapter constitutes the City’s rules and regulations to carry out and implement the Public Records Act, Chapter 42.56 RCW. (Ord. 442 § 1, 2007)


2.21.020 Public Records Officer.

The City Clerk shall serve as the City’s Public Records Officer. Contact information for the City Clerk will be made available to the public in a manner reasonably calculated to provide notice of to whom members of the public may direct requests, such as posting such contact information at City Hall or on the City’s Internet website. (Ord. 442 § 1, 2007)


2.21.030 Maintenance of records.

All substantive and procedural rules of general applicability, including but not limited to ordinances and resolutions of the City Council, minutes of the regular meetings of the City Council, and statements of general policy, and all public contracts, deeds, easements and leases shall be indexed and maintained by the City Clerk. (Ord. 442 § 1, 2007)


2.21.040 Index of public records – Findings.

(1) The Public Records Act requires all cities and public agencies to maintain and make available a current index of all public records.

(2) RCW 42.56.070(4) provides that an agency need not maintain such an index if to do so would be unduly burdensome, but it must issue and publish a formal order specifying the reasons why and the extent to which compliance would be unduly burdensome or would interfere with agency operations.

(3) The City is comprised of numerous departments, their divisions and subdivisions, many if not all of which maintain separate databases and/or systems for the indexing of records and information.

(4) Because the City has records which are diverse, complex and stored in multiple locations and in multiple computer systems, formats and/or databases, it is unduly burdensome, if not physically impossible, to maintain a current index of all records. (Ord. 442 § 1, 2007)


2.21.050 Index of public records – Order.

Based upon the findings set forth in WMC 2.21.040, and pursuant to RCW 42.56.070(4), the City Council orders the following:

(1) The City is not required to maintain an all-inclusive index of public records due to the undue burden and near-impossibility of maintaining such an index.

(2) The City will make available for inspection and/or copying all public records, including any indexes that are maintained by the City as set forth in WMC 2.21.030, except to the extent that such records are exempt from public disclosure. (Ord. 442 § 1, 2007)


2.21.060 Disclosure of public records.

Unless exempt from disclosure under this chapter or other law, public records shall be available for inspection and copying in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 442 § 1, 2007)


2.21.070 Procedure for inspection or copying.

(1) All persons desiring to inspect or obtain a copy of any public record should make their request in writing to the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall create and avail for public use a standard form by which a requestor may specify particular public records and provide the requestor’s relevant contact information. Reasonable assistance as may be necessary to help a requestor locate particular records shall be provided either by the City Clerk or by the City department maintaining the records; provided, that the provision of such assistance shall not unreasonably disrupt the normal operations of the City Clerk, the department, or the assisting employee.

(2) Except to the extent required or authorized by law, the City Clerk or other City employee shall not distinguish among persons requesting records. Persons requesting records shall not be required to provide information as to the purpose for the request, except to establish whether the inspection or copying would violate Chapter 42.56 RCW or other statute or ordinance that exempts or prohibits disclosure of specific information or records to certain persons. (Ord. 652 § 1, 2017; Ord. 442 § 1, 2007)


2.21.080 Processing public records requests – Review of decision.

(1) Responses to requests for public records shall be made promptly pursuant to Chapter 42.56 RCW. Within five business days of the date of receipt by the City of a written request for a record, the City Clerk shall:

(a) Provide the record; or

(b) Provide an internet address and link on the City’s website to the specific records requested, except that if the requestor notifies the City that he or she cannot access the records through the internet, then the agency must provide copies of the record or allow the requestor to view copies using a City computer; or

(c) Acknowledge that the City has received the request and (i) provide a reasonable estimate of the time the City will require to respond to the request; or

(d) Acknowledge that the City has received the request and ask the requestor to provide clarification for a request that is unclear, and providing, to the greatest extent possible, a reasonable estimate of the time the City will require to respond to the request if it is not clarified; or

(e) Deny the public record request.

(2) Public records may be made available on a partial or installment basis as records that are part of a larger set of requested records are assembled or made ready for public inspection or copying. Additional time to respond to a request may be based upon the need to clarify the intent of the request, to locate and assemble the information requested, to notify third persons or agencies affected by the request, or to determine whether any of the information requested is exempt. If a public records request is unclear, the City Clerk may ask the requestor to clarify what information the requestor is requesting. If the requestor fails to respond to a request to clarify the request, and the entire request is unclear, the City need not respond to it. Otherwise, the agency must respond to those portions of the request that are clear.

(3) If the City Clerk determines that the record is exempt in part but can be made available after deletion of exempt portions, the request shall be granted; provided, that such exempt portions shall first be deleted. If the City Clerk determines to deny the request, in whole or in part, a written statement of the specific reasons for the denial shall be provided to the requestor; provided, that nothing herein shall be construed as requiring the City to disclose portions of a requested record if the entire record is exempt from disclosure.

(4) A requestor who objects to the denial or partial denial of a records request may petition in writing to the City Clerk for a review of that decision. The petition shall include a copy of or identify the written statement by the City Clerk denying the request. The City Clerk shall have two business days to review the requestor’s petition, or such other time period as the City and the requestor mutually agree to. If the City Clerk does not reverse the denial within two business days or a mutually agreed to time period, the denial shall be considered final action by the City. (Ord. 652 § 1, 2017; Ord. 442 § 1, 2007)


2.21.090 Exemptions.

The City adopts by reference the exemptions from public disclosure contained in Chapter 42.56 RCW, including any future amendments thereto or recodification thereof, along with any other exemption or exception to the Public Records Act provided by law, including but not limited to those exemptions set forth in Appendix C to “Public Records Act for Washington Cities, Counties, and Special Purpose Districts,” Municipal Research and Services Center, September 2016, a copy of which shall be maintained in the office of the City Clerk, and those exemptions set forth at the Attorney General’s Sunshine Committee webpage, http://www.atg.wa.gov/sunshine-committee. (Ord. 652 § 1, 2017; Ord. 442 § 1, 2007)


2.21.100 Reimbursement for copying costs.

(1) No fee shall be charged for the inspection of public records. Any person who requests a copy of any public record from the City Clerk shall pay to the City Clerk or designee a copying charge. Per RCW 42.56.120(2)(b), the City is not calculating actual costs for copying its records because to do so would be unduly burdensome for the following reasons: the City does not have the resources to conduct a study to determine actual copying costs for all its records; to conduct such a study would interfere with other essential agency functions; and, through the legislative process, the public and requestors have commented on and been informed of authorized fees and costs provided in the Public Records Act including RCW 42.56.120 and other laws. Therefore, in order to timely implement a fee schedule consistent with the Public Records Act, it is more cost efficient, expeditious, and in the public interest for the City to adopt a fee schedule which calls for charges not to exceed those authorized in RCW 42.56.120. The fee schedule for copying charges for public records, including but not limited to photocopies, maps, photographs including slides, audio tape recordings, video tape recordings and diskettes, shall be established by City Council resolution.

(2) The City may charge all costs directly incident to shipping and transmitting such public records, including but not limited to the cost of postage or delivery charges and the cost of any container or envelope, and including the cost of any electronic transmission charge and the cost of any digital storage media or device provided by the City.

(3) The City may, at its discretion, require the requestor to deposit a sum in an amount not to exceed 10 percent of the estimated cost of providing copies for a request, including any customized service charge referred to in subsection (5) of this section. If the records are made available on a partial or installment basis, the City may charge for each part of the request as it is provided. If an installment of a records request is not paid for or reviewed within 20 days after the City provides notice of availability of the installment, the City is not obligated to fulfill the balance of the request.

(4) Where the request is for a certified copy, there shall be an additional charge in the amount established by City Council resolution to cover the additional expense and time required for certification.

(5) The City may charge for the actual cost of customized services where the City estimates that the request would require the use of information technology expertise to prepare data compilations, or provide customized electronic access services when such compilations and customized service access services are not used by the City for other City purposes. The City may not assess a customized service charge unless it has notified the requestor of the customized service charge to be applied to the request, including an explanation of why the customized service charge applies, a description of the specific expertise, and a reasonable estimated cost of the charge. The notice also must provide the requestor the opportunity to amend his or her request in order to avoid or reduce the cost of a customized service charge.

(6) The City is not required to print and copy records at its own facilities. The City can send records projects to an outside vendor and bill the requestor for the actual amount charged by the vendor. The City can arrange with the requestor for him or her to pay the vendor directly. The City cannot charge a requestor more than the actual cost charged by the vendor. (Ord. 652 § 1, 2017; Ord. 442 § 1, 2007)


2.21.110 Model Rules and administrative procedures.

The City may, in its discretion, follow the Public Records Act Model Rules on file at the City Clerk’s office. The City Manager, upon recommendation of the City Clerk, may issue additional administrative procedures for the implementation of this chapter. (Ord. 442 § 1, 2007)


Chapter 2.22 PUBLIC SPACES COMMISSION

Sections:

2.22.010    Purpose.

2.22.020    Created.

2.22.030    Membership.

2.22.040    Compensation.

2.22.050    Meetings.

2.22.060    Staff support.

2.22.070    Duties and responsibilities.

2.22.080    Public art.

2.22.090    Limitations.


2.22.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish an advisory body to provide guidance and direction on the creation of well rounded public spaces by advising the City Council and staff on matters relating to parks, recreation, trees, art, and City rights-of-way while promoting the responsible management of these public resources in a manner consistent with the goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan; community urban forestry plan; parks, recreation, and open space plan; the City’s Tree Code; and public infrastructure standards and specifications. (Ord. 675 § 17, 2018)


2.22.020 Created.

There is hereby created a Public Spaces Commission for the City of Woodinville, Washington. (Ord. 675 § 17, 2018)


2.22.030 Membership.

(1) Term of Office. The Public Spaces Commission shall consist of seven members, each of who shall be appointed for a term of three years. Any member whose term is expiring or has expired may be reappointed for a subsequent three-year term with no break in service required; provided, that each seat must be subject to an open application, appointment and Council confirmation process prior to each subsequent term after the first two full terms. If a vacancy occurs during the term of any member, his/her successor shall be appointed to serve for the unexpired portion of the term.

(2) Appointment and Qualifications. Members of the Public Spaces Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the City Council. Members of the Public Spaces Commission must reside within the City limits of the City of Woodinville.

(3) Ex-Officio Appointment. With the consent of the majority of the Public Spaces Commission, the chairperson may appoint up to four nonvoting members to the Commission with expertise or interest in a subject matter area relevant to the current work of the Commission. Ex-officio members of the Public Spaces Commission need not meet residency requirements. The duration of such appointments will be established by the Commission at the time the appointments are made.

(4) Removal. Members of the Public Spaces Commission may be removed by the majority vote of the entire City Council for neglect of duty, conflict of interest, malfeasance in office or other just cause, or for unexcused absence for more than three consecutive regular meetings. The decision of the City Council shall be final and there shall be no appeal therefrom.

(5) Vacancies. Vacancies, occurring other than through the expiration of term, shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as for appointments as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 684 § 1, 2019; Ord. 680 § 1, 2019; Ord. 675 § 17, 2018)


2.22.040 Compensation.

Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation but with the appreciation of the City Council. (Ord. 675 § 17, 2018)


2.22.050 Meetings.

(1) The Public Spaces Commission shall elect from among its members a chair who shall preside at all meetings and a vice chair who shall preside in the absence of the chair. The chairperson and vice chairperson shall be elected annually at the first meeting of the year.

(2) A majority of the appointed and confirmed Public Spaces Commission members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business and a majority vote of those present shall be necessary to carry any motion.

(3) The Public Spaces Commission shall adopt such rules and regulations as are necessary for the conduct of its business.

(4) The Public Spaces Commission shall provide for a regular meeting schedule, including time, place and frequency of meetings as necessary. The Commission may, from time to time, provide for special meetings in accordance with Chapter 42.30 RCW. All meetings shall be open to the public, in accordance with Chapter 42.30 RCW, the Open Public Meetings Act. (Ord. 675 § 17, 2018)


2.22.060 Staff support.

City staff shall provide technical and clerical support for the Commission. (Ord. 675 § 17, 2018)


2.22.070 Duties and responsibilities.

The Public Spaces Commission shall act in a policy advisory capacity to the City Council, as directed by the City Council. In performance of its duties and responsibilities, the Public Spaces Commission may be called upon to provide recommendations on matters including, but not limited to, the following:

(1) Parks and Open Spaces Related Matters. Comprehensive park planning; the acquisition of land and/or other facilities for parks and recreational facilities; development, design and operation of parks and recreation programming and facilities; facility use fees and procedures; park, play field and facility design; capital improvement planning; concessions; contracts, interlocal agreements, and lease agreements regarding parks and recreation activities.

(2) Tree Related Matters. City of Woodinville Urban Forestry Plan; tree protection regulations and landscaping requirements; education materials in support of the urban forestry plan and tree protection regulations and standards; tree inventory and tree canopy assessment studies; heritage tree program; and Arbor Day events.

(3) Art Related Matters. Donated and loaned art; strategies for promotion of public art; promotion of public/private partnerships for the benefit of public art pieces; and incorporation of art into the design of public facilities.

(4) Right-of-Way Related Matters. Those matters occurring in City-owned rights-of-way which affect the creation of well rounded public spaces for the community.

(5) All additional matters as may, from time to time, be referred to the Public Spaces Commission by the City Council or the City Manager. (Ord. 675 § 17, 2018)


2.22.080 Public art.

When considering matters pertaining to public art pursuant to WMC 2.22.070(3), the Public Spaces Commission shall be guided by the following considerations: 

(1) Art projects will be responsive to the community by reflecting and respecting local values and character, and providing a source of pride for generations of residents.

(2) Art projects will reflect the scope, scale, and character of the site.

(3) Art projects will be assessed for durability, resistance to vandalism, and public safety.

(4) Consideration of long-term maintenance shall be a consideration in any decision regarding acquisition, donation, or display of public art.

(5) Art projects will promote a multicultural and diverse experience for all residents.

(6) Whenever possible, art projects will be incorporated into the design of the facility. (Ord. 675 § 17, 2018)


2.22.090 Limitations.

The Public Spaces Commission shall have no duties or responsibilities related to the following activities: 

(1) Advocacy on behalf of the City or the Commission without expressed Council authorization;

(2) Supervision of staff, administrative operations, or maintenance; and 

(3) Regional issues not specifically assigned to the Commission by the City Council. (Ord. 675 § 17, 2018)


Chapter 2.23 PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION

(Repealed by Ord. 675)


Chapter 2.24 PUBLIC TREES

Sections:

2.24.005    Purpose.

2.24.010    Definitions.

2.24.015    Applicability.

2.24.020    Repealed.

2.24.030    Repealed.

2.24.040    Repealed.

2.24.050    Repealed.

2.24.060    Repealed.

2.24.065    Repealed.

2.24.068    Repealed.

2.24.070    Street tree species to be planted.

2.24.075    Tree care standards manual.

2.24.080    Public tree care.

2.24.085    Emergency tree removal and maintenance.

2.24.090    Tree planting.

2.24.100    Rights-of-way street tree spacing and location requirements.

2.24.110    Measure methods.

2.24.120    Tree pruning and maintenance.

2.24.130    Tree topping.

2.24.140    Tree removal.

2.24.150    Removal of stumps.

2.24.160    Tree protection.

2.24.170    Arborist’s certification and bond.

2.24.180    Penalty.

2.24.190    Variance and appeal process.

Prior legislation: Ords. 103, 140, 207.


2.24.005 Purpose.

The purpose of these regulations is to encourage responsible management of public tree resources within the City of Woodinville in a manner consistent with the goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan; community urban forestry plan; parks, recreation, and open space plan; and public infrastructure standards and specifications. Because trees growing on public property provide benefits to the greater public at large, they are deserving of a high standard of protection. Proper protection, planting, and maintenance are required to promote tree health and aesthetics, foster species diversity, and to preserve the public tree canopy. Therefore, the purposes of this chapter are to:

(1) Encourage the planting of new trees and the maintenance in public areas of existing trees for all the benefits they provide the community;

(2) Maintain public trees in a healthy and nonhazardous condition through best arboricultural practices;

(3) Manage trees and vegetation on public property in a manner that represents the best interests of the public; and

(4) Encourage a diversity of appropriate species of trees. (Ord. 675 § 2, 2018; Ord. 238 § 1, 1999)


2.24.010 Definitions.

(1) “ANSI” shall mean the American National Standards Institute. ANSI A300 are voluntary industry consensus standards developed by Tree Care Industry Association and written by a committee called the Accredited Standards Committee (ASC).

(2) “Certified arborist” shall mean someone who has passed the International Society of Arboriculture’s extensive certification exam covering all aspects of tree care in addition to the education and experience required to receive the certification.

(3) “City” shall mean the City of Woodinville.

(4) “City Tree Official” shall mean the Development Services Director or his/her designees responsible for implementing the community urban forestry plan and regulations. The City Tree Official shall use the expertise of a certified arborist, under contract by the City, for technical advice on decisions related to the community urban forest.

(5) “Climbing spurs” shall mean sharp, pointed devices affixed to the climber’s legs used to assist in climbing trees (also known as gaffs, hooks, spurs, spikes, and climbers).

(6) “Community urban forest” shall mean the aggregate of public and private trees and plants in the City.

(7) “Community urban forestry plan” shall mean a plan adopted as part of the Comprehensive Plan establishing the goals, policies, and implementation strategies for developing and maintaining the community urban forest within the City of Woodinville.

(8) “Community urban forestry standards” shall mean a set of standards and specifications that includes, at a minimum, provisions for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, or removal of trees and shrubs in the parks, along public streets and in other public areas of the City, together with development standards for private development projects which require City approval.

(9) “Crown reduction pruning” shall mean the reduction of the top, sides, or individual limbs by the means of removal of the leader or longest portion of a limb to a lateral no less than one-third of the total diameter of the original limb and removing no more than one-quarter of the leaf surface.

(10) “Heritage tree” shall mean a tree or stand of trees that is particularly desirable because it has valued, unique characteristics that set them apart from other similar trees. Valued, unique characteristics include uncommon genus, species, form, size, location, historic significance or other desirable feature(s).

(11) “Public trees and plants” shall mean trees growing on property owned in fee-simple by the City of Woodinville or in public easements such as park trees and plants and street trees and plants.

(12) “Tree and/or plant industry professional” shall mean an individual who has professional experience in the tree and/or plant industry including, but not limited to, arboriculture, landscaping, horticulture, urban forestry or other similar industries. (Ord. 675 § 3, 2018; Ord. 478 § 2, 2009; Ord. 238 § 1, 1999)


2.24.015 Applicability.

The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the planting, maintenance, removal, preservation, and protection of all public trees and plants as defined in this chapter. Planting of trees and plants shall be considered in all City construction and land use projects.

The City Tree Official shall have responsibility for implementing the goals and policies of the community urban forestry plan. All City construction and/or land use projects shall be reviewed and approved for planting, removal, preservation, and protection of public trees and plants by the City Tree Official in conjunction with a certified arborist or other qualified professional. (Ord. 675 § 4, 2018; Ord. 238 § 1, 1999)


2.24.020 Creation and establishment of a City Tree Board.

Repealed by Ord. 675. (Ord. 529 § 1, 2011; Ord. 384 § 1, 2005; Ord. 254 § 1, 2000; Ord. 238 § 1, 1999)


2.24.030 Term of office.

Repealed by Ord. 675. (Ord. 384 § 3, 2005; Ord. 318 § 1, 2002; Ord. 238 § 1, 1999)


2.24.040 Compensation.

Repealed by Ord. 675. (Ord. 238 § 1, 1999)


2.24.050 Duties and responsibilities.

Repealed by Ord. 675. (Ord. 384 § 4, 2005; Ord. 238 § 1, 1999)


2.24.060 Operation.

Repealed by Ord. 675. (Ord. 238 § 1, 1999)


2.24.065 Technical advisors to the Tree Board.

Repealed by Ord. 675. (Ord. 238 § 1, 1999)


2.24.068 Review by City Council.

Repealed by Ord. 675. (Ord. 238 § 1, 1999)


2.24.070 Street tree species to be planted.

The City Tree Official shall be responsible for developing a list of required tree species for Woodinville, including members of small, medium, and large tree varieties. No species other than those included in this list may be planted as street trees without written permission of the City Tree Official. (Ord. 675 § 5, 2018; Ord. 238 § 1, 1999)


2.24.075 Tree care standards manual.

The tree care standards manual previously adopted by the Tree Board pursuant to Ordinance No. 238, adoption of which is ratified by the ordinance codified in this section, shall serve as the City’s adopted and binding tree planting standards, tree protection standards, and tree removal standards. (Ord. 675 § 6, 2018; Ord. 238 § 1, 1999)


2.24.080 Public tree care.

The City shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees and plants within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares, public grounds, parks, and easements as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds as determined by the City Tree Official. (Ord. 675 § 7, 2018; Ord. 238 § 1, 1999)


2.24.085 Emergency tree removal and maintenance.

(1) In the event of an emergency as determined by the City Tree Official, all City departments shall have the right to remove or perform maintenance on any public trees and plants or trees and plants on City property right-of-way as necessary to provide public safety.

(2) Utilities may perform tree maintenance or removal without prior authorization only when such actions are necessary to protect the safety of the public or maintain or restore utility service. The utility company must provide written notice to the City within 72 hours of the removal. The notice must include an explanation of the emergency and circumstance for the tree removal. (Ord. 238 § 1, 1999)


2.24.090 Tree planting.

The City shall have the right to regulate the species, installation method, and relative condition of trees located in the City rights-of-way and City-owned property and to cause removal and replacement of unsuitable, damaged, or unhealthy trees. The following regulations apply to planting of trees and plants in the City rights-of-way:

(1) Trees and plants shall be considered for preservation and planting in all City construction and/or land use projects pursuant to tree preservation regulations of Chapter 21.50 WMC. An administrative variance may be granted by the City Tree Official if the preservation requirements interfere with the effectiveness of the public project. Planting alternatives on other public property shall be considered as mitigation for tree loss due to a public project.

(2) Tree planting and protection shall be in accordance with the tree care standards manual.

(3) Private parties may plant trees on property owned by the City with written permission. To obtain permission the applicant(s) shall:

(a) Submit a written request to the City Tree Official a minimum of 30 days prior to planting.

(b) Prepare a tree planting plan identifying the species, size, and location of trees to be planted. The proposed species and locations of trees must be consistent with current and potential future uses of the property as determined by City review pursuant to WMC 2.24.070.

(c) Comply with the current planting standards and City of Woodinville public infrastructure standards and specifications, landscaping plan Section 7, Details 341, 342, and in accordance with the tree care standards manual.

(d) Have underground utilities located and obtain approval from any affected utilities prior to planting.

(4) Any planting of public trees that fails to comply with the standards established in the tree care standards manual, WMC 2.24.075, may be declared a public nuisance and may be abated pursuant to Chapter 1.06 WMC. (Ord. 675 § 8, 2018; Ord. 478 § 2, 2009; Ord. 238 § 1, 1999)


2.24.100 Rights-of-way street tree spacing and location requirements.

Street trees within the right-of-way shall be spaced at an average 25 feet on center, with no less than 15 feet on center and no more than 35 feet on center. At street corners, street trees may be groved. The street trees planting shall be placed to minimize impacts on streets, sidewalks, sewers, overhead utility lines, and pedestrian and vehicular safety. The City Tree Official may authorize modifications to the spacing of street trees which result in a decrease or increase in the standards. Any request for a modification shall involve a consultation with a certified arborist and approval of the City Tree Official and shall be site and species specific. (Ord. 481 § 3, 2009; Ord. 238 § 1, 1999)


2.24.110 Measure methods.

Street tree plantings shall be measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curblines to the nearest point of the tree trunk and parallel to the street. (Ord. 238 § 1, 1999)


2.24.120 Tree pruning and maintenance.

(1) Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the City shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of at least eight feet above the surface of the street or sidewalk or clear the sight distance triangle pursuant to WMC 21.22.190. The City Tree Official shall give 30 days’ notice to said owners to remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs are observed which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. If the owner fails to remove the condition constituting a safety hazard, the City shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a street light or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign or otherwise creates a safety hazard.

(2) Private parties may have public trees pruned with written permission from the City Tree Official at the private party’s expense. To obtain permission the applicant(s) shall:

(a) Submit a written request to the City Tree Official a minimum of 30 days prior to pruning;

(b) Identify the trees to be pruned and the specific work to be performed;

(c) Pay for all costs associated with the proposed pruning;

(d) Comply with the pruning standards of the tree care standards manual; and

(e) Provide proof of insurance, bonds, and business or contractor’s license.

(3) The City may prune, spray, or otherwise maintain public trees in order to control infestations of insects or disease or to maintain public safety. Insect and disease abatement shall be in accordance with methods established in the tree care standards manual.

(4) Persons, utilities, or agencies conducting regular maintenance work on trees or shrubs may be granted public tree maintenance permits to cover their work on a yearly basis if all requirements are met according to this section. (Ord. 675 § 9, 2018; Ord. 238 § 1, 1999)


2.24.130 Tree topping.

It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm, or City department to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public property or in a public easement. “Topping” is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree’s crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical, may be exempted from this chapter at the determination of the City Tree Official. Trees may be pruned subject to the pruning techniques in Chapter 21.50 WMC. (Ord. 481 § 3, 2009; Ord. 238 § 1, 1999)


2.24.140 Tree removal.

The City may remove any public tree determined to be a hazardous or dangerous tree by the City Tree Official. Tree removal shall comply with the following regulations:

(1) All tree removal and/or tree pruning works on public property shall be performed by a licensed, bonded, and insured contractor, pursuant to WMC 2.24.170.

(2) No City trees shall be cut down, killed, or removed for any reason without complying with the following public tree removal process:

(a) File an application with the Development Services Department;

(b) Secure a permit for tree removal;

(c) Trees shall be replaced to mitigate the loss of the removed tree(s) equal to one tree credit in accordance with the replacement table of WMC 21.50.060.

(3) A tree removal permit is required to be obtained prior to the removal of any City tree by a private party. A permit shall be approved only when one or more of the following conditions exist as determined by City staff:

(a) The tree is infected with an epidemic insect or disease for which removal is the recommended practice to prevent transmission to other trees;

(b) The tree poses a public nuisance;

(c) The tree poses a safety hazard that pruning, transplanting, or other treatments cannot correct;

(d) The tree severely interferes with the growth and development of a more desirable tree;

(e) Required infrastructure work or improvements would kill the tree or render it a hazard/danger and no other alternative is feasible;

(f) Removal of the tree is necessary to implement or maintain a vegetation management plan for the area, as approved by the City;

(g) Removal of the tree(s) is necessary to provide the only reasonable access to adjacent private property.

(4) Mitigation is required if a public tree is removed, injured, or otherwise damaged by a private party. The mitigation value shall be calculated by the City or qualified representative using the formula outlined in the most recent edition of the “Guide for Plant Appraisal,” published by the International Society of Arboriculture, or other comparable source authorized by the Planning Director. Current calculated timber, pulpwood, or cordwood values will not be acceptable mitigation values for public trees. The mitigation value shall be paid into the City tree account as established in WMC 21.50.040 or the City will require a replacement to be installed in accordance with the regulations and standards set forth for public trees. All or a portion of this mitigation may be met by planting replacement trees on or off site as determined by the City.

(5) A vegetation management plan is required when a private party requests the removal of a public tree. The applicant shall develop and implement a vegetation management plan for the property. The applicant shall be required to pay all costs associated with the development and implementation of such plan.

(a) The plan shall ensure:

(i) Protection of slopes and soil stability on the property in accordance with applicable codes and standards;

(ii) Protection of critical areas as defined in Chapter 21.51 WMC, Critical Areas;

(iii) Protection of heritage trees or trees identified as significant;

(iv) City maintenance costs for the property are maintained at or below the current levels; and

(v) Compliance with all applicable Federal, State, and local regulations.

(b) The plan should consider:

(i) Wildlife habitat enhancement;

(ii) Species diversity; and

(iii) Aesthetics.

The City may require that the vegetation management plan be prepared by qualified professionals as deemed necessary. (Ord. 675 § 10, 2018; Ord. 478 § 2, 2009; Ord. 347 § 12, 2003; Ord. 238 § 1, 1999)


2.24.150 Removal of stumps.

All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground. Stump removal methods shall be in accordance with the tree care standards manual. (Ord. 238 § 1, 1999)


2.24.160 Tree protection.

(1) Authorization must be given by the City Tree Official before anyone:

(a) Attaches or installs any metal materials, cables, wires or other objects foreign to the natural structure of public trees;

(b) Excavates into the root zone within the drip line of a public tree;

(c) Treats the soil within the root zone of a public tree with a soil sterilant.

(2) No person shall abuse, destroy, or mutilate any public tree. This includes breaking stakes or supports to the tree, or causing or encouraging any burning near or around the trunk. No person shall deface or injure a public tree by attaching any sign or notice, nails, screws, or other such devices to it.

(3) Public trees shall be protected at all times during construction in accordance with the tree protection standards stated in the tree care standards manual.

(4) Violation of tree protection regulations for public trees shall be subject to WMC 2.24.180. (Ord. 238 § 1, 1999)


2.24.170 Arborist’s certification and bond.

(1) It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage in the business or occupation of pruning or treating public trees within the City without first obtaining a certification from the International Society of Arboriculture; provided, however, that any public service company or City employee doing such work in the pursuit of their public service endeavors shall perform said work under the direction of a certified arborist. The person or firm conducting tree work shall also possess evidence of liability insurance in the minimum amounts of $500,000 for bodily injury and $1,000,000 property damage resulting from the pursuit of such endeavors as herein described.

(2) No person or firm may cut, prune or treat street trees without express authorization of the City. (Ord. 238 § 1, 1999)


2.24.180 Penalty.

In accordance with enforcement regulations in Chapter 1.06 WMC, any person violating these provisions shall be subject to civil penalties, pursuant to Chapter 21.50 WMC. For violations related to tree removal or tree damage, each tree shall be considered a separate violation. (Ord. 481 § 3, 2009; Ord. 238 § 1, 1999)


2.24.190 Variance and appeal process.

The administrative process for variance and appeals shall be as follows:

(1) A written request shall be submitted to the City Tree Official providing a detailed explanation of the variance request.

(2) The request shall provide at least one alternative to the variance request.

(3) The City Tree Official shall meet with the applicable City departments to decide the variance request.

(4) The City Tree Official shall provide a written decision to the applicant and applicable City departments within 21 days of the date of request.

(5) The decision may be appealed to the Hearing Examiner pursuant to Chapter 21.85 WMC. (Ord. 675 § 11, 2018; Ord. 238 § 1, 1999)


Chapter 2.25 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS AND PUBLIC SAFETY COMMISSION

(Repealed by Ord. 649)


Chapter 2.27 HEARING EXAMINER

Sections:

2.27.010    Hearing Examiner authorized.

2.27.020    Appointments – Qualifications.

2.27.030    Powers and duties.

2.27.040    Repealed.

2.27.050    Procedures.


2.27.010 Hearing Examiner authorized. 

There is hereby created the office of Hearing Examiner as an independent office of the City for the conduct of hearings on such matters as are delegated to the Hearing Examiner by ordinance. (Ord. 17 § 1, 1993)


2.27.020  Appointments – Qualifications.

(1) Appointments to the office of Hearing Examiner shall be made by the City Manager. The City Manager is also authorized from time to time to appoint Hearing Examiners Pro Tempore to serve on a day-to-day basis due to the absence, unavailability, incapacity or disqualification of the Hearing Examiner.

(2) The Hearing Examiner shall be experienced in land use, planning, subdivision and related matters. (Ord. 17 § 2, 1993)


2.27.030  Powers and duties. 

In the performance of duties prescribed by this chapter, the Hearing Examiner is authorized to:

(1) Administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses, rule upon offers of proof, receive evidence, and conduct discovery procedures which may include propounding interrogatories and taking oral depositions; provided, that no person shall be compelled to divulge information which he or she could not be compelled to divulge in a court of law;

(2) Upon the request of a City officer or any party, or upon the Hearing Examiner’s own volition, issue and witness; provided, that any such subpoena shall state the name and address of the witness sought, and if for the production of books, documents or things, shall specifically identify the same and the relevance thereof to the issues involved;

(3) Regulate the course of the hearing in accordance with rules and this chapter and other applicable ordinances;

(4) Hold conferences for the settlement or simplification of the issues by consent of the parties;



(5) Dispose of procedural requests or similar matters;

(6) Make such decisions or recommendations as are contemplated herein and by other ordinance contemplated herein and by other ordinances conferring jurisdiction on the Hearing Examiner;

(7) Take any other action authorized by ordinance;

(8) Make rules for the conduct of hearings, notices and other proceedings and procedures not inconsistent with this chapter and other applicable ordinances. An audio or video record of the hearing proceedings shall be maintained and shall be made available for public review;

(9) Make recommendations for revision to relevant codes and ordinances which will clarify or otherwise improve the development review process. (Ord. 17 § 3, 1993)


2.27.040  Appeals. 

Repealed by Ord. 685. (Ord. 17 § 4, 1993)


2.27.050 Procedures.

(1) Each final decision of the Hearing Examiner shall be in writing and shall include findings and conclusions, based on the record, to support the decision. Such findings and conclusions shall also set forth the manner in which the decision would carry out and conform to the applicable criteria established by ordinance or law.

(2) Each final decision of a Hearing Examiner, unless a longer period is mutually agreed to in writing by the applicant and the Hearing Examiner, shall be rendered within 10 working days following conclusion of all testimony and hearings. (Ord. 17 § 5, 1993)


Chapter 2.30 APPEAL PROCEDURES

Sections:

2.30.010    Scope.

2.30.020    Procedures.

2.30.030    Fees.

2.30.040    Judicial appeal.

2.30.050    Procedural irregularity.

2.30.060    Impact fee appeals.


2.30.010  Scope. 

The procedures set forth in this chapter shall be applicable to all appeals unless contrary provisions are specifically made. The procedures set forth in this chapter shall be in addition to any other procedures required. (Ord. 18 § 1, 1993)


2.30.020 Procedures.

(1) A person must file a written notice of appeal within 14 days of the date of the decision being appealed. The notice of appeal shall state clearly the grounds for appeal. When City ordinance or State law requires preparation of a written decision, the date of decision is when the written decision is approved by the person, board or commission.

(2) The written notice must be filed with the person, board or commission authorized to hear such appeal within the time period set forth in subsection (1) above.

(3) Upon timely receipt of such notice of appeal, and payment of the fee set forth in WMC 2.30.030, the person, board or agency shall set the matter for a public meeting.

(4) Notice of the meeting shall be given to the appellant and the applicant or permit holder, if this person is not the appellant.

(5) The person, board or agency conducting the appeal shall render a decision based upon the record, including written materials and any tape recording or minutes of the previous proceedings, and on the criteria or standards applicable to the permit, license or action being considered. Nothing herein shall be deemed to require tape recording or other verbatim record. The person, board or agency conducting the appeal shall affirm the decision unless from a review of the record it is determined the decision being appealed was clearly erroneous. Written findings and conclusions shall be prepared and adopted setting forth the facts and the reasoning for the decision. The decision appealed may be affirmed, reversed, remanded or modified.

(6) Any further appeal from any decision shall be to superior court as provided in WMC 2.30.040.

(7) If a permit is granted, the City official administering the permit may allow the applicant to begin all or a portion of the construction or commence all or a portion of the operations during the pendency of any appeal; provided, however, that such construction or commencement of operations is begun at the applicant’s own risk. If the decision being appealed is reversed or modified, the applicant may be required to remove or alter any development inconsistent with the final decision and/or restore the environment to its pre-existing condition. (Ord. 81 § 1, 1994; Ord. 18 § 2, 1993)


2.30.030  Fees.

 A fee shall be imposed for filing any appeal. The amount of the fee shall be set by ordinance. (Ord. 18 § 3, 1993)


2.30.040  Judicial appeal.

 Appeal from the decision of the City board, commission or officer, for which no other administrative appeal is provided, shall be to the County Superior Court. An appropriate action must be served and filed within 14 days of the date of the decision, or 21 days for a Land Use Petition Act appeal under Chapter 36.70C RCW. The costs of transcription of any record ordered to be certified by the court shall be borne by the appellant. (Ord. 496 § 2 (Att. B), 2010; Ord. 18 § 4, 1993)


2.30.050  Procedural irregularity. 

No procedural irregularity or informality in the notice, consideration, hearing or other matter relating to the decision and/or appeal shall affect the final decision, or any other action leading to the final decision, unless substantial rights of a person with demonstrable beneficial interests are adversely affected and unless objection to any procedural irregularity is made to the City at the earliest possible time after discovery. (Ord. 18 § 5, 1993)


2.30.060 Impact fee appeals.

(1) To appeal the amount of an impact fee, the amount of an impact fee credit, or the denial of a permit based upon a failure to pay an impact fee, the appellant must file a notice of appeal with the Development Services Department within 14 days of impact fee collection or permit denial, pursuant to Chapter 21.85 WMC. The notice of appeal shall clearly state the grounds for such appeal. Filing an appeal shall require the payment of a fee as set forth in WMC 2.30.030.

(2) The Development Services Department will schedule a hearing before the Hearing Examiner, who shall operate pursuant to the authority granted in Chapter 2.27 WMC. For the purposes of appeals under this section, the Examiner is authorized to make findings of fact and a decision regarding any of the following: the applicability of the impact fee requirement to a given development activity, the availability or amount of a credit, or the accuracy or applicability of an independent fee calculation. 

(3) The decision of the Hearing Examiner shall be a final decision appealable to the City Council by either the original appellant or City staff.

(4) The decision of the City Council, upon appeal from the Hearing Examiner, shall be the final administrative decision. This decision may be appealed to Superior Court under State law. (Ord. 496 § 2 (Att. B), 2010; Ord. 279 § 2, 2001)


Chapter 2.31 AMENDMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE RULES

Sections:

2.31.010    Rules change notice filing.

2.31.020    Emergency rules or amendments.

2.31.030    Effective date of rules.

2.31.040    Council notification.


2.31.010 Rules change notice filing. 

(1) Prior to the adoption, amendment or repeal of any rule, each City department shall give at least 20 days’ notice of its intended action by filing the notice with the Clerk of the City of Woodinville Council, mailing the notice to all persons or agencies who have made timely request of the City for advance notice of its rulemaking proceedings on a specific topic, and giving public notice by one publication in the official newspaper of City of Woodinville. Such notice shall include:

(a) Reference to the authority under which the rule is proposed;

(b) A statement of either the terms or substance of the proposed rule or a description of the subjects and issues involved; and

(c) The time when, the place where, and the manner in which interested persons may present their views thereon.

(2) No rule hereafter adopted is valid unless adopted in substantial compliance with this section, or, if an emergency rule and designated as such, adopted in substantial compliance with WMC 2.31.020, as now or hereafter amended. In any proceeding a rule cannot be contested on the ground of noncompliance with the procedural requirements of this section, or of WMC 2.31.020, as now or hereafter amended, after two years have elapsed from the effective date of the rule. (Ord. 159 § 1, 1996)


2.31.020 Emergency rules or amendments. 

If the City Mayor declares that a state of emergency exists as defined in Chapter 2.15 WMC, and the agency finds that immediate adoption or amendment of a rule is necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety or general welfare, and that observance of the requirements of notice and opportunity to present views on the proposed action would be contrary to the public interest, the agency may dispense with such requirements and adopt the rule or amendment as an emergency rule or amendment. The agency’s finding and a brief statement of the reasons for its finding shall be incorporated in the emergency rule or amendment as filed with the Clerk of the City of Woodinville Council. An emergency rule or amendment shall not remain in effect for longer than 90 days. This section does not relieve any agency from compliance with any law requiring that its rules be approved by designated persons or bodies before they become effective. (Ord. 159 § 2, 1996)


2.31.030 Effective date of rules. 

(1) Emergency rules adopted under WMC 2.31.020 shall become effective upon filing with the Clerk of the City of Woodinville Council. All other rules hereafter adopted shall become effective upon the expiration of 30 days after the date of filing, unless a later date is required by stature or specified in the rule.

(2) The Clerk of the City of Woodinville Council shall, as soon as practicable after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, compile and index all rules adopted by each City department. Compilations shall be supplemental or revised as often as necessary and at least once every two years.

(3) To continue effective, all rules adopted prior to the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter must be filed with the Clerk of the Council within 60 days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 159 § 3, 1996)


2.31.040 Council notification.

When a rule change is adopted under this chapter, the City Council shall be notified of the change and its impact in writing within 15 days of adoption. (Ord. 159 § 4, 1996)


Chapter 2.33 INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM

Sections:

2.33.010    Adopted.


2.33.010 Adopted.

The City of Woodinville hereby adopts the power of initiative and referendum for the qualified electors of the City as pursuant to RCW 35A.11.080 through 35A.11.100. Such powers are to be exercised as provided in the above referenced sections of the Revised Code of Washington as they now exist or may be amended from time to time and said sections are hereby incorporated in full by this reference. (Ord. 119 § 1, 1995)


Chapter 2.36 CODE OF ETHICS

Sections:

2.36.010    Declaration of policy.

2.36.020    Code of ethics.

2.36.025    Nepotism.

2.36.030    Disclosure.

2.36.040    Civil penalties.

2.36.050    Responsibilities of Hearing Examiner.

2.36.060    Enforcement procedures.

2.36.070    False charge of misconduct.


2.36.010  Declaration of policy.

 High moral and ethical standards among public officials and public employees are essential to gain and maintain the confidence of the public because such confidence is essential to the conduct of free government. Public officials and public employees are agents of the people and hold their positions for the benefit of the people. The proper operation of democratic government requires that public officials and employees be independent and impartial when establishing policy and that their positions never be used for personal gain. A code of ethical conduct is necessary for the guidance of public officials where conflicts do occur as well as to prevent conflicts of interest. (Ord. 125 § 1, 1995)


2.36.020  Code of ethics. 

The purpose of the code of ethics is to assist City officials and employees to establish guidelines to govern their own conduct as it relates to official City business. The code is also intended to help develop traditions of responsible public service. This code shall apply to all members of the City Council, Planning Commission, and other City Boards and Commissions as well as all City employees. An official or employee shall be deemed to have violated this code if he or she:

(1) Receives or has any financial interest in any sale to or by the City of any service or property when such financial interest was received with the prior knowledge that the City intended to purchase such property or obtain such service;

(2) Accepts or seeks for others any service, information or thing of value on more favorable terms than those granted to the public generally, from any person, firm or corporation having dealings with the City;

(3) Accepts any gift or favor from any person, firm or corporation having any dealings with the City if he or she knows or has reason to know that it was intended to obtain special consideration;

(4) Influences the selection of or the conduct of business with a corporation, person or firm having business with the City if he or she personally or through household relatives or, with respect to procurement of property or services including federal grant funds, any immediate family member has financial interest in or with the corporation, person or firm;

(5) Is an employee, officer, partner, director or consultant of any corporation, firm or person having business with the City, unless he or she has disclosed such relationship as provided by this chapter; provided, that nothing herein shall be deemed to apply to consultants who render professional advice to corporations, firms or persons on matters unrelated to the business with the City. This provision shall not apply if the official or employee disqualifies himself or herself from all participation in the City business with the corporation, firm or person;

(6) Engages in or accepts private employment or renders services for private industry when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her official duties, would impair his or her independence of judgment or action in the performance of his or her official duties, or would require or induce him or her to disclose confidential information acquired by reason of his or her official position;

(7) Appears in behalf of a private interest before any regulatory governmental agency against the interest of the City, or represents a private interest in any action or proceeding against the interest of the City in any litigation to which the City is a party, unless he or she has a personal interest and this personal interest has been disclosed to the regulatory governmental agency. A City Councilmember may appear before regulatory governmental agencies on behalf of constituents in the course of his or her duties as a representative of the electorate or in the performance of public or civic obligations; however, no official or employee shall accept a retainer or compensation that is contingent upon a specific action by a City agency;

(8) Directly or indirectly possess a substantial or controlling interest in any business entity which conducts business or contracts with the City, or in the sale of real estate, materials, supplies or services to the City, without disclosing such interest as provided by this chapter. An interest is not a substantial interest if such interest does not exceed one-tenth of one percent of the outstanding securities of the business concern; or, if the interest is an unincorporated business concern, one percent of the net worth of such concern, or the financial interest of a corporation, person or firm does not exceed five percent of the net worth of the employee and his or her household relatives;

(9) As a City Councilmember, has a financial or other private interest in any legislation or other matters coming before the council and fails to disclose such an interest on the records of the City Council. This provision shall not apply if the City Councilmember disqualifies himself or herself from voting by stating the nature and extent of such interest. Any other official or employee who has a financial or other private interest, and who participates in discussion with or gives an official opinion to the City Council and fails to disclose on the records of the City Council the nature and extent of such interest is in violation of this chapter;

(10) Violates any ordinance or resolution of the City;

(11) Discloses confidential information gained by reason of his or her official position or otherwise uses such information for his or her personal gain or benefit;

(12) Makes any false statement or representation of any public record or document in a willful disregard of the truth of such statement or representation;

(13) Request or permit the use of City-owned vehicles, equipment, materials or property for personal convenience, improper purposes, or profit, except when such services are available to the public generally or are provided as City policy for the use of such official or employee in the conduct of official business;

(14) Grants any special consideration, treatment or advantage beyond that which is available to every other citizen in similar circumstances;

(15) Knowingly and in willful disregard of WMC 2.36.025 violates or influences any other person to violate the nepotism policy set forth in WMC 2.36.025;

(16) Violates any provision of Chapter 42.20 or 42.23 RCW;

(17) Violates the appearance of fairness doctrine in Chapter 42.36 RCW. (Ord. 660 § 1, 2018; Ord. 528 § 1, 2011; Ord. 469 § 1, 2009; Ord. 125 § 2, 1995)


2.36.025 Nepotism.

In order to prevent conflicts of interest, the City limits employment of an employee’s immediate family, as defined in these policies, under any or all of the following circumstances:

(1) Where an immediate family member would have authority (or practical power) to supervise, appoint, remove, or discipline the other;

(2) Where an immediate family member would be responsible for auditing the work of the other;

(3) Where both parties would report to the same immediate supervisor;

(4) Where, in order to avoid the reality or appearance of improper influence or favor, or to protect confidentiality, the City must limit the employment of immediate family members of policy level officers of any agency or organization currently dealing with the City or which could reasonably be expected to deal with the City in the future;

(5) Where other circumstances might lead to potential conflict among the parties or conflict between the interest of one or both parties and the best interests of the City;

(6) Where an immediate family member, other than a spouse, is a member of the City Council. If an employee’s spouse is a City Councilmember, then a prohibited conflict of interest exists if any or all of subsections (1) through (4) of this section apply.

For purposes of this section, “immediate family” means the public official’s or employee’s spouse, registered domestic partner, child, parent, brother and sister, mother and father-in-law, son and daughter-in-law, aunt and uncle, grandparents, grandchildren, or step-relatives or domestic partner-relatives in one of these relationships. (Ord. 469 § 2, 2009)


2.36.030 Disclosure.

Disclosure as required by this chapter shall be in writing and filed with the City Clerk. Disclosure shall be made as soon as the person becomes aware of the facts giving rise to the disclosure requirements. An oral disclosure made at a regular or special City Council meeting shall constitute compliance with this section. The oral disclosure shall be included in the official minutes of the Council meeting. (Ord. 528 § 2, 2011; Ord. 125 § 3, 1995)


2.36.040 Civil penalties.

(1) Any person willfully violating this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and is subject to the criminal penalty set forth in WMC 1.03.010. Any violation of this chapter is subject to the civil penalties provided in WMC 1.03.010. The election of pursuing criminal penalties is subject to the prosecutorial discretion of the City’s Prosecuting Attorney(s). The City may initiate a civil action through the office of the City Attorney, or other authorized agent.

(2) An employee of the City found guilty of a violation of this chapter is subject to discipline imposed by the City Manager, up to and including termination from employment.

(3) Any member of a City Board or Commission found guilty of a violation of this chapter may be suspended or removed from office by action of the City Council.

(4) Any member of the City Council found guilty of a violation of this chapter in addition to any other penalties permitted by law may receive a written reprimand in a letter approved by the majority vote of the other City Councilmembers or a censure by written statement approved by majority vote of the other City Councilmembers and administered personally to the individual Councilmember in open session of the City Council.

(5) In addition to the sanctions for aiding, abetting, seeking or requesting a violation of this chapter, any person or organization which willfully attempts to secure preferential treatment in its dealing with the City by offering any valuable gifts, whether in the form of services, loan, thing or promise, or any other form to any City official or employee, shall have its current contract with the City canceled and shall not be able to bid on any other City contracts for a period of two years. (Ord. 528 § 3, 2011; Ord. 125 § 4, 1995)


2.36.050  Responsibilities of Hearing Examiner.

(1) There is hereby delegated to the Hearing Examiner, the responsibility set forth in WMC 2.36.060 relating to enforcement procedures, except as to employees of the City of Woodinville in the administrative service under the City Manager. Once such allegation or complaint has been filed with the office of the City Clerk and notice of such filing has been transmitted to the Hearing Examiner which notice shall not set forth any names or details concerning the complaint, then the Hearing Examiner shall conduct an investigation; provided, that in the event said complaint shall involve in some manner the office of the Hearing Examiner, the matter shall be referred to the City Attorney for investigation, all in accordance with the procedures outlined herein.

(2) The Hearing Examiner is also authorized to issue advisory opinions upon request of City officials concerning the applicability of this chapter to specific factual situations. Administrative employees under the supervision of the City Manager concerned with the applicability of this chapter to specific factual situations may address their concerns to the City Manager or the Manager’s designee. (Ord. 528 § 4, 2011; Ord. 125 § 5, 1995)


2.36.060 Enforcement procedures.

(1) Any person who has knowledge of a violation of this code of ethics by a person other than an administrative employee under the supervision of the City Manager may make a signed written report of the same to the City Clerk. The fact that a report has been received, the contents of the report, and the identity of the person making the report shall remain confidential until such time as the Hearing Examiner has made an initial threshold determination that probable cause exists to believe that a violation of the code of ethics has occurred.

(2) Upon receipt of a report, the Hearing Examiner, without benefit of subpoenas or sworn testimony, shall make such preliminary investigation as he or she deems appropriate to determine whether probable cause exists to believe that a violation of the code of ethics has occurred. Once the preliminary investigation is complete, the person accused shall be given the name(s) of the accuser(s) and the allegations whether or not the Hearing Examiner finds probable cause. If the Hearing Examiner is satisfied that probable cause does exist, he or she may choose between two courses of action as follows:

(a) Refer the matter to the proper authorities for criminal prosecution; provided, that upon a determination that the proof beyond a reasonable doubt necessary for criminal conviction is not available, the proper authorities may refer the matter back to the Hearing Examiner for proceedings consistent with the civil burden of proof, e.g., a simple preponderance of the evidence; or

(b) Retain the matter for his or her own formal investigation with a view toward the ultimate disposition by the City Council in the event it is determined an actual violation has occurred.

(3) If the Hearing Examiner should determine probable cause does not exist, he or she shall communicate his or her decision in writing to the person who made the initial report. The Hearing Examiner’s determination of lack of probable cause shall remain confidential, unless the person who made the initial report chooses to make his or her complaint public. Should this latter event occur, all of the Hearing Examiner’s records, files, notes, correspondence, and investigative materials relating to the finding of lack of probable cause shall be made open for public inspection.

(4) Should the Hearing Examiner decide to retain the matter for his or her own formal investigation pursuant to subsection (2)(b) of this section, the Hearing Examiner shall notify, in writing, the person who made the report and the person complained against, of his or her decision to pursue a formal investigation by way of holding a hearing to determine if a violation has occurred. The person complained against may choose whether the hearing shall be open or closed to the public.

(5) Hearings conducted by the Hearing Examiner shall be informal. The person complained against may be represented by legal counsel and may present and cross examine witnesses and give evidence before the Hearing Examiner. The Hearing Examiner may call witnesses on his or her own motion and compel the production of books, records, papers, or other evidence needed. To that end, the proper authorities shall issue subpoenas and subpoenas duces tecum at the request of the Hearing Examiner or the person complained against. All testimony shall be under oath administered by the Hearing Examiner. The Hearing Examiner may adjourn the hearing from time to time in order to allow for the orderly presentation of evidence.

Upon motion made by the person complained against or upon his or her own motion, the Hearing Examiner may temporarily stay or permanently suspend his or her investigation when, in his or her formal discretion, the manifest needs of justice and fairness will be better served thereby.

The Hearing Examiner shall prepare an official record of the hearing, including all testimony, which shall be recorded by mechanical device, and exhibits; provided, that the Hearing Examiner shall not be required to transcribe such records unless presented with a request accompanied by payment of the cost of transcription.

(6) Within 30 days after the conclusion of the hearing, the Hearing Examiner shall, based upon a preponderance of the evidence, make and fully record in his or her permanent records, findings of fact, conclusions of law, and his or her determination of a recommended disposition. A copy of the findings, conclusions, and recommended disposition shall be forwarded by registered mail to the person who made the initial report and to the person complained against at addresses as given by both persons to the Hearing Examiner. An additional copy of the findings, conclusions, and recommendations shall be forwarded to the City Council for its formal action, if any.

(7) Upon receipt of the Hearing Examiner’s final action, the City Council shall schedule a public hearing. The person complained against shall have not less than two weeks’ written notice of this hearing. At this hearing the Hearing Examiner, the person complained against, and other interested parties shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard, following which the City Council may adopt, reject, amend, or modify the Hearing Examiner’s findings, conclusions, and recommendations, or remand the matter for further investigation and consideration by the Hearing Examiner. The Council’s decision shall be in writing, setting forth its findings, conclusions, and in appropriate cases, the civil sanction(s) imposed.

(8) Any person found, by final written order of the City Council, to be in violation of this code of ethics may appeal the Council’s decision in the manner and form as provided by Chapter 2.30 WMC. (Ord. 528 § 5, 2011; Ord. 125 § 6, 1995)


2.36.070 False charge of misconduct. 

Any person who shall file with or report a charge of misconduct on the part of any public official or other person encompassed within the definition of this chapter, knowing such charge to be false or to have been recklessly made without any reasonable attempt to determine relevant facts and circumstances, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1.03 WMC. (Ord. 125 § 7, 1995)


Chapter 2.37 RULES OF PROCEDURE

Sections:

2.37.010    General.

2.37.020    Organization.

2.37.030    Meetings.

2.37.040    Effect/waiver of rules.


2.37.010 General.

The official rules of procedure for the Woodinville City Council shall be established by State statute, City Council ordinance, or City Council resolution. In the event of any disagreement between Councilmembers arising from a point of order not expressly covered by statute, ordinance, or resolution, the Council may consult Robert’s Rules of Order (Newly Revised) as a guide to help it resolve the contested matter. (Ord. 445 § 1, 2007)


2.37.020 Organization.

(1) Swearing in of New Councilmembers. New Councilmembers shall be sworn in by the City Clerk or other authorized official either:

(a) Up to 10 days prior to the day they are scheduled to assume their office; or

(b) At the first meeting of the Council in January.

(2) Declaration of Interest. Council will informally discuss the interests of each member in serving as Mayor or Deputy Mayor at the first meeting after the general election has been certified. Councilmembers and newly elected Councilmembers who would not be attending that meeting may submit their intent in writing.

(3) Election of Officers. The Council shall elect a Mayor and Deputy Mayor for a term of two years and organize itself at the first Council meeting during even-numbered years. The term of Mayor and Deputy Mayor shall run from the first meeting of the Council held in January to the first meeting of the Council held in January two years later. In the temporary absence of the Mayor, the Deputy Mayor shall perform the duties and responsibilities of the Mayor with regard to conduct of meetings and emergency business. In the event the Mayor is unable to serve the remainder of the term, a new Mayor shall be elected at the next regular meeting. In the event the Deputy Mayor is unable to serve the remainder of the term, a new Deputy Mayor shall be elected at the next regular meeting. (Ord. 445 § 1, 2007)


2.37.030 Meetings.

All Council meetings shall comply with the requirements of the Open Public Meetings Act (Chapter 42.30 RCW). All regular meetings and special meetings of the Council shall be open to the public.

(1) Regular Meetings. The Council shall hold regular meetings on the first three Tuesdays of each month at 7:00 p.m. Should any meeting fall on a legal holiday, the meeting shall be held at the same hour and place on the next working day.

(2) Special Meetings. Special meetings may be held by the Council subject to notice requirements prescribed by State law. Special meetings may be called by the Mayor, Deputy Mayor or temporary Presiding Officer by written notice delivered to each member of the Council at least 24 hours before the time specified for the proposed meeting. Special meetings shall also be called by the Mayor, Deputy Mayor or temporary Presiding Officer upon the written request of any three members of the Council. The notice of such special meetings shall state the subjects to be considered, and no subjects other than those specified in the notice shall be considered. For purposes of the noticing of special meetings, e-mail shall be considered a written notice.

(3) Executive Sessions. The Council may hold executive sessions from which the public may be excluded, for those purposes set forth in RCW 42.30.110. Before convening an executive session, the Presiding Officer shall announce the purpose of the session and the anticipated time when the session will be concluded and indicate whether or not Council action will be taken after the executive session. Should the session require more time, a public announcement shall be made that the session is being extended.

(4) Meeting Place. Regular meetings will be at the Council Chambers, 17301 133rd Avenue NE, Woodinville, Washington 98072, unless public notice is given of another location. Meetings may be held at other locations when appropriate notice has been given and posted.

(5) Public Notice. The City shall comply with the provisions of RCW 35A.12.160. (Ord. 445 § 1, 2007)


2.37.040 Effect/waiver of rules.

These rules of procedure set forth herein and/or by other ordinance or resolution are adopted for the sole benefit of the members of the City Council to assist in the orderly conduct of Council business. These rules of procedure do not grant rights or privileges to members of the public or third parties. Failure of the City Council to adhere to these rules shall not result in any liability to the City, its officers, agents, and employees, nor shall failure to adhere to these rules result in invalidation of any Council act. The City Council may implicitly or by a majority vote determine to temporarily waive any of the provisions herein. Council action taken in disregard or nonconformity with these rules shall be construed as an implicit waiver thereof. (Ord. 445 § 1, 2007)


Chapter 2.39 EMPLOYEES’ RETIREMENT SYSTEM

Sections:

2.39.010    Adopted.

2.39.020    Effective date.

2.39.030    Federal law qualification.

2.39.040    Emergency.


2.39.010 Adopted.

The City Council hereby establishes the City of Woodinville Employees’ Retirement System as authorized by the Federal Social Security Act (Subchapter II, 42 USCA Section 401, et seq.) and other applicable Federal and State laws as is set forth more particularly in City of Woodinville Employees’ Benefit Plan and the City of Woodinville Employees’ Survivor and Disability Benefits Plan, dated March 31, 1993, given Clerk’s Receiving No. 122 and which is adopted herein by this reference. (Ord. 48 § 1, 1993)


2.39.020 Effective date.

This system shall be effective on March 31, 1993, and all acts and actions of employees and the City since that time in compliance with such plans are hereby ratified. (Ord. 48 § 2, 1993)


2.39.030 Federal law qualification.

These plans are specifically enacted with the intent that they qualify for approval under Section 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, and the trust is created with the intent that it qualifies for approval under Section 501 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. The survivor and disability benefits portion of the plan may be provided through a trust arrangement under Internal Revenue Code, Section 501(c) and (g) or via insurance policies as the plan committee of the retirement system so decides. (Ord. 48 § 3, 1993)


2.39.040 Emergency.

The City Council finds that the City of Woodinville will be incorporated on March 31, 1993. Failure to have the provisions contained in this chapter in existence as of the date of incorporation will mean that the subject matter of this chapter will not be in effect and thus will cause substantial detriment to the public health, safety and welfare. The City Council therefore declares that an emergency exists necessitating that this chapter be in full force in effect on March 31, 1993. This chapter or a summary thereof consisting of the title shall be published in the City’s official newspaper. (Ord. 48 § 4, 1993)


Chapter 2.42 MUNICIPAL COURT

Sections:

2.42.010    Created.

2.42.020    Jurisdiction.

2.42.030    Violations Bureau.

2.42.040    Disposition of Municipal Court revenue.

2.42.050    Sessions.

2.42.060    Municipal Court seal.

2.42.070    Pleadings, practice and procedure.

2.42.080    Deferral and suspension of sentences.

2.42.090    Complaints.

2.42.100    Case transfers.

2.42.110    Civil jury trials.

2.42.120    Criminal process.

2.42.130    Municipal Court Judge.

2.42.140    Municipal Court employees.


2.42.010 Created.

(1) Creation. The Municipal Court of the City of Woodinville is hereby created, which shall have jurisdiction and exercise all powers vested in the Court by Chapter 3.50 RCW as it now exists or may hereafter be amended, together with such other powers and jurisdiction as are generally conferred on such courts in Washington, either by common law or express statute. The Municipal Court shall commence operation January 1, 1995. 

(2) Term. The Municipal Court Judge shall serve a term of four years. The initial appointment of a judge under this chapter shall expire December 31, 1994. On or before December 1, 1994, the City Manager shall make an appointment of a judge for a term expiring December 31, 1998. Appointments for each term thereafter shall be made on or before December 1st of the year next preceding the year in which the judicial term commences. (Ord. 65 § 1, 1993; Ord. 38 § 1, 1993)


2.42.020 Jurisdiction.

The Woodinville Municipal Court shall have exclusive original jurisdiction over traffic infractions arising under City ordinances, and exclusive original criminal jurisdiction of all violations of City ordinances. The Court shall have original jurisdiction of all other actions brought to enforce or recover license penalties or forfeitures declared by City ordinance or State statute. The Court is also empowered to forfeit cash bail or bail bonds and issue execution thereon; and in general to hear and determine all causes, civil or criminal, including traffic infractions, arising under such City ordinances, and to pronounce judgment in accordance therewith. Finally, the Court shall have the jurisdiction as conferred on it by statute. (Ord. 38 § 2, 1993)


2.42.030 Violations Bureau. 

(1) Creation. As previously established by Woodinville City Ordinance No. 201 a Traffic Violations Bureau has been created to operate under the supervision of the Municipal Court Judge, in order to assist the Court in processing traffic cases. 

(2) Processing. City traffic offenses/infractions may be processed by the Bureau in conformity with Chapter 46.63 RCW. 

(3) Posting of Bail. The Violations Bureau may receive the posting of bail for specified offenses, and, to the extent authorized by court order, is permitted to accept forfeiture of bail and payment of penalties. Upon accepting the prescribed bail, the Bureau shall issue a receipt therefor to the alleged violator, shall acknowledge the posting thereof, and shall further inform the accused of the legal consequences of bail forfeiture. 

(4) Fines and Penalties. Any person charged with any criminal traffic offense within the authority of the Violations Bureau as described in subsection (1) of this section, may, upon signing a written appearance, a written plea of guilty and a written waiver of trial, pay to the Bureau the fine established for the offense charged and costs, and this shall have the same effect as a court conviction. All penalties and forfeitures paid to the Bureau for violations of municipal ordinances shall be deposited with the Finance Director to be placed in the City’s general fund. (Ord. 530 § 4, 2012; Ord. 38 § 3, 1993)


2.42.040 Disposition of Municipal Court revenue.

(1) Costs in civil and criminal actions may be imposed as provided in District Court. All fees, costs, fines, forfeitures and other money imposed by the Municipal Court for the violation of any City ordinances shall be collected by the Court Clerk, and, together with any revenues received by the Clerk, shall be deposited with the Finance Director as a part of the general fund of the City, or deposited in such other funds as may be designated by the laws of the State of Washington. 

(2) The Finance Director shall monthly remit 32 percent of the money received under this section, other than parking infractions, and certain costs to the State Treasurer. “Certain costs,” as used in this subsection, means those costs awarded to prevailing parties in civil actions under RCW 4.84.010 or 36.18.040, or those costs awarded against convicted defendants in criminal actions under RCW 10.01.160, 10.46.190, or 36.18.040, or other similar statutes if such costs are specifically designated as costs by the Court and are awarded for the specific reimbursement of costs incurred by the State, County or City in the prosecution of the case, including the fees of defense counsel. 

(3) The balance of the money received under this section shall be retained by the City and deposited in the general fund. (Ord. 530 § 4, 2012; Ord. 38 § 4, 1993)


2.42.050 Sessions.

The Municipal Court shall be open and shall hold such regular and special sessions as may be prescribed by the City Council; provided, that the Municipal Court shall not be open on nonjudicial days. (Ord. 38 § 5, 1993)


2.42.060 Municipal Court seal. 

The Municipal Court shall have a seal which shall be the vignette of George Washington, with the words “Seal of the Municipal Court of Woodinville, State of Washington” surrounding the vignette. (Ord. 38 § 6, 1993)


2.42.070 Pleadings, practice and procedure.

Pleadings, practice and procedure in cases not governed by Chapter 3.50 RCW or other statutes or rules specifically applicable to municipal courts shall, insofar as applicable, be governed by the statutes and rules now existing or hereafter adopted governing pleadings, practice and procedure applicable to District Courts. (Ord. 38 § 7, 1993)


2.42.080 Deferral and suspension of sentences.

Unless otherwise provided by State law, the Municipal Court shall have the following sentencing authority: 

(1) After a conviction, the Court may defer sentencing and place the defendant on probation and prescribe the conditions thereof, but in no case shall it extend for more than two years from the date of conviction. During the time of the deferral, the Court may, for good cause shown, permit a defendant to withdraw the plea of guilty, permit the defendant to enter a plea of not guilty, and dismiss the charges. 

(2) For a period not to exceed two years after imposition of sentence, the Court shall have continuing jurisdiction and authority to suspend the execution of all or any part of the sentence upon stated terms, including installment payment of fines. 

(3) Deferral of sentence and suspension of execution of sentence may be revoked if the defendant violates or fails to carry out any of the conditions of the deferral or suspension. Upon the revocation of the deferral or suspension, the Court shall impose the sentence previously suspended or any unexecuted portion thereof. In no case shall the Court impose a sentence greater than the original sentence, with credit given for time served and money paid on fine and costs. 

(4) Any time before entering an order terminating probation, the Court may revoke or modify its order suspending the imposition or execution of the sentence. If the ends of justice will be served and when warranted by the reformation of the probationer, the Court may terminate the period of probation and discharge the person so held. (Ord. 38 § 8, 1993)


2.42.090 Complaints.

All criminal prosecutions for the violation of a City ordinance shall be conducted in the name of the City and may be upon the complaint of any person, subject to the procedures set forth in all applicable ordinances or statutes. (Ord. 38 § 9, 1993)


2.42.100 Case transfers.

A transfer of a case from the Municipal Court to either another municipal judge of the same City or to a judge pro tempore appointed in the manner prescribed by this chapter shall be allowed in accordance with RCW 3.66.090 in all civil and criminal proceedings. (Ord. 38 § 10, 1993)


2.42.110 Civil jury trials. 

In all civil cases, the plaintiff or defendant may demand a jury, which shall consist of six citizens of the State, who shall be impaneled and sworn as in cases before District Courts, or the trial may be by a judge of the Municipal Court; provided, that no jury trial may be held on a proceeding involving a traffic infraction. In all criminal cases, jury trials shall be allowed unless waived by the defendant. A party requesting a jury shall pay to the court a fee which shall be the same as that for a jury in District Court. If more than one party requests a jury, only one jury fee shall be collected by the Court. The fee shall be apportioned among the requesting parties. Each juror shall receive $10.00 for each day in attendance upon the Municipal Court, and in additional thereto shall receive mileage at the rate determined under RCW 43.03.060. (Ord. 38 § 11, 1993)


2.42.120 Criminal process.

All criminal process issued by the Municipal Court shall be in the name of the State of Washington and run throughout the State, and be directed to and served by the Chief of Police, Marshal, or other police officer of any City or to a Sheriff in the State. (Ord. 38 § 12, 1993)


2.42.130 Municipal Court Judge. 

(1) Appointment. Within 30 days after August 1, 1994, the City Manager of the City shall appoint a Municipal Court Judge. Pursuant to RCW 35A.13.080, the City Manager’s appointment of the Municipal Court Judge shall be subject to confirmation by the City Council. 

(2) Term. The Municipal Court Judge shall serve a term of four years. The initial appointment of a judge under this chapter shall expire December 31, 1993. On or before December 1, 1993, the City Manager shall make an appointment of a judge for a term expiring December 31, 1997. Appointments for each term thereafter shall be made on or before December 1st of the year next preceding the year in which the judicial term commences. 

(3) Judicial Qualifications. A person appointed as a full-time or part-time municipal judge shall be a citizen of the United States of America and of the State of Washington, and an attorney admitted to practice law before the courts of record of the State of Washington. 

(4) Additional Judges. Additional full or part-time judges may be appointed as provided in this section, when the public interest and the administration of justice makes such additional judge or judges necessary. 

(5) Judges Pro Tem. The City Manager may, in writing, appoint judges pro tem who shall act in the absence or disability of the regular judge of the City Municipal Court, or subsequent to the filing of an affidavit of prejudice. A pro tem judge’s term of appointment shall also be specified in writing, but in any event shall not extend beyond the City Manager’s termination of employment. The judges pro tem shall be qualified to hold the position of judge of the Municipal Court as described in this section. The pro tem judges shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed by the ordinances of the City. 

(6) Vacancy. Any vacancy in the Municipal Court due to death, disability or resignation of a judge shall be filled by the City Manager, for the remainder of the unexpired term. The appointment shall be subject to the confirmation of the City Council. The appointed judge shall be qualified to hold the position of judge of the Municipal Court as provided in this section. 

(7) Removal. A Municipal Court Judge shall only be removed upon conviction of misconduct or malfeasance in office, or because of physical or mental disability rendering the judge incapable of performing the duties of the office. 

(8) Oath. Every judge of the Municipal Court, before entering upon the duties of the office, shall take and subscribe the following oath or affirmation: 

“I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Washington, and that I will faithfully discharge the duties of the office of judge of the Municipal Court of the City of Woodinville, according to the best of my ability.” The oath shall be filed in the office of the King County Auditor. 

(9) Bonds. Every Municipal Court Judge shall give such bonds to the State and City for the faithful performance of the judge’s duties as may be required by law or City ordinance.

(10) Compensation. Pursuant to RCW 3.50.080, the compensation for Municipal Court Judges shall be set by the City Council by ordinance. The City shall enter into a contract with the appointed judge for professional services. (Ord. 38 § 13, 1993)


2.42.140 Municipal Court employees.

All employees of the Municipal Court shall, for all purposes, be deemed employees of the City of Woodinville. They shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the Court. (Ord. 38 § 14, 1993)1

Code reviser’s note: Ord. 20 was repealed by Ord. 71 which was repealed by Ord. 93. 


Chapter 2.45 ANNEXATION TO KING COUNTY LIBRARY DISTRICT

Sections:

2.45.010    Declaration of intent and finding.

2.45.020    Request for concurrence.

2.45.030    Transmittal of ordinance.


2.45.010 Declaration of intent and finding.

The City of Woodinville hereby initiates the process of potential annexation of the City to the King County Rural Library District by stating its intent to join the Library District. After consideration of the options for providing continued library service to the City’s residents, the City Council finds that the public interest will best be served by annexation to said District, effective immediately upon the effective date of incorporation of the City. (Ord. 2 § 1, 1992)


2.45.020 Request for concurrence.

The City Council hereby requests the Board of Trustees of the King County Rural Library District to concur in the proposed annexation of the City by the District. The City Manager is directed to provide the District any and all such documents as may be required and to take such action as may be required to facilitate and effect the annexation. (Ord. 2 § 2, 1992)


2.45.030 Transmittal of ordinance.

The City Clerk is directed to transmit certified copies of Ordinance 2 to the State Librarian pursuant to RCW 27.12.360 and to the King County Rural Library District Board of Trustees and if the Board of Trustees concurs in the annexation to take the further steps outlined in Chapter 27.12 RCW to place this question before the voters at a special election. (Ord. 2 § 3, 1992)


Chapter 2.48 CREDIT CARD REGULATIONS FOR CITY OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES

Sections:

2.48.010    Definition.

2.48.020    Issuance, use and control of credit cards.


2.48.010 Definition.

As used in this chapter, “credit card” means a card or device issued under an arrangement pursuant to which the issuer gives to a cardholder the privilege of obtaining credit from the issuer. (Ord. 264 § 1, 2000)


2.48.020 Issuance, use and control of credit cards.

The City Council hereby adopts the following system for the issuance, use and control of credit cards by City officials and employees:

(1) The following system for the distribution, authorization and control, credit limits and payment of bills related to the use of credit cards by City officials and employees is established:

(a) Distribution. Credit cards may be issued or checked out on a temporary basis to those City officials and employees who have job responsibilities which would be facilitated by the use of a credit card.

(b) Authorization and Control. The City Manager shall ensure that policies and procedures are developed and implemented to safeguard the City’s interests and that procedures and accounting controls are in place to ensure the proper use of credit cards and credit card funds.

(c) Credit Limits. The credit limit for an individual credit card issued shall not exceed $2,000 without written approval of the City Manager.

(d) Payment of Bills. The City Manager shall ensure that proper written procedures for the payment of all credit card bills is implemented.

(e) Unauthorized Charges. Any employee using a City-issued credit card for non-City business shall be billed for all charges on the credit card, and the City Manager or his/her designee is directed and authorized to make payroll deductions to recover any unauthorized charges. No employee shall use the City-issued credit card for non-City business use.

(f) Cash Advances. Cash advances on credit cards are prohibited.

(2) The City Manager is authorized to adopt any additional procedures or policies necessary to implement the provisions of this section. (Ord. 603 § 1, 2015; Ord. 264 § 2, 2000)


Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE*

Chapters:

3.03    Claims and Other Obligations

3.06    Sales and Use Tax

3.08    Affordable Housing Sales and Use Tax

3.09    Additional Sales and Use Tax

3.10    Admissions Tax

3.12    Excise Tax on Real Estate Sales

3.15    Leasehold Excise Tax

3.17    Lodging Excise Tax

3.18    Registration of Bonds and Obligations

3.21    Investment of Excess Funds

3.22    Donations of Property to City

3.23    Confidential Fund

3.24    Petty Cash Fund

3.27    Unemployment Insurance Benefit Account

3.30    Debt Collection

3.33    Utilities Tax

3.36    Park Impact Fees

3.38    School Impact Fees

3.39    Transportation Impact Fees

3.40    Credit Card Payments

3.43    Multifamily Housing Property Tax Exemption

*    Code reviser’s note: Sec. 1 of Ordinance 67, provided as follows: All fees established by Ordinances 46, 47, 56 and 59 and fees for site development and public rights-of-way may be set by resolution.


Chapter 3.03 CLAIMS AND OTHER OBLIGATIONS

Sections:

3.03.010    Payment of claims or obligations of the City.

3.03.020    Issuance of checks before approval by City Council.

3.03.030    Council review.


3.03.010 Payment of claims or obligations of the City.

Pursuant to RCW 35A.40.020, payment of claims or obligations of the City shall be by check. The City officers authorized to sign checks shall be the City Manager, the Finance Director (“the Auditing Officer”) and an employee designated by the City Manager. Two signatures will be required on all checks. (Ord. 604 § 1, 2015; Ord. 433 §§ 2, 3, 2006; Ord. 7 § 1, 1993)


3.03.020 Issuance of checks before approval by City Council.

Pursuant to RCW 42.24.180, the City Council, after audit by the Auditing Officer, authorizes the early issuance and release of checks for payment of claims, bills, invoices and other demands or obligations before formal approval by the City Council; for the purposes of avoiding late fees and penalties, avoiding the disruption of service or delivery of goods or services, taking advantage of early payment discounts, complying with obligations established by previously approved legally binding agreements, reimbursing employees for City purchases that cannot be made with a City credit card, and paying such other transactions that require immediate remittance necessary for the ongoing efficient operation and affairs of the City government. (Ord. 604 § 1, 2015)


3.03.030 Council review.

The City Council shall review the documentation supporting claims paid for its approval of all checks issued in payment of claims at a regularly scheduled public meeting within one month of issuance. If, upon review, the City Council disapproves some claims, the Auditing Officer and the City Manager shall jointly cause the disapproved claims to be recognized as receivables of the City and pursue collection diligently until the amounts disapproved are collected or until the City Council is satisfied and approves the claims. (Ord. 604 § 1, 2015)


Chapter 3.06 SALES AND USE TAX

Sections:

3.06.010    Imposition – Tax rate.

3.06.020    Administration – Collection.

3.06.030    Inspection of records – Agreement with Department of Revenue.

3.06.040    Penalty.


3.06.010 Imposition – Tax rate.

Imposition of sales and use tax as authorized by RCW 82.14.030(1):

(1) Imposition. There is hereby imposed a sales and/or use tax, as the case may be, upon every taxable event, as defined in Chapter 82.14 RCW as the same exists or may hereafter be amended, which occurs within the City limits of Woodinville. The tax shall be imposed upon and collected from those persons from whom the State sales and/or use tax is collected pursuant to Chapters 82.04, 82.08 and 82.12 RCW as the same now exist or may hereafter be amended.

(2) Tax Rate. The rate of tax imposed by subsection (1) of this section shall be one-half of one percent of the selling price of or value of the article used as the case may be; provided, however, that during such period as there is in effect a sales or use tax imposed by King County pursuant to RCW 82.14.030(1) then the rate imposed by this title shall be as provided in RCW 82.14.030(1) as the same exists or may hereafter be amended. The rate as of the effective date of this chapter shall be 425/1000th of one percent. (Ord. 10 § 2, 1993; Ord. 8 § 1, 1993)


3.06.020 Administration – Collection.

The administration and collection of the tax imposed by this chapter shall be in accordance with the provisions of RCW 82.14.050 as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended. (Ord. 10 § 3, 1993; Ord. 8 § 2, 1993)


3.06.030 Inspection of records – Agreement with Department of Revenue.

The City of Woodinville consents to the inspection of such records as are necessary to qualify the City for inspection of records of the Department of Revenue, pursuant to RCW 82.32.330 as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended. The City Manager is authorized to enter into an agreement with the Department of Revenue for the administration of the tax. (Ord. 10 § 4, 1993; Ord. 8 § 3, 1993)


3.06.040 Penalty.

Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof punished pursuant to State law or City ordinance. (Ord. 10 § 5, 1993; Ord. 8 § 4, 1993)


Chapter 3.08 AFFORDABLE HOUSING SALES AND USE TAX

Sections:

3.08.010    Imposition of sales and use tax for affordable housing.

3.08.020    Purpose of tax.

3.08.030    Administration and collection – Statutory compliance.


3.08.010 Imposition of sales and use tax for affordable housing.

(1) There is imposed a sales and use tax as authorized by Washington State Legislature Chapter 338, Laws of 2019, codified in Chapter 82.14 RCW, upon every taxable event, as defined in Chapter 82.14 RCW, occurring within the City of Woodinville. The tax shall be imposed upon and collected from those persons with whom the State sales tax or use tax is collected pursuant to Chapters 82.07 and 82.12 RCW.

(2) The rate of the tax imposed by this section shall be 0.0073 percent of the selling price or value of the article used.

(3) The tax imposed under this section shall be deducted from the amount of tax otherwise required to be collected or paid to the Department of Revenue under Chapter 82.08 or 82.12 RCW. (Ord. 697 § 1, 2020)


3.08.020 Purpose of tax.

(1) The City may use the moneys collected by the tax imposed under WMC 3.08.010 or bonds issued only for the affordable housing purposes as defined in RCW 82.14.540, as it may be amended from time to time, which currently includes the following restrictions:

(a) Revenues may only be used for (i) acquiring, rehabilitating, or constructing affordable housing, which may include new units of affordable housing within an existing structure or facilities providing supportive housing services under RCW 71.24.386; (ii) funding the operations and maintenance costs of new units of affordable or supportive housing; or (iii) providing rental assistance to tenants.

(b) The housing and services funded by these revenues may only be provided to persons whose income is at or below 60 percent of the median income of the city.

(c) In determining the use of funds under this section, the City must consider the income of the individuals and families to be served, the leveraging of the resources made available under WMC 3.08.010, and the housing needs within the City.

(2) Annual reports must be submitted to the Washington State Department of Commerce, in accordance with the Department’s rules, on the collection and use of the revenue from the tax imposed under WMC 3.08.010.

(3) The tax imposed by the City under WMC 3.08.010 will expire 20 years after the date on which the tax is first imposed. The Finance Director shall provide notice to the City Council of the expiration date of the tax each year beginning three years before the expiration date, and shall also promptly notify the City Council of any changes to the expiration date. (Ord. 697 § 1, 2020)


3.08.030 Administration and collection – Statutory compliance.

The administration and collection of the tax imposed by this chapter shall be in accordance with the provisions of Washington State Legislature Chapter 338, Laws of 2019, codified in Chapter 82.14 RCW. (Ord. 697 § 1, 2020)


Chapter 3.09 ADDITIONAL SALES AND USE TAX

Sections:

3.09.010    Imposition – Rate of tax.

3.09.020    Administration – Collection.

3.09.030    Inspection of records – Agreement with Department of Revenue.

3.09.040    Penalty.


3.09.010 Imposition – Rate of tax.

Imposition of additional sales and use tax as authorized by RCW 82.14.030(2):

(1) Imposition. In addition to other taxes which may be imposed by the City, there is hereby imposed a separate sales and/or use tax, as the case may be, upon the same taxable events, and upon which the tax imposed pursuant to RCW 82.14.030(1) as the same exists or may hereafter be amended, is levied, as specifically authorized by RCW 82.14.030(2).

(2) Rate of Tax. The rate of tax imposed by this section, which shall be in addition to the rate of tax permitted to be imposed by City ordinance pursuant to RCW 82.14.030(1), as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended, shall be one-half of one percent of the selling price (in the case of a sales tax) or value of the article used (in the case of a use tax); provided, however, that in the event King County shall impose a sales and/or use tax pursuant to RCW 82.14.030(2), as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended, at a rate that is equal to or greater than the rate imposed under this chapter, then the County shall receive 15 percent of the City tax; provided further, that in the event King County shall impose a sales and/or use tax pursuant to RCW 82.14.030(2), at a rate that is less than the rate imposed under this chapter, the County shall receive that amount of revenues from the City tax equal to 15 percent of the rate of tax imposed by the County. (Ord. 11 § 2, 1993; Ord. 9 § 1, 1993)


3.09.020 Administration – Collection.

The administration and collection of the tax imposed by this chapter shall be in accordance with the provisions of RCW 82.14.050 as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended. (Ord. 11 § 3, 1993; Ord. 9 § 2, 1993)


3.09.030 Inspection of records – Agreement with Department of Revenue.

The City of Woodinville consents to the inspection of such records as are necessary to qualify the City for inspection of records of the Department of Revenue, pursuant to RCW 82.32.330 as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended. The City Manager is authorized to enter into an agreement with the Department of Revenue for the administration of the tax. (Ord. 11 § 4, 1993; Ord. 9 § 3, 1993)


3.09.040 Penalty.

Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof punished pursuant to State law or City ordinance. (Ord. 11 § 6, 1993; Ord. 9 § 5, 1993)


Chapter 3.10 ADMISSIONS TAX

Sections:

3.10.010    Definitions.

3.10.015    Tax levied.

3.10.020    Exemptions.

3.10.025    Collection – Remittance.

3.10.030    Ticket to show amount of tax.

3.10.035    Transient business remittance.

3.10.040    Certificate of registration – Fee.

3.10.045    Penalty for late payment.

3.10.050    Penalty.

3.10.055    Fund created.

3.10.060    Fund purposes – Expenditures.

3.10.065    Unexpended funds.


3.10.010 Definitions.

(1) Admission Charge. In addition to its usual and ordinary meaning, “admission charge” includes, but is not limited in meaning to:

(a) A charge made for season tickets or season subscriptions;

(b) A cover charge, or a charge made for use of seats and tables reserved or otherwise, and other similar accommodations;

(c) A charge made for food and refreshment in any place where free entertainment, recreation or amusement is provided; however, if the admission charge is separate from the food or refreshment, i.e., if one can be admitted without paying for them, then the admission tax would only apply to that fee actually paid for admission, and not to that fee or charge paid for food or refreshment. Otherwise, the entire amount shall be taxed. This shall also include cover charges to night clubs, lounges, private clubs, or similar places;

(d) A charge made for rental or use of equipment or facilities for purposes of recreation or amusement; if the rental of the equipment or facilities is necessary to the enjoyment of a privilege for which a general admission is charged, the combined charges shall be considered as the admission charge;

(e) Automobile parking charges if the amount of the charge is determined according to the number of passengers in the automobile;

(f) Required “donations.”

(2) “Charitable organization” means an organization exempt from Federal taxation under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code.

(3) “City sponsored event” means any program or event provided by City of Woodinville departments.

(4) “City co-sponsored event” means an event which benefits the community and for which the City of Woodinville and another entity share jointly the expenses and responsibilities of providing the event. For an event to be co-sponsored by the City, there must be a formal written agreement entered into between the City and the other entity or entities sponsoring the event in which the City agrees to the co-sponsorship. A lease agreement from the City to another entity does not constitute co-sponsorship unless the lease specifically provides that it does.

(5) “Nonprofit organization” means an organization, corporation, or association organized and operated for the advancement, appreciation, public exhibition or performance, preservation, study and/or teaching of the performing arts, visual arts, history, science, or a public charity providing social or human services or public education and which is currently recognized by the United States of America as exempt from Federal income taxation pursuant to Section 501(c)(1) or (3) of the Internal Revenue Code, as now existing or hereafter amended, and registered under Chapter 24.03 RCW.

(6) “Person” means any individual, receiver, assignee, firm, copartnership, joint venture, corporation, company, joint stock association, society, any group of individuals acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative or fraternal, or any nonprofit or not-for-profit corporation or organization as the term “nonprofit” is defined under the statutes of the State of Washington, RCW 82.04.365 and 82.04.366.

(7) “Place” includes, but is not limited to, movie theaters, museums, dance halls, auditoriums, restaurants, night clubs, lounges, private clubs, athletic pavilions and fields, baseball and athletic parks, swimming pools, circuses, or carnivals; provided, however, the definition of place shall not include any business or establishment located within the tourist district overlay, WMC 21.26.010.

(8) “Religious organization” means an organization engaged in the practice of a particular faith or central beliefs.

(9) “Ticket sales outlet” means the location of any agency, person, group, etc. that is in charge of distributing, selling, or otherwise managing the sale of tickets and are collecting the fees for such tickets to any of the described events.

(10) “Transient” means temporary, short-lived, nonpermanent or nonlasting. (Ord. 177 § 1, 1997)


3.10.015 Tax levied.

There is hereby levied and imposed upon every person, without regard to age, who pays an admission charge to any place as described in WMC 3.10.010, a tax of $0.01 on $0.20 paid for admission. (Ord. 177 § 1, 1997)


3.10.020 Exemptions.

The following activities are exempt for the provisions of this chapter:

(1) Activities of elementary and secondary schools;

(2) Activities of churches and religious organizations;

(3) Government activities;

(4) City sponsored and City co-sponsored events; provided, that for profit activities conducted in conjunction with such an event shall not be exempt;

(5) Activities of nonprofit organizations, as defined in WMC 3.10.010(5); provided, that all of the following requirements are met:

(a) The nonprofit organization:

(i) Publicly sponsors and through its members, representatives or personnel promotes and publicizes the event; or

(ii) Publicly sponsors and:

(A) Performs a major portion of the performance; or

(B) Supplies a major portion of the materials on exhibit; or

(C) When the event is part of a season or series of performances or exhibitions, performs the major portion of the performances or exhibitions in the season or series or supplies a major portion of the materials on exhibit.

(b) The nonprofit organization receives the use and benefit of the admission charges collected.

(c) The proceeds from any single event sponsored by the nonprofit organization do not exceed $100,000.

(d) The event for which the exemption is claimed cannot be one for which a nonprofit organization lends its name as an endorsement to an ineligible person or organization for the purpose of invoking the exemption.

(e) The nonprofit organization must be registered with the Finance Director’s office as provided in WMC 3.10.040 and must provide a copy of its incorporation approval by the State of Washington and any other proof deemed reasonably necessary by the Finance Director to verify that the organization meets the definition of nonprofit organization established by this chapter. (Ord. 530 § 5, 2012; Ord. 177 § 1, 1997)


3.10.025 Collection – Remittance.

(1) The person, firm or corporation receiving payment for admissions on which a tax is levied under this chapter shall collect the amount of the tax imposed from the person making payment for admission, shall hold said tax in trust until the same is remitted to the Finance Director as herein provided, and shall be personally liable for the amount of such tax if the same is not collected and remitted as herein provided.

(2) The tax imposed by this chapter shall be reported and remitted to the Finance Director quarterly on or before the thirtieth day of the month next succeeding the quarter of the year in which the tax is collected by the person, firm or corporation collecting the tax. The quarterly returns shall be made on forms provided by the Finance Director, separately stating the number of admissions sold, the price of each admission, the amount of tax, and such other information as the Finance Director may specify. Each return shall be signed and verified by the person making the return.

(3) The books, records and accounts of any person, firm or corporation collecting the tax herein levied shall, as to admission charges and tax collections, be at all reasonable times subject to examination and audit by the Finance Director. (Ord. 530 § 5, 2012; Ord. 177 § 1, 1997)


3.10.030 Ticket to show amount of tax.

Every admission ticket or card shall separately state and set forth, indelibly printed or written, the price, exclusive of taxes, for which admission is sold and the tax levied under this chapter. (Ord. 177 § 1, 1997)


3.10.035 Transient business remittance.

Whenever any activity which is subject to the tax levied in WMC 3.10.015 is of a temporary or transitory nature, of which the Finance Director shall be the judge, the Finance Director may require the return and remittance of the admissions tax immediately upon its collection or at the conclusion of said activities, whichever the Finance Director deems appropriate. An application for a certificate of registration shall be required as noted in WMC 3.10.040. For temporary or transient events, the owner, lessee or custodian shall be responsible for payment of this tax if the person conducting the event fails to do so. Failure to comply with any requirement of the Finance Director as to reporting and remittance of the tax as required shall be a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 530 § 5, 2012; Ord. 177 § 1, 1997)


3.10.040 Certificate of registration – Fee.

Every person, firm or corporation, prior to conducting or operating any event or place of entrance to which an admission charge is made, shall on a form prescribed by the City complete a certificate of registration and file the same with the Finance Director. The certificate of registration shall continue to be valid until December 31st of the same year in which it was issued. A list of admission charges for all events must accompany the certificate of registration. The application for certificate of registration, or a copy of it, shall be posted in the ticket office or box office where tickets or admission are sold. (Ord. 530 § 5, 2012; Ord. 177 § 1, 1997)


3.10.045 Penalty for late payment.

For each payment due, if such payment is not made by 5:00 p.m. on the due date, there shall be added penalties as follows:

(1) One to 15 days delinquency, 10 percent with a minimum penalty of $10.00;

(2) After 15 days delinquency, 15 percent with a minimum penalty of $10.00.

Failure to pay tax is a violation of this chapter and may be punished as such in addition to the late fees imposed. (Ord. 177 § 1, 1997)


3.10.050 Penalty.

Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as set forth in Chapter 1.03 WMC. (Ord. 685 § 6, 2019; Ord. 177 § 1, 1997)


3.10.055 Fund created.

There is hereby created a special fund known as the “admissions tax park capital fund” into which all money collected from the tax imposed by WMC 3.10.015 shall be deposited. (Ord. 177 § 1, 1997)


3.10.060 Fund purposes – Expenditures.

The fund established in WMC 3.10.055 has been created for the purpose of accumulating funds for park capital in order to acquire, maintain and improve City parks. The monies deposited into said fund shall be expended only for such purposes and for no other purpose unless otherwise directed by ordinance of the City Council. (Ord. 177 § 1, 1997)


3.10.065 Unexpended funds.

Any unexpended funds remaining in the admissions tax park capital fund at the end of any budget year shall not be transferred to the general fund or otherwise lapse, rather said unexpended funds shall be carried forward from year to year until expended for the purposes set forth in WMC 3.10.060 or as otherwise directed by ordinance of the City Council. (Ord. 177 § 1, 1997)


Chapter 3.12 EXCISE TAX ON  REAL ESTATE SALES

Sections:

3.12.010    One-quarter percent excise tax on real estate sales.

3.12.020    Additional one quarter percent excise tax on real estate sales.

3.12.030    County to collect payment.

3.12.040    Tax is obligation of seller.

3.12.050    Tax lien on real property.

3.12.060    Duties of County Treasurer.

3.12.070    Payment due.

3.12.080    Refunds.

3.12.090    Creation of capital improvement fund.

3.12.100    Creation of special capital improvement fund.

3.12.110    Penalty.


3.12.010 One-quarter percent excise tax on real estate sales.

(1) Imposition. Pursuant to RCW 82.46.010, there is hereby imposed an excise tax on each sale of real property constituting a taxable event as defined in Chapter 82.45 RCW, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended, and occurring within the corporate limits of the City of Woodinville. The tax imposed under this section shall be collected from persons who are taxable by the State under Chapter 82.45 RCW as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended, and such tax shall comply with all applicable rules, regulations, laws and court decisions regarding real estate excise taxes as imposed by the State under Chapters 82.45 and 82.46 RCW as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended.

(2) Rate of Tax. The rate of tax imposed by this section pursuant to RCW 82.46.010, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended, shall be one-quarter of one percent of the selling price of all real property upon which this tax is imposed by subsection (1) of this section.

(3) Use of Proceeds. All proceeds from the tax imposed by this section shall be placed by the Finance Director in a capital improvement fund and shall be used by the City solely for financing capital projects as defined by RCW 82.46.010(6) that are specified in a capital facilities plan element of a Comprehensive Plan and housing relocation assistance under RCW 59.18.440 and 59.18.450. (Ord. 530 § 6, 2012; Ord. 115, 1995; Ord. 13 § 1, 1993)


3.12.020 Additional one quarter percent excise tax on real estate sales.

(1) Pursuant to RCW 82.46.035, there is imposed an additional excise tax on each sale of real property constituting a taxable event as defined in Chapter 82.45 RCW and occurring within the corporate limits of the City of Woodinville. The tax imposed under this section shall be collected from persons who are taxable by the State under Chapter 82.45 RCW and such tax shall comply with all applicable rules, regulations, laws and court decisions regarding real estate excise taxes as imposed by the State under Chapter 82.45 RCW.

(2) Rate of Tax. The rate of tax imposed by this section pursuant to RCW 82.46.035 shall be 1/4 of one percent of the selling price of all real property upon which this tax is imposed by subsection (1).

(3) Use of Proceeds. Revenues generated from the tax imposed by this section shall be used solely for the financing of capital projects specified in a capital facilities plan element of the Comprehensive Plan approved by the City Council. (Ord. 13 § 2, 1993)


3.12.030 County to collect payment.

The County Treasurer shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter. The County Treasurer shall place one percent of the proceeds of the taxes imposed and collected by this chapter in the County current expense fund to defray costs of collection. The remaining proceeds from City taxes imposed by this chapter shall be distributed to the City monthly. (Ord. 13 § 3, 1993)


3.12.040 Tax is obligation of seller.

The taxes imposed by this chapter are the obligation of the seller and may be enforced through the action of debt against the seller or in the manner prescribed for the foreclosure of mortgages. (Ord. 13 § 4, 1993)


3.12.050 Tax lien on real property.

The taxes imposed by this chapter and any interest or penalties thereon are the specific lien upon each piece of real property sold from the time of sale or until the tax is paid, which lien may be enforced in the manner prescribed for the foreclosure of mortgages. Resort to one course of enforcement is not an election not to pursue the other. (Ord. 13 § 5, 1993)


3.12.060 Duties of County Treasurer.

The taxes imposed by this chapter shall be paid to and collected by the treasurer of the County where the real property which was sold is located. The County Treasurer shall cause a stamp evidencing satisfaction of the lien to be affixed to the instrument of sale or conveyance prior to its recording or to the real estate excise tax affidavit in the case of used mobile home sales. A receipt issued by the County Treasurer for the payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidence of the satisfaction of the lien imposed in this chapter and may be recorded in the manner prescribed for recording satisfactions of mortgages. No instrument of sale or conveyance evidencing a sale subject to the tax may be accepted by the County Auditor or Recorder for filing or recording until the tax is paid and the stamp affixed thereto. In case the tax is not due on the transfer, the instrument shall not be accepted until suitable notation of this fact is made on the instrument by the County Treasurer. (Ord. 13 § 6, 1993)


3.12.070 Payment due.

The tax imposed by this chapter shall become due and payable immediately at the time of the sale, and if not so paid within 30 days thereafter, shall bear interest at the maximum rate permitted by law from the time of sale until the date of payment. (Ord. 13 § 7, 1993)


3.12.080 Refunds.

If, upon written application by taxpayer to the County Treasurer for a refund, it appears that tax has be paid in excess of the amount actually due or upon a sale or other transfer declared to be exempt, such excess amount or improper payment shall be refunded by the County Treasurer to the taxpayer; provided, however, no refund shall be made unless the State has first authorized the refund of an excessive amount or an improper amount paid, unless such improper amount was paid as a result of a miscalculation. Any refund made shall be withheld from the next monthly distribution to the City. (Ord. 13 § 8, 1993)


3.12.090 Creation of capital improvement fund.

There is hereby created a special fund to be known as the “Capital Improvement Fund” into which shall be deposited all proceeds of the tax imposed by WMC 3.12.010 and distributed to the City. (Ord. 13 § 9, 1993)


3.12.100 Creation of special capital improvement fund.

There is hereby created a special fund to be known as the “Special Capital Improvement Fund,” into which shall be deposited all proceeds of the tax imposed by WMC 3.12.020. (Ord. 13 § 10, 1993)


3.12.110 Penalty.

Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof punished pursuant to State law or City ordinance. (Ord. 13 § 11, 1993)


Chapter 3.15 LEASEHOLD EXCISE TAX

Sections:

3.15.010    Leasehold excise tax imposed.

3.15.020    Contract authorized.

3.15.030    Penalty.


3.15.010 Leasehold excise tax imposed.

Pursuant to RCW 82.29A.040, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended, the City hereby imposes a leasehold excise tax as authorized by Chapter 82.29A RCW, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended. Said tax shall be equal to four percent of taxable rent. (Ord. 14 § 1, 1993)


3.15.020 Contract authorized.

Pursuant to RCW 82.29A.080, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended, the City Manager is authorized to enter into a contract prior to the effective date of this chapter with the Department of Revenue for the administration and collection of said tax. (Ord. 14 § 2, 1993)


3.15.030 Penalty.

Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof punished pursuant to State law or City ordinance. (Ord. 14 § 4, 1993)


Chapter 3.17 LODGING EXCISE TAX

Sections:

3.17.010    Imposition of tax.

3.17.020    Exceptions.

3.17.030    Independent operation.

3.17.040    Definitions.

3.17.050    Lodging tax fund.

3.17.060    Administration.

3.17.070    Adoption of rules.

3.17.080    Violator deemed principal.

3.17.090    Penalty.

3.17.100    Annual report.


3.17.010 Imposition of tax. 

There is hereby levied a lodging excise tax of one percent, collection of which shall begin as soon as possible pursuant to State Department of Revenue requirements, but not later than June 1, 2004, upon the sale of or charge made for the furnishing of lodging by a hotel, rooming house, tourist court, motel, trailer camp, and the granting of any similar license to use real property, as distinguished from the renting or leasing of real property. (Ord. 364 § 1, 2004)


3.17.020 Exceptions. 

(1) For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be presumed that the occupancy of real property for a continuous period of one month or more constitutes a rental or lease of real property and not a mere license to use or to enjoy the same. 

(2) The tax levied under this chapter shall not apply to emergency lodging provided for homeless persons for a period of less than 30 consecutive days under a shelter voucher program administered by a city, town, or county, or their respective agencies, and groups providing emergency food and shelter services. (Ord. 364 § 1, 2004)


3.17.030 Independent operation. 

To the extent permissible under State law, the tax levied in this chapter shall be in addition to any license fee or any other tax imposed or levied under any law or any other ordinance of the City. (Ord. 364 § 1, 2004)


3.17.040 Definitions.

(1) The definitions in this section shall apply throughout this chapter unless the context clearly requires otherwise:

(a) “Tourism” means economic activity resulting from tourists, which may include sales of overnight lodging, meals, tours, gifts, or souvenirs.

(b) “Tourism promotion” means activities and expenditures designed to increase tourism, including but not limited to advertising, publicizing, or otherwise distributing information for the purpose of attracting and welcoming tourists; developing strategies to expand tourism; operating tourism promotion agencies; and funding marketing of special events and festivals designed to attract tourists.

(c) “Tourism-related facility” means real or tangible personal property with a usable life of three or more years, or constructed with volunteer labor, and used to support tourism, performing arts, or to accommodate tourist activities.

(d) “Tourist” means a person who travels from a place of residence to a different town, city, county, state or country, for purposes of business, pleasure, recreation, education, arts, heritage, or culture. 

(2) The definitions of “selling price,” “seller,” “buyer,” and all other definitions applicable to this chapter shall be as defined in Chapters 67.28 and 82.08 RCW, and subsequent amendments thereto. (Ord. 364 § 1, 2004)


3.17.050 Lodging tax fund. 

(1) Pursuant to Chapter 67.28 RCW, a special fund to be known as the lodging tax fund is hereby established and all taxes collected under this chapter shall be credited to this special fund.

(2) All revenue collected under this chapter shall be used solely for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost of tourism promotion, acquisition of tourism-related facilities, or operation of tourism-related facilities or for other purposes as authorized in Chapter 67.28 RCW, or as it is hereafter amended. (Ord. 364 § 1, 2004)


3.17.060 Administration.

The State Department of Revenue is designated as the agent of the City for the purposes of collection of the lodging tax and for administrative procedures applicable thereto. All rules, regulations, and procedures adopted by the State Department of Revenue for the administration of the collection of lodging tax on behalf of the City are adopted by reference. (Ord. 364 § 1, 2004)


3.17.070 Adoption of rules. 

The Director of Finance shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with the terms of this chapter for carrying out and enforcing the payment, collection and remittance of the tax herein levied such as concerning inspection of records; and a copy of the rules and regulations shall be on file and available for public review in the Director of Finance’s office. Failure or refusal to comply with any such rules and regulations is a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 364 § 1, 2004)


3.17.080 Violator deemed principal. 

Any person who directly or indirectly performs or omits to perform any act in violation of this chapter, or aids or abets the same, or directly or indirectly counsels, encourages, commands, or otherwise induces another to commit such violation is a principal under the terms of this chapter and may be proceeded against as such. (Ord. 364 § 1, 2004)


3.17.090 Penalty.

It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter. Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a serious crime, which is a gross misdemeanor. Each day of violation shall be considered a separate offense. (Ord. 364 § 1, 2004)


3.17.100 Annual report. 

Pursuant to RCW 67.28.8001, or as otherwise provided by Chapter 67.28 RCW, the City shall submit a report to the State Department of Community, Trade, and Economic Development about the rate of lodging tax imposed and about revenue received and projects and activities funded with lodging tax revenue. (Ord. 364 § 1, 2004)


Chapter 3.18 REGISTRATION OF BONDS AND OBLIGATIONS

Sections:

3.18.010    Definitions.

3.18.020    Findings.

3.18.030    Adoption of registration system.

3.18.040    Statement of transfer restrictions.

3.18.050    Ratification of prior acts.


3.18.010 Definitions.

The following words shall have the following meanings when used in this chapter:

(1) “Bond” or “bonds” shall have the meaning defined in RCW 39.46.020(1), as the same may be from time to time amended.

(2) “City” shall mean the City of Woodinville, Washington.

(3) “Fiscal agencies” shall mean the duly appointed fiscal agencies of the State of Washington serving as such at any given time.

(4) “Obligation” or “obligations” shall have the meaning defined in RCW 39.46.020(3), as the same from time to time may be amended.

(5) “Registrar” shall mean the person, persons or entity designated by the City to register ownership of bonds or obligations under this chapter or under an ordinance of the City of authorizing the issuance of such bonds or obligations. (Ord. 19 § 1, 1993)


3.18.020 Findings.

The City Council of the City finds that it is in the City’s best interest to establish a system of registering the ownership of the City’s bonds and obligations in the manner permitted by law. (Ord. 19 § 2, 1993)


3.18.030 Adoption of registration system.

The City adopts the following system of registering the ownership of its bonds and obligations.

(1) Registration Requirement. All bonds and obligations offered to the public, having a maturity of more than one year, on which the interest is intended to be excluded from gross income for Federal income tax purposes, shall be registered as to both principal and interest as provided in this chapter.

(2) Method of Registration. The registration of all City bonds and obligations required to be registered shall be carried out either by:

(a) A book entry system of recording the ownership of the bond or obligation on the books of the registrar, whether or not a physical instrument is issued; or

(b) Recording the ownership of the bond or obligation and requiring as a condition of the transfer of ownership of any bond or obligation the surrender of the old bond or obligation and either the re-issuance of the old bond or obligation or the issuance of a new bond or obligation to the new owner.

No transfer of any bond or obligation subject to registration requirements shall be effective until the name of the new owner and the new owner’s mailing address, together with such other information deemed appropriate by the registrar, shall be recorded on the books of the registrar.

(3) Denominations. Except as may be provided otherwise by the ordinance authorizing their issuance, registered bonds or obligations may be issued and reissued in any denomination up to the outstanding principal amount of the bonds or obligations of which they are a part. Such denominations may represent all or a part of a maturity or several maturities and on re-issuance may be in smaller amounts than the individual denominations for which they are reissued.

(4) Appointment of Registrar. Unless otherwise provided in the ordinance authorizing the issuance of registered bonds or obligations, the Finance Director shall be the registrar for all registered interest-bearing warrants, installment contracts, interest-bearing leases and other registered bonds or obligations not usually subject to trading without a fixed maturity date or maturing one year or less after issuance and the fiscal agencies shall be the registrar for all other City bonds and obligations without a fixed maturity date or maturing more than one year after issuance.

(5) Duties of Registrar. The registrar shall serve as the City’s authenticating trustee, transfer agent, registrar and paying agent for all registered bonds and obligations for which he, she, or it serves as registrar and shall comply fully with all applicable Federal and State laws and regulations respecting the carrying out of those duties.

The rights, duties, responsibilities and compensation of the registrar shall be prescribed in each ordinance authorizing the issuance of the bonds or obligations, which rights, duties, responsibilities and compensation shall be embodied in a contract executed by the Finance Director and the registrar, except that (a) when the fiscal agencies serve as registrar, the City adopts by reference the contract between the State Finance Committee of the State of Washington and the fiscal agencies in lieu of executing a separate contract and prescribing by ordinance the rights, duties, obligations and compensation of the registrar, and (b) when the Finance Director serves as registrar, a separate contract shall not be required.

In all cases when the registrar is not the fiscal agencies and the bonds or obligations are assignable, the ordinance authorizing the issuance of the registered bonds or obligations shall specify the terms and conditions of:

(a) Making payments of principal and interest; 

(b) Printing any physical instruments, including the use of identifying numbers or other designation;

(c) Specifying record and payment dates; 

(d) Determining denominations; 

(e) Establishing the manner of communicating with the owners of the bonds or obligations; 

(f) Establishing the methods of receipting for the physical instruments for payment of principal, the destruction of such instruments and the certification of such destruction; 

(g) Registering or releasing security interests, if any; and 

(h) Such other matters pertaining to the registration of the bonds or obligations authorized by such ordinance as the City may deem to be necessary or appropriate. (Ord. 530 § 7, 2012; Ord. 19 § 3, 1993)


3.18.040 Statement of transfer restrictions.

Any physical instrument issued or executed by the City subject to registration under this chapter shall state on its face that the principal of and interest on the bonds or obligations shall be paid only to the owner thereof registered as such on the books of the registrar as of the record date defined in the instrument and to no other person, and that such instrument, either principal or interest, may not be assigned except on the books of the registrar. (Ord. 19 § 4, 1993)


3.18.050 Ratification of prior acts.

All acts of officers and employees of the City performed prior to the effective date of this chapter and consistent with the terms thereof are hereby ratified and confirmed. (Ord. 19 § 5, 1993)


Chapter 3.21 INVESTMENT OF EXCESS FUNDS

Sections:

3.21.010    Authority delegated.

3.21.020    Investments specified.

3.21.030    Common investment portfolio.

3.21.040    Limitation on earnings from bonds.


3.21.010 Authority delegated.

Pursuant to RCW 35.39.032, the City Manager and the Finance Director, acting in committee, shall have the authority to make investments of inactive or surplus funds without the consent of the City Council for each investment. (Ord. 530 § 8, 2012; Ord. 28 § 1, 1993)


3.21.020 Investments specified.

The authority to invest inactive and surplus funds is limited to:

(1) United States bonds;

(2) United States certificates of indebtedness;

(3) Bonds or warrants of the State of Washington; 

(4) General obligation or utility revenue bonds or warrants of the City of Woodinville or of any other city or town in the State; 

(5) Bonds or warrants of a local improvement district of the City of Woodinville which are within the protection of the local improvement guarantee fund law; and 

(6) Other investments as are authorized by law for any other taxing district. (Ord. 28 § 2, 1993)


3.21.030 Common investment portfolio.

(1) Money determined to be available for investment purposes may be invested on an individual fund basis or may, unless otherwise restricted by law, be commingled within one common investment portfolio for the mutual benefit of all participating funds.

(2) If money is commingled in a common investment portfolio, all income derived therefrom shall be apportioned among the various participating funds in proportion to the amount of money invested by each fund based on the end-of-the-month fund balance. The costs of investment will be attributed either to the general fund or to each participating fund in proportion to the amount of money invested by each fund based on the end-of-the-month fund balance. If money is commingled in the local government investment pool for common investment, the costs of investment will be paid from the pool’s earnings pursuant to RCW 43.250.060. (Ord. 657 § 1, 2018; Ord. 28 § 3, 1993)


3.21.040 Limitation on earnings from bonds.

All earnings from the sale of general obligation bonds or revenue bonds or similar instruments of indebtedness shall be invested or used in such manner as the initiating ordinances, resolutions, or bond covenants may lawfully prescribe. (Ord. 657 § 2, 2018; Ord. 28 § 4, 1993)


Chapter 3.22 DONATIONS OF PROPERTY TO CITY

Sections:

3.22.010    Administration.

3.22.020    Use.

3.22.030    Acceptance.


3.22.010 Administration.

The City Manager or his designee shall have the responsibility for the financial administration of all donations to the City. (Ord. 521 § 1, 2011)


3.22.020 Use.

In the event a donor has indicated a desire for a particular use by the City of a donation, such donation shall, to the extent reasonably feasible, be used consistent with the donor’s desired use. (Ord. 521 § 1, 2011)


3.22.030 Acceptance.

All monetary and nonmonetary donations with a current value of up to $5,000 may be approved and accepted for the City by the City Manager. All donations with a value greater than $5,000 must be accepted by resolution of the City Council. The City Manager shall estimate the value of any nonmonetary donation not supported by a bona fide appraisal, for the purposes of compliance with this section. (Ord. 521 § 1, 2011)


Chapter 3.23 CONFIDENTIAL FUND

Sections:

3.23.010    Fund created.

3.23.020    Sources of funds.

3.23.030    Expenditures.

3.23.040    Unexpended funds.


3.23.010 Fund created.

There is created and established an account in the general fund to be designated the confidential fund. (Ord. 330 § 1, 2002)


3.23.020 Sources of funds. 

The confidential fund shall include all monies and proceeds from the sale of property seized during drug investigations and forfeited pursuant to RCW 69.50.505 and other state and federal laws pertaining to drug enforcement. (Ord. 330 § 2, 2002)


3.23.030 Expenditures.

This fund has been established for the purpose of using the net proceeds retained by the seizing agency exclusively for the expansion and improvement of controlled substances related law enforcement activity. (Ord. 330 § 3, 2002)


3.23.040 Unexpended funds. 

Any unexpended funds remaining in the confidential fund at the end of any budget year shall be carried forward from year to year until expended for the purposes set forth in WMC 3.23.030. (Ord. 330 § 4, 2002)


Chapter 3.24 PETTY CASH FUND

Sections:

3.24.010    Established.

3.24.020    Promulgation of administrative regulations – Conformance with State Auditor’s Office requirements.

3.24.030    Expenditures and deposits.


3.24.010 Established.

The Director of Finance is authorized to establish a petty cash fund not to exceed $3,000, composed of two categories of cash, as follows:

(1) Petty cash – such amount as the Director of Finance determines necessary for the making of minor authorized disbursements and the making of change, but not to exceed $1,000; and

(2) Advanced travel – such amount as the Director of Finance determines necessary for the making of minor authorized disbursements, but not to exceed $2,000. (Ord. 440 § 1, 2007; Ord. 57 § 1, 1993)


3.24.020 Promulgation of administrative regulations – Conformance with State Auditor’s Office requirements.

The Director of Finance is hereby authorized and directed to establish written regulations for the operation of the petty cash fund in order to ensure the efficient administration thereof, including but not limited to provisions governing the appropriate replenishment of said fund as reasonably necessitated from time to time. Such regulations shall conform to the petty cash requirements and advance travel requirements of the State Auditor’s Office as set forth in BAR System Manual and applicable sections of the Revised Code of Washington. (Ord. 440 § 2, 2007; Ord. 57 § 1, 1993)


3.24.030 Expenditures and deposits.

Any expenditures from and deposits into the City petty cash fund prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter are hereby ratified and confirmed. (Ord. 57 § 1, 1993)


Chapter 3.27 UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE BENEFIT ACCOUNT

Sections:

3.27.010    Created – Purpose – Deposits.

3.27.020    Expenditures.

3.27.030    Administration.


3.27.010 Created – Purpose – Deposits.

There is created a new account entitled unemployment insurance benefit account which shall be utilized for the reimbursement of unemployment benefits paid by the Employment Security Department of the State and chargeable to the City. Deposits shall be made to such account from City operating funds on a monthly basis or other intervals as determined by the City Council. (Ord. 41 § 1, 1993)


3.27.020 Expenditures.

Expenditures from such account shall be made from time to time as required to reimburse the Employment Security Department of the State for unemployment benefits paid by them and chargeable to the City. (Ord. 41 § 1, 1993)


3.27.030 Administration.

The Finance Director is authorized and directed to establish and administer such account and to make such temporary investments of account proceeds in any manner authorized by law. (Ord. 530 § 9, 2012; Ord. 41 § 1, 1993)


Chapter 3.30 DEBT COLLECTION

Sections:

3.30.010    Collection costs recoverable.

3.30.020    Requirement for debt assignment.


3.30.010 Collection costs recoverable.

In all instances where the City assigns to a collection agency for a collection of any debt owed to the City, including but not limited to past due utility charges, fines, assessments, and permit and license fees and charges, the costs involved in the collection of the debt through use of the collection agency are costs that shall be added to and included in the debt to be paid by the debtor. (Ord. 188 § 1, 1997)


3.30.020 Requirement for debt assignment. 

No debt may be assigned to a collection agency unless:

(1) There has been an attempt to advise the debtor (a) of the existence of the debt, and (b) that the debt may be assigned to a collection agency for collection if the debt is not paid; and

(2) At least 30 days have elapsed from the time notice was attempted. (Ord. 188 § 1, 1997)


Chapter 3.33 UTILITIES TAX*

Sections:

3.33.010    Purpose and effect.

3.33.020    Definitions.

3.33.030    License required.

3.33.040    Utility occupations subject – Rate.

3.33.050    Return required – Due dates and payment.

3.33.060    Payment procedure.

3.33.070    More than one business.

3.33.080    Exceptions and deductions.

3.33.090    Allocation of income – Cellular telephone service.

3.33.100    Rate change.

3.33.110    Records required – Audit authorized.

3.33.120    Sale of business.

3.33.130    Not exclusive.

3.33.140    Approved uses.

3.33.150    Penalty for late payment interest.

3.33.160    Underpayment of tax.

3.33.170    Overpayment of tax.

3.33.180    Debt to City – When unpaid.

3.33.190    Rules and regulations.

3.33.200    Appeals.

3.33.210    Violation – Unlawful acts.

3.33.220    Repealed.

* Ordinance No. 200 adds this chapter as Chapter 3.30. It has been editorially renumbered to prevent duplication.


3.33.010 Purpose and effect.

The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be an exercise of the power of the City to license for revenue pursuant to the laws of the State of Washington. (Ord. 200 § 1, 1998)


3.33.020 Definitions.

Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the words, phrases and terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:

(1) “Cellular telephone service” means a two-way voice and data telephone/telecommunications system based in whole or substantially in part on wireless radio communications and which is not subject to regulation by the Washington Utilities and Transportation Commission (WUTC). This includes cellular mobile service. The definition of cellular mobile service includes other wireless radio communications services such as specialized mobile radio (SMR), personal communications services (PCS), and any other evolving wireless radio communications technology which accomplishes a purpose similar to cellular mobile service.

(2) “Competitive telephone service” means the providing by any person of telecommunications equipment or apparatus, or service related to that equipment or apparatus such as repair or maintenance service, if the equipment or apparatus is of a type which can be provided by persons that are not subject to regulation as telephone companies under RCW Title 80 and for which a separate charge is made.

(3) “Gross income” means the value proceeding or accruing from the sale of tangible property or service, and receipts (including all sums earned or charged, whether received or not) by reason of investment of capital in the business engaged in (including rentals, royalties, receipts, or proceeds from the use or sale of real property or any interest therein, and proceeds from the sale of notes, bonds, mortgages or other evidence of indebtedness, or stocks and the like) and without any deduction on account of the cost of the property sold, cost of materials used, labor costs, interest or discount paid, or any expenses whatsoever, and without any deduction on account of losses. Further deductions and exceptions from gross income upon which the fee or tax described in this chapter is computed are set forth in WMC 3.33.080.

(4) “Person” means any individual, receiver, administrator, executor, assignee, trustee in bankruptcy, trust, estate, firm, copartnership, corporation, joint venture, club, company, joint stock company, business trust, public utility districts, municipal corporation or department thereof, public or private utilities, and all other associations, whether acting by themselves or by servants, agents or employees. 

(5) “Tax year or taxable year” means the year commencing January 1st and ending on December 31st of such year, or in lieu thereof the taxpayer’s fiscal year when permission is obtained from the Finance Director to use the same as the tax period.

(6) “Taxpayer” means any person liable for the license fee or tax imposed by this chapter.

(7) “Telephone business” means the business of providing access to a local telephone network, local telephone network switching service, toll service, or coin telephone services, or providing telephonic, video, data or similar communication or transmission for hire, via a local telephone network, toll line or channel, cable, microwave, or similar communication or transmission system. Telephone business includes the provision of transmission to and from the site or an Internet provider via a local telephone network, toll line or channel, cable, microwave, or similar communication or transmission system. It also includes cooperative or farmer line telephone companies or associations operating an exchange. Telephone business does not include the providing of competitive telephone service, the providing of cable television service, the providing of broadcast services by radio and television stations, nor the provision of Internet service as defined in RCW 82.04.297, including the reception of dial-in-connection, provided at the site of the Internet service provider. (Ord. 530 § 10, 2012; Ord. 200 § 1, 1998)


3.33.030 License required. 

On and after April 1, 1998, no person shall engage in any business, occupation or activity in the City for which a tax is imposed by WMC 3.33.040 without first having obtained and being the holder of a valid license to do so, to be known as a “utility occupation license.” The City shall be exempt from such license requirement. The annual license fee for such license shall be $20.00. Each such person shall promptly apply to the Finance Director for such license upon such forms as the Finance Director shall prepare and provide, giving such information as the Finance Director shall deem reasonably necessary to enable the Finance Director to administer and enforce this chapter; and upon acceptance of such application by the Finance Director, the Finance Director shall thereupon issue such license to the applicant. Such utility occupation license shall be personal and nontransferable and shall be valid as long as the licensee shall continue in the business and shall comply with this chapter. (Ord. 530 § 10, 2012; Ord. 200 § 1, 1998)


3.33.040 Utility occupations subject – Rate.

From and after April 1, 1998, there is levied upon, and there shall be collected from, every person engaged in carrying on the following business for hire or for sale of a commodity or a service within or partly within the corporate limits of the City a tax for the privilege of so doing business as defined as follows: 

(1) Electric Light and Power. By authority of RCW 35.21.870, a fee or tax is levied upon all persons engaged in or carrying on the business of furnishing electric light and power within the City, in an amount equal to two percent of the total gross income from such business in the City during the current calendar year for which a license is required.

(2) Natural or Manufactured Gas and Service. By authority of RCW 35.21.870, a fee or tax is levied upon all persons engaged in or carrying on the business of transmitting, distributing, selling and furnishing natural and/or manufactured gas within the City, in an amount equal to two percent of the total gross income from such business in the City during the calendar year for which a license is required.

(3) Telephone Business. By authority of RCW 35.21.870, a fee or tax is levied upon all persons engaged in or carrying on any telephone business within the City, in an amount equal to four percent of the total gross income of such business in the City during the current calendar year for which a license is required, including revenues from intrastate long distance toll service. 

(4) Garbage Collection. A fee or tax is levied upon all persons engaged in or carrying on the business of solid waste collection, transportation, and/or disposal within the City, in an amount equal to four percent of the total gross income from such business in the City during the calendar year for which a license is required. (Ord. 200 § 1, 1998)


3.33.050 Return required – Due dates and payment.

The tax imposed by this chapter, except the annual license fee required to accompany the application for the utility occupation license and renewal, shall be due and payable in monthly installments. The remittance shall be made as hereinafter provided and shall be accompanied by a return on a form to be provided and prescribed by the Finance Director. The return and remittance shall be in the Finance Director’s office by 5:00 p.m. Pacific time, on or before the last day of each month succeeding the end of the month in which the tax accrued. The taxpayer shall be required to swear or affirm in writing on the return that the information therein given is full and true and that the taxpayer knows it to be so. Whenever the total tax for which any person is liable under this chapter does not exceed the sum of $15.00 for any monthly period, an annual return may be made upon written request and subject to the approval of the Finance Director. The Finance Director may also require verified annual returns from any taxpayer, setting forth such additional information as it may deem necessary to correctly determine tax liability.

Whenever a taxpayer commences to engage in business during any monthly period, his or her first return and tax shall be based upon and cover the portion of the month during which he or she engaged in business. (Ord. 530 § 10, 2012; Ord. 200 § 1, 1998)


3.33.060 Payment procedure.

The tax shall be paid at the time the tax return is filed with the Finance Director by bank draft, certified check, cashier’s check, personal check or money order or in cash. If payment is made by draft or check, the tax shall not be deemed paid until the check or draft is honored in the usual course of business; nor shall the acceptance of any sum by the Finance Director be an acquittance or discharge of the tax due unless the amount of payment is in full and is the actual amount due. (Ord. 530 § 10, 2012; Ord. 200 § 1, 1998)


3.33.070 More than one business.

Any person engaged in, or carrying on more than, one such business or occupation subject to the tax hereunder shall pay the tax so imposed separately for each of the same. (Ord. 200 § 1, 1998)


3.33.080 Exceptions and deductions.

(1) There shall be excepted and deducted from the total gross income upon which the license fee or tax is computed the following:

(a) That portion of the gross income derived from charges to another telecommunications company, as defined in RCW 80.04.010, for connecting fees, switching charges, or carrier access charges relating to intrastate toll telephone services, or for access to, or charges for, interstate services.

(b) Charges by a taxpayer engaging in a telephone business or to a telecommunications company, as defined in RCW 80.04.010, for telephone service that the purchaser buys for the purpose of resale.

(c) Adjustments made to a billing or to a customer account or to a telecommunications company accrual account in order to reverse a billing or charge that had been made as a result of third-party fraud or other crime and was not properly a debt of a customer.

(d) There shall be excepted and deducted from the total gross income upon which the tax is computed all cash discounts allowed and actually granted to customers of the taxpayer during the tax year.

(e) Amounts derived from transactions in interstate or foreign commerce, or any business which the City is prohibited from taxing under the Constitutions of the United States or the State of Washington. 

(2) There shall be excepted and deducted from the total gross income upon which the tax is computed all bad debts for services incurred, rendered or charged for during the tax year. Debts shall be deemed bad and uncollectible when they have been written off the books of the taxpayer. In the event debts are subsequently collected, the income shall be reported in the return for the quarter in which the debts are collected and at the rate prevailing in the tax year when collected.

(3) Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as requiring a license, or the payment of a license fee or tax, or the doing of any act, which would constitute an unlawful burden or interference in violation of the Constitution or laws of the United States or which would not be consistent with the Constitution or laws of the State of Washington. (Ord. 200 § 1, 1998)


3.33.090 Allocation of income – Cellular telephone service. 

(1) Service Address. Payments by a customer for the telephone service from telephones without a fixed location shall be allocated among taxing jurisdictions to the location of the customer’s principal service address during the period for which the tax applies.

(2) Presumption. There is a presumption that the service address a customer supplies to the taxpayer is current and accurate, unless the taxpayer has actual knowledge to the contrary.

(3) Roaming Phones. When the service is provided while a subscriber is roaming outside the subscriber’s normal cellular network area, the gross income shall be assigned consistent with the taxpayer’s accounting system to the location of the originating cell site of the call, or to the location of the main cellular switching office that switched the call.

(4) Dispute Resolution. If there is a dispute between or among the City and one or more other cities, as to the service address of a customer who is receiving cellular telephone services and the dispute is not resolved by negotiation among the parties, then the dispute shall be resolved by the City and the other City or cities by submitting the issue for settlement to the Association of Washington Cities (AWC). Once the taxes on the disputed revenues have been paid to one of the contesting cities, the cellular telephone service company shall have no further liability with respect to additional taxes on the disputed revenues so long as it changes its billing records for future revenues to comport with the settlement facilitated by AWC. (Ord. 200 § 1, 1998)


3.33.100 Rate change.

No change in the rate of tax upon persons engaging in providing cellular telephone service shall apply to business activities occurring before the effective date of the change and, except for a change in the tax rate authorized by RCW 35.21.870, no change in the rate of the tax may take effect sooner than 60 days following the enactment of the ordinance establishing the change. The City shall send to each cellular telephone service company, at the address on its license, a copy of any ordinance changing the rate of tax upon cellular telephone service promptly upon its enactment. (Ord. 200 § 1, 1998)


3.33.110 Records required – Audit authorized.

It shall be the duty of each taxpayer taxed upon his/her or its gross income to keep and enter in a proper book or set of books or records an account which shall accurately reflect the amount of his/her or its gross income, which account shall be open at all reasonable times to the inspection of the Finance Director, or the Finance Director’s duly authorized agent, for verification of the tax returns or for the fixing of the tax of a taxpayer who fails to make such returns. (Ord. 530 § 10, 2012; Ord. 200 § 1, 1998)


3.33.120 Sale of business.

Upon the sale or transfer during a quarterly period of a business or account of which a tax is required under this chapter, the purchaser or transferee shall, if the tax has not been paid in full for the quarterly period, be responsible for the payment of the tax for that portion of the quarterly period during which he or it carries on such business. (Ord. 200 § 1, 1998)


3.33.130 Not exclusive.

The license fee or tax herein levied shall be additional to any license fee or tax imposed or levied under any law or any other ordinance of the City. (Ord. 200 § 1, 1998)


3.33.140 Approved uses.

One hundred percent of these monies may be used for any legal governmental purpose. (Ord. 676 § 1, 2018; Ord. 623 § 1, 2016; Ord. 576 § 1, 2013; Ord. 549 § 1, 2012; Ord. 401 § 1, 2005; Ord. 284 § 1, 2001; Ord. 200 § 1, 1998)


3.33.150 Penalty for late payment interest.

For each payment due, if such payment is not made by the due date and time thereof, there shall be added penalties and interest as follows:

(1) For each month or portion thereof that the payment is overdue, a penalty of five percent of the tax due shall be imposed; provided, that the total penalty imposed shall not exceed a total of 25 percent.

(2) In addition to the penalties imposed, interest on the amount due shall accrue at the rate of eight percent per annum from the date of the delinquency.

The Finance Director is authorized to waive all or any portion of the penalties and interest provided herein in the event that the Director determines that late payment was the result of excusable neglect or extreme hardship. (Ord. 200 § 1, 1998)


3.33.160 Underpayment of tax.

If upon examination of any returns or from other information obtained by the Finance Director it appears that a tax or penalty has been paid less than that properly due, the Finance Director shall assess against the taxpayer such additional amount found to be due and shall add thereto interest at the rate of one percent for each 30 days or portion thereof, compounded monthly, from the respective due dates of such additional amount until date of such assessment. The Finance Director shall notify the taxpayer by mail of the additional amount and the same shall become due and shall be paid within 10 days from the date of notice, or within such further time as the Finance Director may provide. If payment is not received by the Finance Director by the due date specified in the notice, the Finance Director shall add a penalty of 10 percent of the amount of the additional tax found due. If the Finance Director finds that all or any part of the deficiency resulted from an intent to evade the tax payable hereunder, a further penalty of 50 percent of the additional tax found to be due shall be added.

No assessment or correction of assessment for additional taxes due may be made by the Finance Director more than three years after the close of the tax year, except (1) against a taxpayer who has not registered as required by this chapter, (2) upon a showing of fraud or misrepresentation of a material fact by the taxpayer, or (3) where a taxpayer has executed a written waiver of such limitation. (Ord. 200 § 1, 1998)


3.33.170 Overpayment of tax.

If, upon application by a taxpayer for a refund or for an audit of his/her records, or upon an examination of the returns or records of any taxpayer, it is determined by the Finance Director that within three years immediately preceding the receipt by the Finance Director of the application by the taxpayer for a refund or for an audit, or, in the absence of such an application, within the three years immediately preceding the commencement by the Finance Director of such examination, a tax has been paid in excess of that properly due, the excess amount paid within such period of three years shall be credited to the taxpayer’s account or shall be refunded to the taxpayer, at his/her option. No refund or credit shall be allowed with respect to any payment made to the Finance Director more than three years before the date of such application or examination. Where a refund or credit may not be made because of the lapse of said three-year period, the amount of the refund or credit which would otherwise be allowable for the portion of the statutory assessment period preceding the three-year period may be offset against the amount of any tax deficiency which may be determined by the Finance Director for such preceding period. Interest upon any such refund or credit shall be allowed by the Director at the rate of three percent per annum. (Ord. 200 § 1, 1998)


3.33.180 Debt to City – When unpaid.

Any license fee or tax due and unpaid under this chapter, and all penalties and interest thereon, shall constitute a debt to the City and may be collected by court proceedings in the same manner as any other debt in like amount, which remedy shall be in addition to all other existing remedies. (Ord. 200 § 1, 1998)


3.33.190 Rules and regulations.

The Finance Director shall have the power and authority from time to time to adopt, publish and enforce rules and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter or with law for the purpose of carrying out the provisions thereof, and it is unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any such rule or regulation. (Ord. 530 § 10, 2012; Ord. 200 § 1, 1998)


3.33.200 Appeals.

(1) Any taxpayer aggrieved by the amount of the fee or tax determined by the Finance Director to be due under the provisions of this chapter may, upon full payment of the amount assessed, appeal such determination to the City Hearing Examiner.

(2) The appeal shall be in writing and shall contain the following:

(a) The name and address of the taxpayer;

(b) A statement identifying the determination of the Finance Director from which the appeal is taken;

(c) A statement setting forth the grounds upon which the appeal is taken, and identifying the specific errors the Finance Director is alleged to have made in making his or her determination;

(d) A statement identifying the requested relief from the determination being appealed.

(3) The appeal must be filed with the Finance Director within 10 days from the date the taxpayer was mailed notice of the Finance Director’s decision.

(4) The Hearing Examiner shall conduct an appeal hearing, at which the appellant taxpayer and the Finance Director shall have the opportunity to be heard and to introduce evidence relevant to the subject of the appeal. The Hearing Examiner shall establish rules for such hearings consistent with the provisions of this section, including rules relating to the issuance and reconsideration of decisions.

(5) The appellant taxpayer shall have the burden of proving by the preponderance of the evidence that the determination of the Finance Director is erroneous.

(6) Appeal proceedings before the Hearing Examiner shall be tape recorded and all exhibits admitted by the Examiner shall be made part of the record. 

(7) Following the hearing, the Hearing Examiner shall render a decision on the appeal and shall enter written findings and conclusions in support thereof. A copy of the findings, conclusions, and decision shall be mailed to the appellant taxpayer and the Finance Director. The decision shall state the correct amount of the tax owing as determined by the Hearing Examiner.

(8) The decision of the Hearing Examiner shall be final and conclusive unless the same is appealed to the City Council. Any such appeal must be filed with the Finance Director within 10 working days of the decision appealed from or any final decision on reconsideration thereof. Any such appeal shall be based solely on the record of the appeal hearing conducted by the Hearing Examiner.

(9) Any and all actions seeking judicial review of a City Council decision under this section must be filed in the King County Superior Court within 10 calendar days following the date of the decision. Any action not brought within this time limit is barred. (Ord. 530 § 10, 2012; Ord. 200 § 1, 1998)


3.33.210 Violation – Unlawful acts.

It is unlawful, and shall be a violation of this chapter, for any person liable to tax hereunder to fail or refuse to secure the utility occupation license, to make the returns when required, or to pay the license fee or tax when due, or for any person to make any false or fraudulent application or return or any false statement or return or any false statement or representation in, or in connection with, any such application or return, or to aid or abet another in an attempt to evade payment of the fee or tax, or any part thereof, or for any person to fail to appear and/or testify in response to subpoena issued pursuant hereto, or to testify falsely upon any investigation of the correctness of a return, or upon the hearing of any appeal, or in any manner to hinder or delay the City or any of its officers in carrying out the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 200 § 1, 1998)


3.33.220 Sunset.

Repealed by Ord. 250. (Ord. 200 § 1, 1998)


Chapter 3.36 PARK IMPACT FEES

Sections:

3.36.010    Purpose.

3.36.020    Authority.

3.36.030    Definitions.

3.36.040    Applicability.

3.36.050    Exemptions.

3.36.055    Affordable housing – Accessory housing exemption.

3.36.060    Service area.

3.36.070    Impact fee account funds established.

3.36.080    Use of funds.

3.36.090    Impact fee assessment and collection.

3.36.100    Impact fee adjustments, independent calculations.

3.36.110    Impact fee credits.

3.36.120    Impact fee refunds.

3.36.130    Appeals and payments under protest.

3.36.140    Council review of impact fees.

3.36.160    Impact fee calculations.

3.36.170    Schedule of fees.


3.36.010 Purpose.

This chapter is intended to:

(1) Assist in the implementation of the Comprehensive Plan for the City of Woodinville.

(2) Ensure that those public facilities and services necessary to support development shall be adequate to serve the development at the time the development is available for occupancy and use without decreasing current service levels below established minimum standards for the City.

(3) Establish standards and procedures so that new development pays a proportionate share of costs for new facilities and services and does not pay arbitrary or duplicative fees for the same impact. (Ord. 279 § 1, 2001)


3.36.020 Authority.

(1) This chapter is enacted pursuant to the Washington State Growth Management Act codified at Chapter 36.70A RCW and at RCW 82.02.050 to 82.02.100.

(2) The City has conducted studies documenting costs and demand for new facilities and services. These studies are included in the parks, recreation and open space plan, and are hereby incorporated into this chapter by reference as if set forth in full. The Comprehensive Plan and all of the related documents are incorporated into the chapter by reference. (Ord. 279 § 1, 2001)


3.36.030 Definitions.

(1) Dwelling Unit. See definition in WMC 21.11.060.

(2) “Encumber” means to transfer funds from the general park impact fee fund to an account created to fund, in whole or in part, a particular system improvement. Once funds have been encumbered they cannot be used to fund any other system improvement. Funds may only be encumbered by an action of the City Council.

(3) “Project improvements” means site improvements and facilities that are planned and designed to provide service for a particular development project and that are necessary for the use and convenience of the occupants or users of the project, and are not system improvements. No improvement or facility included in a capital facilities plan approved by the City Council shall be considered a project improvement.

(4) “System improvements” means park facilities that are included in the City’s six-year capital facilities plan and are designed to provide service to the community at large, in contrast to project improvements. (Ord. 279 § 1, 2001)


3.36.040 Applicability.

All persons receiving building permits for dwelling units within the City of Woodinville after March 24, 2001, shall be required to pay impact fees in an amount and manner set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 279 § 1, 2001)


3.36.050 Exemptions.

The following development activities are exempt from paying park impact fees because they do not have a measurable impact on the City’s park facilities, or because the City has chosen to exempt them pursuant to RCW 82.02.060(2).

(1) Existing Dwelling Unit. Any alteration, expansion, reconstruction, remodeling or replacement of existing single-family or multifamily dwelling units that does not result in the creation of additional dwelling units.

(2) Facilities for Long-Term Care. Any housing facility or long-term care facility exclusively providing any or all of the following services as defined in RCW 74.39A.009: “assisted living services,” “enhanced adult residential care,” or “nursing home”; provided, that this exemption ceases if the housing facility is later converted to permanent use as a single-family or multifamily residence not providing such services, in which case impact fees would be imposed at that point; and provided further, that where a housing facility provides a mixture of independent senior housing in combination with any of the above mentioned services, the exemption shall be limited to that portion of the facility providing such services, and the impact fee shall be appropriately calculated on a per dwelling unit basis for that portion of the facility not providing such services.

(3) Temporary Accommodation. Any dwelling unit licensed and operated as transient accommodations under Chapter 70.62 RCW and WAC 248-144-026(26), such as hotels, motels, condominiums and resorts; provided, that this exclusion ceases if the housing is later converted to permanent use as a single-family or multifamily residence not subject to such restrictions. (Ord. 279 § 1, 2001)


3.36.055 Affordable housing – Accessory housing exemption.

In addition to the exemptions in WMC 3.36.050, the following shall be exempt from the requirement to pay all impact fees:

(1) Any accessory dwelling unit as that term is defined in WMC 21.11.060.

(2) Low- or moderate-income housing projects developed or owned by public housing agencies or private nonprofit housing developers.

(3) Residential housing units dedicated for occupancy by low- or moderate-income households and whose rents or purchase price is affordable to low- or moderate-income persons under the regulations of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development or its successor.

(4) Individual low- or moderate-income dwelling units (as defined in the current King County Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS)) to be purchased by households with prices within their eligibility limits based on standard lending criteria.

(5) As a condition of receiving an exemption under this section, the owner shall execute and record in King County’s real property title records a City-drafted lien, covenant or other contractual provision against the property that provides that the proposed housing unit or development will continue to be used for low- or moderate-income housing and remain affordable to those households under the regulations of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. The term of this provision shall be 10 years for individual owners and 15 years for private and private nonprofit developers/builders. The lien, covenant, or other contractual provision shall run with the land and apply to subsequent owners and assigns. In the event that the housing unit(s) is no longer used for low- or moderate-income housing during the term of the provision, then the owner shall pay the amount of impact fees from which the housing unit(s) was exempted into the City’s account for paying low- and moderate-income impact fees.

(6) Any claim or request for an exemption under this section shall be made no later than the time of issuance of a building permit. Any claim not made when required by this section shall be deemed waived.

(7) The impact fees not collected from low- and moderate-income housing shall be paid from public funds from sources other than impact fees or interest on impact fees and budgeted for this purpose by the Woodinville City Council.

(8) If claims or requests for exemptions under this section exceed the funds the Woodinville City Council has budgeted for the payment of impact fees for low- and moderate-income housing and accessory housing, this section shall not apply to claims or requests for exemptions under this section made after the budgeted funds were committed or allocated until additional funds are budgeted. (Ord. 279 § 1, 2001)


3.36.060 Service area.

The service area established in this section assures a proportional benefit of public facilities to development applicants and establishes a nexus between those paying for the fees and those benefiting from the capital facilities. Because the City’s size allows its park and recreation facilities to provide a reasonable benefit to its entire population regardless of their location within the City, the service area for the park impact fee shall be the entire City of Woodinville. (Ord. 279 § 1, 2001)


3.36.070 Impact fee account funds established.

There is hereby created and established a special purpose park and recreation facilities impact fee fund (“the park impact fee fund”) to receive park impact fees. All park impact fees and any investment income generated by such fees shall be deposited into the park impact fee fund. Procedures for administration of the funds shall be established by the Finance Director. These funds shall be expended in accordance with the City’s normal budget procedures subject to the limitations set forth in WMC 3.36.080 and RCW 82.02.070. Annually, the City shall prepare a report on the impact fee account showing the source and amount of all monies collected, interest earned, and capital or system improvements that were financed in whole or in part by these impact fees. (Ord. 279 § 1, 2001)


3.36.080 Use of funds.

(1) Park impact fees shall be used for development of parks, open space, passive recreation parks, linear trail parks, and recreation facilities to serve new growth and development in Woodinville; provided, that such impact fees may only be spent on system improvements.

(2) Impact fees may be spent on the following items to the extent that they relate to a particular system improvement: facility planning, land acquisition, site improvements, necessary off-site improvements, facility construction, facility engineering and design work, facility permitting fees, facility financing, grant matching funds, applicable mitigation costs, capital equipment pertaining to public facilities, and any other expenses which can be capitalized and are consistent with the capital facilities plan.

(3) Impact fees may also be used to recoup park facility improvement costs previously incurred to the extent that new growth and development will be served by the previously acquired or constructed improvements or incurred costs. 

(4) In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments are or have been issued for the construction of public facility or system improvements for which impact fees may be expended, impact fees may be used to pay debt service on such bonds or similar debt instruments to the extent that the facilities or improvements provided are consistent with the requirements of this chapter and are used to serve new development. The capital facilities plan should distinguish between facilities and funds needed to serve new development and those facilities and funds needed to correct existing deficiencies. (Ord. 279 § 1, 2001)


3.36.090 Impact fee assessment and collection.

(1) City staff shall determine the total impact fee owed at the time of building permit issuance based on the fee schedule in effect at the time of such issuance.

(2) Impact fee collection shall occur at the time of building permit issuance, unless the applicant applies for the deferred payment of impact fees pursuant to subsection (3) of this section and satisfies all requirements contained therein.

(3) The applicant may request to defer payment of impact fees for single-family residential construction with the following conditions:

(a) In order for an applicant to qualify for the option to defer payment of impact fees, all of the following requirements must be met: 

(i) Prior to building permit issuance, the applicant submits a written request to defer payment for specifically identified building permits. The request shall identify the applicable building permit number(s), the applicant’s corporate identity, the full name of all legal owners, the tax parcel identification number(s), and the calculated impact fee amount at the time of building permit issuance. 

(ii) The legal owners pay an administrative fee as provided by the City’s current fee schedule.

(iii) All legal owners of the property sign a deferred impact fee payment lien in a form acceptable to the City and consistent with RCW 82.02.050(3)(c). The lien shall be granted in favor of the City in the amount of the deferred impact fee. The legal owners shall record the lien against the subject property.

(b) Deferred impact fees shall be paid at the time of final inspection, or at the time of the granting of a certificate of occupancy, or within 18 months from the date of building permit issuance, whichever occurs first.

(c) The City shall have the authority to withhold final inspection and to suspend or refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy or equivalent inspection or certification until impact fees have been paid in full.

(d) In the event that deferred impact fees are not paid within 18 months from the date of building permit issuance, the City may institute foreclosure proceedings under the process set forth in Chapter 61.12 RCW.

(e) The option for deferred payment is limited to the first 20 single-family residential building permits per calendar year per applicant, in accordance with a contractor registration number or other unique identification number.

(f) For the purposes of this section, an “applicant” includes an entity that controls the applicant, is controlled by the applicant, or is under common control with the applicant. (Ord. 630 § 1, 2016; Ord. 279 § 1, 2001)


3.36.100 Impact fee adjustments, independent calculations.

A fee payer may request an adjustment to the impact fees determined according to the fee schedule adopted by this chapter by preparing and submitting to the Parks and Recreation Department an independent fee calculation for the development activity for which a building permit is sought. The documentation submitted shall show the basis upon which the independent fee calculation was made.

(1) If the Department agrees with the independent fee calculation, a written agreement to accept such amount shall be transmitted to the fee payer who shall, in turn, present it to the Permit Center upon impact fee collection.

(2) If the Department does not agree with the independent fee calculation, the fee payer may appeal this decision to the Hearing Examiner through procedures outlined in WMC 2.30.060. (Ord. 279 § 1, 2001)


3.36.110 Impact fee credits.

(1) A developer shall be entitled to a credit against the park impact fee collected under the fee schedule adopted by this chapter in any of the following situations:

(a) Whenever a project is granted approval subject to a condition that the developer actually provide system improvements; or

(b) Whenever a developer has agreed, pursuant to the terms of a voluntary agreement with the City, to provide land for system improvements; or

(c) Whenever a developer has agreed to make system improvements to existing park facilities; or

(d) Whenever a developer has paid a park mitigation fee which is allocated toward providing system improvements.

(2) If, in any of the cases in subsection (1) of this section, the land dedicated, facility constructed, or fee paid is allocated partly toward system improvements and partly toward project improvements, the credit shall be limited to that portion allocated to system improvements.

(3) For the purposes of calculating the credit, the land value or costs of construction shall be determined as follows: 

(a) The amount of credit for land dedicated shall be the higher of either the value of the land established in the parks, recreation, and open space plan, if such value is identified, or by an appraisal conducted by an independent professional appraiser chosen by the fee payer from a list of at least three such appraisers provided by the City. Either the fee payer or the City may request an appraisal, in which event the cost of the appraisal shall be borne by the requesting party. For the purposes of this section, the date of value shall be the date the land was dedicated to the City. 

(b) The amount of credit for facilities constructed shall be based upon the actual cost of construction at the time of construction.

(4) In cases where a developer would be entitled to a credit under this section, but the amount of the credit has yet to be determined on a per dwelling unit basis, the City shall take the total credit amount available to the entire plat or project, calculated by applying subsections (1) through (3) of this section, and divide that amount by the number of dwelling units planned for that plat or project. The impact fee and credit may then be calculated and collected on a per dwelling unit basis as building permits are issued. Where building permits for some, but not all, of the dwelling units within a plat or project have already been obtained at the time the ordinance codified in this chapter becomes effective, the credit for the unpermitted dwelling units will be calculated to arrive at a per dwelling unit amount in the same manner. For example, if a plat is planned for 20 dwelling units, and building permits have only been issued for 10 of those units, the per dwelling unit credit for the remaining 10 units will equal the total credit amount divided by 20.

(5) The fee payer shall be entitled to such credit against the impact fee regardless of whether the system improvement was provided before or after March 24, 2001.

(6) Determinations made pursuant to this section may be appealed to the Examiner under WMC 2.30.060.

(7) A credit must be requested within 30 days of building permit issuance or it is deemed waived.

(8) No refund will be allowed in the event that the impact fee credit exceeds the amount of the impact fee itself. (Ord. 279 § 1, 2001)


3.36.120 Impact fee refunds.

(1) The current owner of property on which impact fees have been paid may receive a refund of such fees if the impact fees have not been expended or encumbered within six years of their receipt by the City. In determining whether impact fees have been expended or encumbered, impact fees shall be considered expended or encumbered on a first in, first out basis.

(2) The City shall provide for the refund of fees according to the requirements of this section and RCW 82.02.080.

(a) The City shall notify potential claimants of the refund availability by first-class mail deposited with the United States Postal Service addressed to the owner of the property as shown in the King County tax records.



(b) An owner’s request for a refund must be submitted to the City Finance Director in writing within one year of the date the right to claim the refund arises or the date that notice is given, whichever date is later.

(3) Any impact fees that are not expended or encumbered within six years of their receipt by the City, and for which no application for a refund has been made within this one-year period, shall be retained by the City and expended consistent with the provisions of this chapter.

(4) Refunds of impact fees shall include any interest earned on the impact fees.

(5) Should the City seek to terminate any or all impact fee requirements, all unexpended or unencumbered funds, including interest earned, shall be refunded to the current owner of the property for which an impact fee was paid. Upon the finding that any or all fee requirements are to be terminated, the City shall place notice of such termination and the availability of refunds in a newspaper of general circulation at least two times and shall notify all potential claimants by first-class mail addressed to the owner of the property as shown in the King County tax records. All funds available for refund shall be retained for a period of one year. At the end of one year, any remaining funds shall be retained by the City, but must be expended for the original purposes, consistent with the provisions of this section. The notice requirement set forth above shall not apply if there are no unexpended or unencumbered balances within the account or accounts being terminated.

(6) A developer may request and shall receive a refund, including interest earned on the impact fees, when:

(a) The developer does not proceed to finalize the development activity as required by statute or City code or the Uniform Building Code; and

(b) The City has not expended or encumbered the impact fees prior to the application for a refund. In the event that the City has expended or encumbered the fees in good faith, no refund shall be forthcoming. However, if within a period of three years, the same or subsequent owner of the property proceeds with the same or substantially similar development activity, the owner shall be eligible for a credit against any then-existing park impact fee requirement. The owner must petition the City in writing and provide receipts of impact fees paid by the owner for a development of the same or substantially similar nature on the same property or some portion thereof. The City shall determine whether to grant a credit and such determinations may be appealed by following the procedures set forth in this chapter.

(7) The amount to be refunded shall include the interest earned by this portion of the account from the date that is was deposited into the impact fee fund. (Ord. 279 § 1, 2001)


3.36.130 Appeals and payments under protest.

(1) An appeal of the initial decision of the City with regard to the imposition of an impact fee or the amount of any impact fees, impact fee credit, or impact fee refund may be taken before the Hearing Examiner pursuant to WMC 2.30.060. The right to such an administrative appeal is triggered by the City’s issuance or denial of a building permit. 

(2) Any applicant may pay the impact fees imposed by this chapter under protest in order to obtain a building permit. (Ord. 279 § 1, 2001)


3.36.140 Council review of impact fees.

The impact fee schedule adopted by this chapter shall be reviewed by the City Council, as it deems necessary and appropriate in conjunction with the annual update of the capital facilities plan element of the City’s Comprehensive Plan. (Ord. 279 § 1, 2001)


3.36.160 Impact fee calculations.

(1) The park impact fee shall be calculated using the same schedule for all dwelling units regardless of type. 

(2) The park impact fee schedule shown in this chapter has been calculated using the formula shown in Attachment A at the end of this chapter.

(3) The fee schedule based on this formula is the City’s determination of the appropriate share of system improvement costs to be paid by new growth and development. (Ord. 399 § 3, 2005; Ord. 279 § 1, 2001)


3.36.170 Schedule of fees.

A park impact fee shall be assessed against all new residential development in the amount of $3,175 per dwelling unit. (Ord. 399 § 2, 2005; Ord. 279 § 1, 2001)

Attachment A

The Woodinville park impact fee shall be calculated according to the following formula:

(TV ÷ DU) × AI = Impact Fee

    (rounded to the nearest dollar)

Where:

TV represents the total value of park land within the City; and

DU represents the total number of dwelling units within the City; and

AI is a percentage that represents the actual investment in TV made by existing Woodinville residents once grant funding and other external sources of capital funding for parking facilities have been subtracted.

Currently, the figures are as follows:

TV = $14,893,954

DU = 3,890

AI = 83.03%

So the impact fee is derived as follows:

$14,893,954 ÷ 3,890 × 83.03% = $3,175


Chapter 3.38 SCHOOL IMPACT FEES

Sections:

3.38.010    Findings.

3.38.020    Authority.

3.38.030    Definitions.

3.38.040    Exemptions.

3.38.050    Exemptions for low- and moderate-income housing.

3.38.060    Assessment of school impact fees.

3.38.070    Procedures for collecting school impact fees.

3.38.080    School impact fees imposed on final plat approval.

3.38.090    Determination of the school impact fee, adjustments and exemptions.

3.38.100    Refunds.

3.38.110    Appeal of a school impact fee determination.

3.38.120    Interlocal agreement between the City and district.

3.38.130    Review of schedule and school impact fees.

3.38.140    District’s capital facilities plan.

3.38.150    Annual report of capital improvements.

3.38.160    School impact fee accounts.

3.38.170    Existing authority unimpaired.


3.38.010 Findings.

The City Council finds that new residential growth and development in the City will create additional demand and need for public school capacity and finds that new residential growth and development should pay a proportionate share of the cost of facilities needed to serve the new growth and development. (Ord. 674 § 2 (Att. A), 2018)


3.38.020 Authority.

This chapter is adopted as an official control to implement Woodinville’s Comprehensive Plan policies, the Growth Management Act, RCW 82.02.050 through 82.02.100, and the State Subdivision Act, Chapter 58.17 RCW. This chapter is also necessary to address identified impacts of new development on schools, in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 674 § 2 (Att. A), 2018)


3.38.030 Definitions.

For purposes of this chapter, the following terms have the indicated meanings:

(1) “Act” means the Growth Management Act, Chapter 36.70A RCW and Chapter 365-196 WAC.

(2) “Building permit” means the official document or certification that is issued by the City and that authorizes the construction, alteration, enlargement, conversion, reconstruction, remodeling, rehabilitation, erection, tenant improvement, demolition, moving or repair of a building or structure.

(3) “Capital facilities plan” means the District’s six-year capital facilities plan and such amended plans as adopted by the City.   

(4) “City” means the City of Woodinville.

(5) “Council” means the City Council of Woodinville.

(6) “Developer” means the person or entity who owns or holds purchase options or other development control over property for which development activity is proposed.

(7) “Development activity” means any residential construction or expansion of a residential building, structure or use, any change in use of a residential building or structure, or any change in the use of residential land that creates additional demand for school facilities.

(8) “Director” means the Director of Development Services or designee.

(9) “District” means the Northshore School District No. 417.

(10) “Dwelling unit” means one or more rooms designed for occupancy by a person or family for living, cooking, and sleeping purposes. This term includes all detached, attached or stacked dwelling units, mobile and manufactured homes, and includes senior citizen assisted dwelling units intended for occupancy by one or more persons. For the purposes of this chapter, an accessory dwelling unit as determined pursuant to WMC Title 21, Zoning, is not charged a separate impact fee.

(11) “Interlocal agreement” means the agreement between the District and the City, governing the operation of the school impact fee program and describing the relationship, duties and liabilities of the parties.

(12) “Impact fee” means a payment of money imposed upon development on an applicant prior to issuance of a building permit as a condition of granting a building permit to pay for public facilities needed to serve new residential growth and development. “Impact fee” does not include a reasonable permit or application fee.

(13) “Low-income and moderate-income housing” means housing affordable under Federal standards to households with annual incomes at or below 80 percent of the County median income.

(14) “Public facilities” under this chapter means capital facilities owned or operated by the District.

(15) “Standard of service” means the standard adopted by the District which identifies the program year, the class size by grade span and considering the requirements of students with special needs, the number of classrooms, the types of facilities the District believes will best serve its student population, and other factors as identified by the District. (Ord. 674 § 2 (Att. A), 2018)


3.38.040 Exemptions.

The following development activities are exempt from the requirements to pay school impact fees:

(1) Replacement, alteration, expansion, enlargement, remodeling, rehabilitation or conversion of an existing dwelling unit where no additional units are created, the use is not changed, and subsection (3) of this section does not apply. Replacement must occur within one year of the demolition or destruction of the prior dwelling unit.

(2) Reconstruction, remodeling or construction of the following facilities, subject to the recording of a covenant or recorded declaration of restrictions precluding use of the property for other than the exempt purpose; provided, that if the property is used for a nonexempt purpose, then the school impact fees then in effect shall be paid.

(a) Shelters or dwelling units for temporary placement, which provide housing to persons on a temporary basis for not more than four weeks;

(b) Construction or remodeling of transitional housing facilities or dwelling units that provide housing to persons on a temporary basis for not more than 24 months, in connection with job training, self-sufficiency training and human services counseling, the purpose of which is to help persons make the transition from homelessness to placement in permanent housing; and

(c) Any form of housing for the elderly, including nursing homes, retirement centers, and any type of housing units for persons age 55 and over, which have recorded covenants or recorded declaration of restrictions precluding school-aged children as residents in those units.

(3) Rebuilding of legally established dwelling unit(s) destroyed or damaged by fire, flood, explosion, act of God or other accident or catastrophe; provided, that such rebuilding takes place within a period of five years and no additional dwelling units are created.

(4) Condominium projects in which existing dwelling units are converted into condominium ownership and where no new dwelling units are created.

(5) Any development activity that is exempt from the payment of an impact fee pursuant to RCW 82.02.100, due to mitigation of the same system improvement under the State Environmental Policy Act.

(6) Any development activity for which school impacts have been mitigated pursuant to a condition of plat approval to pay fees, dedicate land or construct or improve school facilities, unless the condition of the plat approval provides otherwise; provided, that the condition of the plat approval predates the effective date of fee imposition.

(7) Any development activity for which school impacts have been mitigated pursuant to a voluntary agreement entered into with the District to pay fees, dedicate land or construct or improve school facilities, unless the terms of the voluntary agreement provide otherwise; provided, that the agreement predates the effective date of fee imposition.

(8) Any development activity subject to paying school impact fees to the extent that school impact fees have previously been paid for such development activity. (Ord. 674 § 2 (Att. A), 2018)


3.38.050 Exemptions for low- and moderate-income housing.

In addition to the exemptions in WMC 3.38.040, the following shall be exempt from the requirement to pay school impact fees:

(1) Low- or moderate-income housing projects developed or owned by public housing agencies or private nonprofit housing developers.

(2) Residential housing units dedicated for occupancy by low- or moderate-income households and whose rents or purchase price is affordable to low- or moderate-income persons under the regulations of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development or its successor.

(3) Individual low- or moderate-income home purchases (as defined in the current King County Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS)) by households who are purchasing homes with prices within their eligibility limits based on standard lending criteria.

(4) As a condition of receiving an exemption under this section, the owner shall execute and record in King County’s real property title records a City-drafted lien, covenant or other contractual provision against the property that provides that the proposed housing unit or development will continue to be used for low- or moderate-income housing and remain affordable to those households under the regulations of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.

(a) The term of this provision shall be 10 years for individual owners and 15 years for private and private nonprofit developers/builders. 

(b) The lien, covenant, or other contractual provision shall run with the land and apply to subsequent owners and assigns. 

(c) In the event that the housing unit(s) is no longer used for low- or moderate-income housing during the term of the provision, the owner shall pay the applicable impact fees in effect at the time of conversion into the City’s account for paying low- and moderate-income impact fees.

(5) Any claim or request for an exemption under this section shall be made no later than the time a building permit application is submitted to the City. If a building permit is not required for the development activity, the claim shall be made when the school impact fee is tendered. Any claim not made when required by this section shall be deemed waived.

(6) If claims or requests for exemptions under this section exceed the funds the Northshore School District budgeted for the payment of impact fees for low- and moderate-income housing, this section shall not apply to claims or requests for exemptions under this section made after the budgeted funds were committed or allocated until additional funds are budgeted. (Ord. 674 § 2 (Att. A), 2018)


3.38.060 Assessment of school impact fees.

(1) Impact fees are based on the District’s capital facilities plan adopted by reference by the City Council as part of the Capital and Public Facilities Element of the Woodinville Comprehensive Plan.

(2) Unless exempt pursuant to WMC 3.38.040 or 3.38.050, school impact fees shall be imposed upon development activity in accordance with the following schedule: 

	Housing Type	Impact Fee	Per Unit

	Single-family (Detached, mobile homes, manufactured homes)	$15,000	Dwelling Unit

	Townhouse (Attached, not stacked)	$15,000	Dwelling Unit

	Multifamily (Attached, stacked)	$0	Dwelling Unit

	Multifamily (2+ bedroom)	$3,000	Dwelling Unit

(3) At the time complete application is made for a development activity, the school impact fee shall be imposed based on the impact fee schedule in effect at the time of such application. 

(4) Impact fees shall be paid in accordance with conditions of approval with respect to any application for preliminary plat approval or multifamily development which has been approved subject to conditions requiring the payment of impact fees consistent with this chapter. (Ord. 692 § 1, 2019; Ord. 674 § 2 (Att. A), 2018)


3.38.070 Procedures for collecting school impact fees.

(1) The City shall collect school impact fees from any applicant where such development activity requires final plat approval conditioned upon payment of such fees, or issuance of a building permit for residential development not exempt pursuant to WMC 3.38.040 or 3.38.050.

(2) The applicant shall make payment of the school impact fees prior to the City issuing any permits for development activity that is subject to school impact fees.

(3) Impact fees may be paid under protest and subject to appeal as set forth in WMC 3.38.110. 

(4) An applicant may request to defer payment of school impact fees for single-family residential construction pursuant to the same procedures and requirements applicable to park impact fees and traffic impact fees as established in WMC 3.36.090 and 3.39.090, respectively. (Ord. 692 § 2, 2019; Ord. 674 § 2 (Att. A), 2018)


3.38.080 School impact fees imposed on final plat approval.

(1) For plats applied for after February 28, 2001, 50 percent of the impact fees calculated to be imposed on the dwelling units in the plat shall be imposed and collected from the applicant prior to final plat approval.

(2) The impact fee schedule in effect at the granting of final plat approval shall be used for calculating the fees in subsection (1) of this section.

(3) The balance of the impact fee for such plat shall be allocated to the dwelling units in the project and shall be collected when the building permits are issued. 

(4) At the time of final plat approval, the applicant shall be required to place a covenant on the recorded plat and include in the deed for each affected lot within the plat the requirement to pay the balance of the fee when the building permit is issued.

(5) Final plat approval shall not be granted, nor shall the City issue the required building permit or mobile home permit, nor shall the City grant the required site plan approval for a mobile home park unless and until the impact fees set forth in the impact fee schedule have been paid in accordance with this section.

(6) An applicant may request to defer payment of school impact fees for final plats pursuant to the same procedures and requirements applicable to park impact fees and traffic impact fees as established in WMC 3.36.090 and 3.39.090, respectively.

(7) This section does not apply to any plats having four or fewer dwelling units subject to school impact fees. (Ord. 674 § 2 (Att. A), 2018)


3.38.090 Determination of the school impact fee, adjustments and exemptions.

(1) The Director shall determine a developer’s impact fee or exemption in accordance with this chapter.

(2) Arrangement may be made for later payment of the school impact fee with the approval of the District only if the District determines that it will be unable to use or will not need the payment until a later time; provided, that sufficient security, as determined by the District, is provided to assure payment. Security shall be made to and held by the District, which will be responsible for tracking and documenting the security interest.

(3) The school impact fee amount established in the schedule shall be reduced by the amount of any school impact fee payment previously made for the lot or development activity in question, either as a condition of approval or pursuant to a voluntary agreement.

(4) Whenever a developer is granted approval subject to a condition that the developer actually provide a school facility acceptable to the District, the developer shall be entitled to a credit for the actual cost of providing the facility, against the fee that would be chargeable under this chapter. The cost of construction shall be estimated at the time of approval, but must be documented, and the documentation confirmed after the construction is completed to assure that an accurate credit amount is provided. If construction costs are less than the calculated fee amount, the difference remaining shall be chargeable as a school impact fee.

(5) The school impact fees may be adjusted, if one of the following circumstances exist; provided, that the discount set forth in the fee formula fails to adjust for the error in the calculation or fails to ameliorate the unfairness of the fee:

(a) The developer demonstrates that a school impact fee assessment was improperly calculated; or

(b) Unusual circumstances identified by the developer demonstrate that if the required impact fee amount was applied to the development, it would be unfair or unjust.

(6) In cases where a developer requests an independent fee calculation, adjustment exception, or a credit pursuant to RCW 82.02.060(3), the Director shall consult with the District and the District shall advise the Director prior to a final determination of the impact fee.

(7) A developer may provide studies and data to demonstrate that any particular factor used by the District may not be appropriately applied to the development proposal. (Ord. 674 § 2 (Att. A), 2018)


3.38.100 Refunds.

(1) The current owner of property on which a school impact fee has been paid may receive a refund of such fees if the impact fees have not been expended or encumbered within the time period established in and pursuant to WMC 3.38.160(5) on school facilities intended to benefit the development activity for which the impact fees were paid. In determining whether impact fees have been encumbered, impact fees shall be considered encumbered on a first-in, first-out basis. 

(2) On behalf of the City, the District shall notify potential claimants by first-class mail deposited with the United States Postal Service addressed to the owner of the property as shown in the King County tax records.

(3) An owner’s request for a refund must be submitted to the District in writing within one year of the date the right to claim the refund arises or the date that notice is given, whichever date is later. 

(4) Any school impact fees that are not expended or encumbered by the District in conformance with the capital facilities plan within these time limitations, and for which no application for a refund has been made within this one-year period, shall be retained and expended consistent with the provisions of this section. 

(5) Refunds of school impact fees shall include any interest earned on the impact fees.

(6) Should the City seek to terminate any or all school impact fee requirements, all unexpended or unencumbered funds, including interest earned, shall be refunded to the current owner of the property for which a school impact fee was paid. (Ord. 674 § 2 (Att. A), 2018)


3.38.110 Appeal of a school impact fee determination.

Any appeal of a determination by the Director in imposing school impact fees shall follow the process for the appeal of the underlying development application, as set forth in WMC Title 21. (Ord. 674 § 2 (Att. A), 2018)


3.38.120 Interlocal agreement between the City and district.

As a condition of the City’s authorization to implement this chapter, the City and district shall enter into an interlocal agreement governing the operation of the school impact fee program and describing the relationship and liabilities of the parties thereunder. The interlocal agreement shall provide for the collection of impact fees by the District on behalf of the City. (Ord. 674 § 2 (Att. A), 2018)


3.38.130 Review of schedule and school impact fees.

(1) The district shall annually submit to the City a capital facilities plan or an update of a previously adopted plan, which meets the requirements of the Act and this chapter. The materials submitted by the District shall include proposed school impact fee amounts for single-family and multifamily dwelling units. 

(2) The City Council shall review on at least an annual basis the District’s submitted six-year capital facilities plan. The review shall occur in conjunction with any update of the capital and public facilities plan element of the City’s Comprehensive Plan.

(3) The schedule in WMC 3.38.060 may be amended to reflect changes to the capital facilities plan. Amendments to the schedule for this purpose shall be adopted by the Council. (Ord. 674 § 2 (Att. A), 2018)


3.38.140 District’s capital facilities plan.

Pursuant to WMC 3.38.130(1), at a minimum the following information shall be provided to the City by the District consistent with RCW 82.02.060 and WAC 365-196-850:

(1) The district’s student enrollment projections over the next six years, its current enrollment and the District’s enrollment projections and actual enrollment from the previous year; 

(2) The district’s adopted standard of service;

(3) The district’s overall capacity over the next six years based on the following:

(a) The number of students the District’s facilities can accommodate district-wide compared with the District’s standard of service; and

(b) The available capacity from school facilities planned, but not yet built;

(4) An inventory of the District’s existing facilities, including permanent, transitional and relocatable facilities; 

(5) A forecast of future needs for school facilities based on the standard of service and the District’s enrollment projections; 

(6) An identification of deficiencies in school facilities serving the student populations; 

(7) To the extent deficiencies in the existing district’s facilities are identified, the source of funding other than impact fees for building or acquiring the necessary facilities to serve the existing student population in order to eliminate the deficiencies within a reasonable period;

(8) Facilities to meet future demand based on the standard of service;

(9) If sufficient funding is not projected to be available to fully fund a capital facilities plan, the reason for the funding gap, and identify all sources of funding that the District plans to use to meet the standard of service;

(10) In the financing plan component of a capital facilities plan, the District shall plan on a six-year horizon and shall demonstrate its best efforts by taking the following steps:

(a) Establish a six-year financing plan and propose the necessary bond issues and levies required by and consistent with that plan and as approved by the school board consistent with RCW 28A.53.020, 84.52.052 and 84.52.056; and

(b) Apply to the State for funding and comply with the State requirements for eligibility to the best of the District’s ability.

(11) Any other long-range projects planned by the District. (Ord. 674 § 2 (Att. A), 2018)


3.38.150 Annual report of capital improvements.

The district shall submit an annual report to the City Council showing the capital improvements which were financed in whole or in part by the impact fees. (Ord. 674 § 2 (Att. A), 2018)


3.38.160 School impact fee accounts.

(1) Impact fee receipts shall be earmarked specifically and retained in a special interest-bearing account established by the District solely for the District’s school impact fees. 

(2) All interest from the account shall be retained in the account and expended for the purpose or purposes for which impact fees were imposed.

(3) Annually, the District shall prepare a report on the impact fee account showing the source and amount of all moneys collected, earned or received, and capital or system improvements that were financed in whole or in part by impact fees. The district shall submit a copy of this report to the City Council. 

(4) Impact fees for the District’s system improvements shall be expended by the District only in conformance with the capital facilities plan element of the City’s Comprehensive Plan.

(5) Impact fees shall be expended or encumbered by the District for a permissible use within 10 years of receipt by the District, unless there exists an extraordinary or compelling reason for fees to be held longer than 10 years. 

(a) Such extraordinary or compelling reasons shall be identified to the City by the District in a written report. 

(b) The City Council shall identify the District’s extraordinary and compelling reasons for the fees to be held longer than 10 years in the Council’s own written findings.

(6) Upon the finding that any or all school impact fee requirements are to be terminated, the City shall publish notice of such termination and the availability of the refunds in a newspaper of general circulation at least two times and shall notify all potential claimants by first-class mail addressed to the owner of the property as shown in the County tax records.

(7) All funds available for refund shall be retained for a period of one year. At the end of one year, any remaining funds shall be retained by the District, but must be expended by the District, consistent with the provisions of this section. 

(8) The notice requirement set forth above shall not apply if there are no unexpended or unencumbered balances within the account or accounts being terminated.

(9) A developer may request and shall receive a refund, including interest earned on the impact fees, when:

(a) The developer has not received final plat approval, the building permit, the mobile home permit, the site plan approval, or final approval for the development activity as required by statute or City Code including the State Building Code;

(b) No impact on the District has resulted where: 

(i) “Impact” shall be deemed to include cases where the District has expended or encumbered the impact fees in good faith prior to the application for a refund; and 

(ii) In the event that the District has expended or encumbered the fees in good faith, no refund shall be forthcoming. 

(c) If within a period of three years, the same or subsequent owner of the property proceeds with the same or substantially similar development activity, the owner shall be eligible for a credit, provided: 

(i) The owner must petition the District and provide receipts of school impact fees paid by the owner for a development of the same or substantially similar nature on the same property or some portion thereof; and 

(ii) The district shall determine whether to grant a credit, and such determinations may be appealed by following the procedures set forth in WMC 3.38.110.

(10) Interest due upon the refund of impact fees required by this section shall be calculated according to the average rate received by the District on invested funds throughout the period during which the fees were retained. (Ord. 674 § 2 (Att. A), 2018)


3.38.170 Existing authority unimpaired.

Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the City from requiring the applicant for a building permit to mitigate adverse environmental impacts of a specific development pursuant to the State Environmental Policy Act, Chapter 43.21C RCW, based on the environmental documents accompanying the underlying development approval process, and/or Chapter 58.17 RCW, governing plats and subdivisions; provided, that the exercise of this authority is consistent with the provisions of RCW 82.02.050(1)(c). (Ord. 674 § 2 (Att. A), 2018)


Chapter 3.39 TRANSPORTATION IMPACT FEES

Sections:

3.39.010    Purpose.

3.39.020    Authority.

3.39.030    Definitions.

3.39.040    Applicability.

3.39.050    Exemptions.

3.39.060    Service area.

3.39.070    Transportation impact fee fund established.

3.39.080    Use of funds.

3.39.085    Computation of transportation fee amount.

3.39.090    Impact fee determination and collection.

3.39.100    Impact fee adjustments, independent calculations.

3.39.110    Impact fee credits.

3.39.120    Impact fee refunds.

3.39.130    Appeals and payments under protest.

3.39.140    Council review of impact fees.

3.39.170    Schedule of fees.


3.39.010 Purpose.

This chapter is intended to:

(1) Assist in the implementation of the Comprehensive Plan for the City of Woodinville.

(2) Ensure that those public facilities and services necessary to support development shall be adequate to serve the development at the time the development is available for occupancy and use, or shortly thereafter, without decreasing current service levels below established minimum standards for the City.

(3) Establish standards and procedures so that new development pays a proportionate share of costs for new facilities and services and does not pay arbitrary or duplicative fees for the same impact. (Ord. 527 § 1, 2012)


3.39.020 Authority.

(1) This chapter is enacted pursuant to the Washington State Growth Management Act codified at Chapter 36.70A RCW and at RCW 82.02.050 to 82.02.100.

(2) The City has conducted studies documenting costs and demand for new facilities and services. These studies are included in the City’s Transportation Master Plan, as may be amended and adopted, from time to time, by the City Council; and are hereby incorporated into this chapter by reference as if set forth in full. The City of Woodinville Comprehensive Plan is also incorporated into this chapter by reference. (Ord. 527 § 1, 2012)


3.39.030 Definitions.

(1) Dwelling Unit. See definition in WMC 21.11.060.

(2) “Encumber” means to transfer impact fee dollars from the transportation impact fee fund to a fund for a particular system improvement that is fully within the current year’s budget. Funds may only be encumbered by an action of the City Council. The fund encumbering the impact fee dollars shall bear the name of the system improvement financed with such money.

(3) “Project improvements” means site improvements and facilities that are planned and designed to provide service for a particular development project and that are necessary for the use and convenience of the occupants or users of the project, and are not system improvements. No improvement or facility included in the City’s Transportation Facilities Plan or Transportation Improvement Plan approved by the City Council shall be considered a project improvement. Project improvements are also improvements to the City’s transportation system, directly adjoining property being developed, that are required in order to mitigate the direct impacts caused by the development such as frontage improvements, are considered part of and within the definition of project improvements.

(4) “System improvements” means transportation facilities that are included in the City’s 20-year Transportation Facilities Plan and are designed to provide service to the community at large, in contrast to project improvements. (Ord. 527 § 1, 2012)


3.39.040 Applicability.

All persons receiving building permits for the following within the City of Woodinville after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be required to pay traffic impact fees in an amount and manner set forth in this chapter:

(1) New single detached dwelling unit.

(2) New multifamily dwelling units including:

(a) Apartments.

(b) Duplexes.

(c) Townhomes.

(d) Senior citizen assisted units.

(3) New commercial buildings.

(4) New industrial buildings.

(5) New retail buildings.

(6) Expansion of any commercial, retail or industrial building for the amount of expansion area and use only.

(7) Expansion or remodeling of any multifamily housing that results in additional dwelling units being created for the number of additional dwelling units being created only.

(8) Change of use inside of any commercial, retail, industrial, or multifamily building that results in a predicted amount of traffic being generated greater than the previous use unless exempt under WMC 3.39.050. The impact fee amount will only be calculated for the increase in predicted traffic volumes. (Ord. 527 § 1, 2012)


3.39.050 Exemptions.

The following development activities are exempt from paying transportation impact fees because they do not have a measurable impact on the City’s transportation facilities, or because the City has chosen to exempt them pursuant to RCW 82.02.060(2), as development with broad public purposes.

(1) Existing Dwelling Unit. Any alteration, expansion, reconstruction, remodeling or replacement of existing single-family or multifamily dwelling units that does not result in the creation of additional dwelling units.

(2) Development activities for retail, commercial, and industrial buildings if all the listed conditions below are met:

(a) The proposed development does not add to the footprint, internal floor area, floors and/or mezzanines to the existing building;

(b) The proposed development does not generate any additional predicted average daily trips as calculated pursuant to WMC 3.39.090; and

(c) The proposed development is an internal alteration/tenant improvement of an existing building. (Ord. 668 § 1, 2018; Ord. 630 § 2, 2016; Ord. 527 § 1, 2012)


3.39.060 Service area.

The service area for the existing and proposed public transportation facilities is defined as that area which is coextensive with the corporate boundaries of the City, as they now exist or as they may be amended through annexation or other means from time to time. (Ord. 527 § 1, 2012)


3.39.070 Transportation impact fee fund established.

(1) A special purpose transportation impact fee fund is hereby established to account for the receipt and expenditure of monies collected under this chapter. All transportation impact fees and any investment income generated by such fees shall be deposited and monitored in the transportation impact fee fund. Any monies collected and unexpended before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be combined into one transportation impact fee fund and no separate accounting shall be required in the future for these monies.

(2) Procedures for administration of the fund and accounts shall be established by the Finance Director. These accounts shall be expended in accordance with the City’s normal budget procedures subject to the limitations set forth in WMC 3.39.080 and RCW 82.02.070. Annually, the City shall prepare a report on the impact fee fund showing the source and amount of all moneys collected, interest earned, and system improvements that were financed in whole or in part by these impact fees. (Ord. 527 § 1, 2012)


3.39.080 Use of funds.

(1) Transportation impact fees shall be used for development of transportation facilities that constitute system improvements.

(2) Impact fees may be spent on the following items to the extent that they directly relate to a particular system improvement: facility planning, land acquisition, site improvements, necessary off-site improvements, facility construction, facility engineering and design work, facility permit fees, facility financing, grant-matching funds, applicable mitigation costs, capital equipment pertaining to a particular system improvement, and any other capital costs related to a particular system improvement, including but not limited to signalization, traffic safety, and nonmotorized transportation improvements.

(3) Impact fees may also be used to recoup transportation facility improvement costs previously incurred by the City to the extent that new growth and development will be served by the previously acquired or constructed improvements resulting in such costs.

(4) In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments are or have been issued for the construction of public facility or system improvements for which impact fees may be expended, impact fees may be used to pay debt service on such bonds or similar debt instruments to the extent that the facilities or improvements provided are consistent with the requirements of this chapter and are used to serve new development. The Transportation Improvement Plan and Transportation Facilities Plan should distinguish between facilities and funds needed to serve new development and those facilities and funds needed to correct existing deficiencies.

(5) Projects that are classified as system improvement projects, that are eligible for partial or full funding by transportation impact fees are listed with their estimated costs in Exhibit B.

Ordinance No. 527, Exhibit B  

Schedule of Transportation System Improvement Projects WMC 3.39.080(5) 

	Project Name (1)	All Capacity Improvements Projects (2)	Proposed Systems Improvement Projects for TIF (3)

	Trestle Replacement	$	8,030,000	$	8,030,000

	Sammamish River Bridge	$	6,490,000	$	6,490,000

	SR 522/195th Street Interchange – Interim	$	750,000	$	–

	Woodinville-Snohomish Road Widening	$	18,100,000	$	18,100,000

	SR 522/195th Street Interchange – Full Interchange	$	32,500,000	$	–

	135th Ave Grid Road 171st to LBC	$	6,028,000	$	6,028,000

	173rd Grid Road	$	2,118,000	$	2,118,000

	138th Grid Road	$	3,630,000	$	3,630,000

	178th Grid Road	$	4,180,000	$	4,180,000

	SR 202 Improvements	$	6,326,000	$	–

	140th Ave Widening (to 5 lanes)	$	2,635,000	$	2,635,000

	Wood – Duvall Road/Woodinville Way (left turn lane)	$	1,500,000	$	1,500,000

	171st/140th Dual Left Turn (northbound to westbound)	$	3,750,000	$	3,750,000

	169th 124th Roundabout	$	2,500,000	$	2,500,000

	SR 202 – Winery Hill Road Intersection Roundabout	$	1,750,000	$	1,750,000

	Woodinville – Duvall Road Widening	$	7,033,000	$	7,033,000

	Little Bear Creek Widening	$	6,375,000	$	6,375,000

	NE 195th/130th Traffic Signal	$	1,000,000	$	1,000,000

	132nd/143rd Roundabout	$	1,500,000	$	1,500,000

	124th/149th Traffic Signal	$	750,000	$	750,000

	136th/NE 195th Traffic Signal	$	750,000	$	750,000

	Total System Capacity Improvements	$	117,695,000	$	78,119,000

NOTES:

(1) Source: Transportation Master Plan adopted May 2010.

(2) Capacity Projects for Medium Growth Scenario.

(3) System Improvement Projects included in Transportation Improvement Fee.

(Ord. 527 § 1, 2012)


3.39.085 Computation of transportation fee amount.

The City of Woodinville shall use the amount of average daily traffic (ADT) as the measurement to determine transportation impacts of a development and impact fee.

(1) Calculation of Impact Fee Amount. The amount of the traffic impact fee assessed under this chapter shall be calculated as follows:

	•	A = Total estimated cost of system improvement projects

	•	B = Percent of growth of traffic (ADT) from internal within City limits

	•	C = Proportionate share of ADT growth assigned to development activity

	•	D = New average daily traffic that will either originate in, transit through, or drive to the City

	•	Impact fee amount = (A x B x C)/D

The above calculation variables may be amended and adopted, from time to time, by the City Council and are hereby adopted as shown in Exhibit A at the end of this section.

(2) Implementation of Impact Fee Amount. The impact fee amount shall be implemented as follows:

	Amount Effective:

	Effective Date of Ordinance 527:	$290.00/ADT

	1/1/2014:	$320.00/ADT

	1/1/2015:	$355.00/ADT

	1/1/2016:	$395.00/ADT

	1/1/2017:	$440.00/ADT

 

Ordinance No. 527, Exhibit A 

Schedule of Transportation Impact Fees 

	Impact Fee Calculation Formula (WMC 3.39.085):

	•	A = Total estimated cost of system improvement projects

	•	B = Percent of growth of traffic (ADT) from internal within City limits

	•	C = Proportionate share of ADT growth assigned to development activity

	•	D = New average daily traffic that will either originate in, transit through, or drive to the City

	•	Impact fee amount = (A x B x C)/D

Calculation of Fee Amount per WMC 3.39.085 established by Ordinance No. 527


[IMAGE]


(Ord. 527 § 1, 2012)


3.39.090 Impact fee determination and collection.

(1) At the time of building permit issuance, City staff shall determine the total impact fee owed based on the fee schedule in effect at the time of such issuance. Impact fee collection shall occur at the time of building permit issuance, unless the applicant applies for the deferred payment of impact fees pursuant to subsection (2) of this section and satisfies all requirements contained therein.

(2) The applicant may request to defer payment of impact fees for single-family residential construction with the following conditions:

(a) In order for an applicant to qualify for the option to defer payment of impact fees, all of the following requirements must be met: 

(i) Prior to building permit issuance, the applicant submits a written request to defer payment for specifically identified building permits. The request shall identify the applicable building permit number(s), the applicant’s corporate identity, the full name of all legal owners, the tax parcel identification number(s), and the calculated impact fee amount at the time of building permit issuance. 

(ii) The legal owners pay an administrative fee as provided by the City’s current fee schedule.

(iii) All legal owners of the property sign a deferred impact fee payment lien in a form acceptable to the City and consistent with RCW 82.02.050(3)(c). The lien shall be granted in favor of the City in the amount of the deferred impact fee. The legal owners shall record the lien against the subject property.

(b) Deferred impact fees shall be paid at the time of final inspection, or at the time of the granting of a certificate of occupancy, or within 18 months from the date of building permit issuance, whichever occurs first.

(c) The City shall have the authority to withhold final inspection and to suspend or refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy or equivalent inspection or certification until impact fees have been paid in full.

(d) In the event that deferred impact fees are not paid within 18 months from the date of building permit issuance, the City may institute foreclosure proceedings under the process set forth in Chapter 61.12 RCW.

(e) The option for deferred payment is limited to the first 20 single-family residential building permits per year per applicant, in accordance with a contractor registration number or other unique identification number.

(f) For the purposes of this section, an “applicant” includes an entity that controls the applicant, is controlled by the applicant, or is under common control with the applicant.

(3) An applicant may request that the impact fee be calculated in advance of building permit issuance, but any such advance calculation shall not be binding upon the City and should only be used as guidance by the applicant. Applicants should note that it is not possible to have a vested right to pay a particular impact fee in advance of building permit issuance. If the City Council revises the impact fee formula or the impact fees themselves prior to the time that a building permit is issued for a particular development, the formula or fee amount in effect at the time of building permit issuance shall apply to the development.

(4) The City shall use as a basis to predict the amount of new average daily trips created by any proposed development the current edition of the publication titled “Trip Generation, an ITE Informational Report” published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers, or other factual basis accepted by the Public Works Director.

(5) This impact fee owed for a development shall be determined by multiplying the number of predicted new average daily trips by the impact fee amount per average daily trip as computed in WMC 3.39.085.

(6) If the predicted number of average daily trips for a property is less than the existing number of average daily trips from the existing uses on the same property as a result of the proposed development, transportation impact fees will not be assessed by the City. The highest number of predicted average daily trips from a previous use of the site since 2005 will be used as a basis for number of existing average daily trips generated by that property.

(7) The number of average daily trips remains with the property or lot and cannot be moved, traded, bought, sold, or transferred to another property within the City. (Ord. 630 § 3, 2016; Ord. 527 § 1, 2012)


3.39.100 Impact fee adjustments, independent calculations.

A fee payer may request an adjustment to the impact fees determined according to the fee schedule adopted by this chapter by preparing and submitting to the Public Works Director an independent fee calculation for the development activity for which a building permit is sought. Said independent fee calculation must be supported by studies and data. The documentation submitted shall show the basis upon which the independent fee calculation was made. The City may, in its sole and exclusive discretion, also adjust the applicable fee at the time of imposition where unusual circumstances exist.

(1) If the Public Works Director agrees with the independent fee calculation, a written agreement to accept such amount shall be transmitted to the fee payer who shall, in turn, present it to the Permit Center upon impact fee collection.

(2) If the Public Works Director does not agree with the independent fee calculation, the fee payer may appeal this decision to the Hearing Examiner through procedures outlined in WMC 2.30.060. (Ord. 527 § 1, 2012)


3.39.110 Impact fee credits.

(1) A developer shall be entitled to a credit against the transportation impact fee collected under the fee schedule adopted by this chapter in any of the following situations:

(a) Whenever a project is approved subject to a condition that the developer actually provide a particular system improvement;

(b) Whenever a developer has agreed, pursuant to the terms of a voluntary agreement with the City, to provide a particular system improvement; or

(c) Whenever a developer or property owner (“developer”) dedicates, conveys or contributes land, right-of-way and/or improvements for use by the City for a system improvement, separate from or in advance of filing a land use application or a development application, that otherwise qualifies for a credit against the transportation impact fee adopted by this chapter. Provided, however, any credit to which a developer is otherwise entitled by this section shall be reduced or offset by any unpaid amount due and owing by the developer to the City for system improvements under the terms of a development agreement or other contractual agreement entered into between the developer and the City.

(d) Any credits authorized and approved in compliance with this section may be used by the developer as provided in this section or may be transferred by the developer to another developer (other than a developer’s lender, a purchaser at a foreclosure sale or their transferee) for use against a transportation impact fee collected against the development of the transferee’s real property. The transfer of any credits by the developer or subsequent party shall be recorded with the Director of Public Works and the King County Department of Records, within 30 days of the transfer, on a form provided by the City executed by both the developer and the transferee. Provided, however, a transfer of credits shall not be authorized or approved if there are unpaid monies due and owing by the developer to the City for system improvements constructed by the City pursuant to a development agreement or other contractual agreement between the developer and the City.

(2) If, in any of the cases in subsection (1) of this section, the land dedicated, facility constructed, or fee paid is allocated partly toward system improvements and partly toward project improvements, the credit shall be limited to that portion allocated to system improvements.

(3) For the purposes of calculating the credit, the land value or costs of construction shall be determined as follows:

(a) The amount of credit for land dedicated shall be by an appraisal conducted by an independent professional appraiser chosen by the fee payer from a list of at least three such appraisers provided by the City. The cost of the appraisal shall be borne by the fee payer. For the purposes of this section, the date of value shall be the date the land was dedicated to the City. The appraisal shall only value the land dedicated and not any alleged damages to any abutting property.

(b) The amount of credit for facilities constructed shall be based upon the actual cost of construction at the time of construction supported by invoices and other required records deemed reasonably necessary by the Public Works Director. The cost to construct required frontage improvements to existing streets, including but not limited to the cost to construct curb and gutter, and street widening for non-through traffic capacity purposes, illumination systems, storm drainage systems, sidewalks and walkways, and landscaping, shall not be included in the amount of credit for facilities constructed as system improvements.

(4) This subsection (4) applies only to residential developments and the residential portion of a mixed use development. In cases where a developer would be entitled to a credit under this section, but the amount of the credit has yet to be determined on a per dwelling unit basis, the City shall take the total credit amount available to the entire plat or project, calculated by applying subsections (1) through (3) of this section, and divide that amount by the number of dwelling units approved for that plat or project. The impact fee and credit may then be calculated and collected on a per dwelling unit basis as building permits are issued for those dwelling units. Where building permits for some, but not all, of the dwelling units within a plat or project have already been obtained at the time the ordinance codified in this chapter becomes effective, the credit for the unpermitted dwelling units will be calculated to arrive at a per dwelling unit amount in the same manner. For example, if a plat has been approved for 20 dwelling units, and building permits have only been issued for 10 of those units, the per dwelling unit credit for the remaining 10 units will equal the total credit amount divided by 20 dwelling units.

(5) This subsection (5) applies to nonresidential developments, or the nonresidential portion of a mixed use development. In cases where a developer would be entitled to a credit under this section, but the amount of the credit has yet to be determined on a per square foot basis, the City shall take the total credit amount available to the entire plat or project, calculated by applying subsections (1) through (3) of this section, and divide that amount by the number of square feet approved for that plat or project. The impact fee and credit may then be calculated and collected on a per square foot basis as building permits are issued for that square footage. Where building permits for some, but not all, of the dwelling units within a plat or project have already been obtained at the time the ordinance codified in this chapter becomes effective, the credit for the unpermitted square footage will be calculated to arrive at a per square footage amount in the same manner. For example, if a 20,000-square-foot commercial project has been approved, and building permits have only been issued for 10,000 square feet of the project, the per square foot credit for the remaining 10,000 square feet will equal the total credit amount divided by 20,000 square feet.

(6) Determinations made pursuant to this section may be appealed to the Examiner under WMC 2.30.060.

(7) A credit must be requested within 30 days of building permit issuance or it is deemed waived.

(8) No refund will be allowed in the event that the impact fee credit calculation exceeds the amount of the impact fee itself. (Ord. 584 § 2, 2014; Ord. 563 § 1, 2013; Ord. 527 § 1, 2012)


3.39.120 Impact fee refunds.

(1) The current owner of property on which impact fees have been paid may receive a refund of such fees if the impact fees have not been expended or encumbered within six years of their receipt by the City. In determining whether impact fees have been expended or encumbered, impact fees shall be considered expended or encumbered on a first in, first out basis.

(2) The City shall provide for the refund of fees according to the requirements of this section and RCW 82.02.080.

(3) The City shall notify potential claimants of the refund availability by first-class mail deposited with the United States Postal Service addressed to the owner of the property at the owner’s last known address.

(4) An owner’s request for a refund must be submitted to the City Council in writing within one year of the date the right to claim the refund arises or the date that notice is given, whichever date is later.

(a) Any impact fees that are not expended or encumbered within six years of their receipt by the City, and for which no application for a refund has been made within this one-year period, shall be retained by the City and expended consistent with the provisions of this chapter.

(b) Refunds of impact fees shall include any interest earned on the impact fees.

(5) Should the City seek to terminate all impact fee requirements, all unexpended or unencumbered funds, including interest earned, shall be refunded to the current owner of the property for which an impact fee was paid. Upon the finding that all fee requirements are to be terminated, the City shall place notice of such termination and the availability of refunds in a newspaper of general circulation at least two times and shall notify all potential claimants by first-class mail addressed to the owner of the property at the owner’s last known address. All funds available for refund shall be retained for a period of one year. At the end of one year, any remaining funds shall be retained by the City, but must be expended for the original purposes, consistent with the provisions of this section. The notice requirement set forth above shall not apply if there are no unexpended or unencumbered balances within the account or accounts being terminated.

(6) A developer may request and shall receive a refund, including interest earned on the impact fees, when the developer does not proceed to finalize the development activity as required by statute or City code or the International Building Code.

(7) The amount to be refunded shall include the interest earned by this portion of the account from the date that it was deposited into the impact fee fund. (Ord. 527 § 1, 2012)


3.39.130 Appeals and payments under protest.

(1) This subsection (1) applies when an applicant seeks a building permit to construct a portion of a development that has already been reviewed and approved, in other respects, pursuant to procedures that comply with Chapter 36.70B RCW. An example of this circumstance would be an application for a permit to build one house in a large subdivision that was previously approved. In this case, any appeal of the decision of the City with regard to the imposition of an impact fee or the amount of any impact fees, impact fee credit, or impact fee refund must be taken before the Hearing Examiner pursuant to WMC 2.30.060 in conjunction with an appeal of the underlying building permit.

(2) This subsection (2) applies when an applicant seeks a building permit in conjunction with other development approvals that may be subject to an open record hearing and closed record appeal pursuant to procedures that comply with Chapter 36.70B RCW. An example of this circumstance would be an application for a short plat and building permit to build a new office park. In this case, any appeal of the decision of the City with regard to the imposition of an impact fee or the amount of any impact fees, impact fee credit, or impact fee refund must be made according to the process outlines for and in conjunction with the underlying development approval.

(3) Any applicant may pay the impact fees imposed by this chapter under protest in order to obtain a building permit.

(4) Only the applicant has standing to appeal impact fee matters. (Ord. 527 § 1, 2012)


3.39.140 Council review of impact fees.

The impact fee schedule adopted by this chapter shall be reviewed by the City Council, as it deems necessary and appropriate in conjunction with the update of the City’s Transportation Facilities Plan and Transportation Improvement Plan. (Ord. 527 § 1, 2012)


3.39.170 Schedule of fees.

A transportation impact fee shall be assessed against all development in an amount as determined by WMC 3.39.085 for proposals that require a building permit unless exempt under WMC 3.39.050. The transportation impact fee schedule established under this chapter, which may be amended from time to time by the City Council, is hereby included as Exhibit A in WMC 3.39.085. (Ord. 527 § 1, 2012)


Chapter 3.40 CREDIT CARD PAYMENTS

Sections:

3.40.010    Authority to contract.

3.40.020    Authority to approve credit card acceptance by departments and set limits.


3.40.010 Authority to contract. 

The Finance Director is hereby authorized to and on behalf of the City of Woodinville to execute an agreement or agreements with one or more banks or third party for the use of credit cards for payment by the public of fees, charges and fines imposed by the City of Woodinville. The agreement shall provide for acceptance of Visa and/or Mastercard credit cards; may provide for acceptance of other credit cards; may provide for payment by the City of fees in accordance with the bank’s or third party’s schedule of fees for accounts of similar volume subject to change from time to time; and may provide for use of equipment provided by the bank or third party. The City reserves the authority to execute agreements with other companies offering credit card services for the payment of City imposed fines and fees. (Ord. 321 § 1, 2002)


3.40.020 Authority to approve credit card acceptance by departments and set limits.

Effective upon execution of the agreement authorized in WMC 3.40.010, the City Manager is authorized, at his or her discretion, to approve a City department or departments to accept credit cards for the payment of City imposed fines and fees. No department shall accept credit cards for the payment of City imposed fines or fees without such approval. The Finance Director is further authorized to establish appropriate business practices and set any limitations concerning the acceptance of credit cards on participating departments. (Ord. 321 § 2, 2002)


Chapter 3.43 MULTIFAMILY HOUSING PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTION

Sections:

3.43.010    Purpose.

3.43.020    Definitions.

3.43.030    Tax exemption.

3.43.040    Residential targeted areas – Criteria – Designation – Rescission.

3.43.050    Project eligibility.

3.43.060    Application procedure – Fee.

3.43.070    Application review and issuance of conditional certificate.

3.43.080    Final certificate – Application –Issuance – Denial and appeal.

3.43.090    Annual compliance review –Cancellation of exemption.

3.43.100    City’s reporting requirements.


3.43.010 Purpose.

As provided for in Chapter 84.14 RCW, the purpose of this chapter is to provide limited eight-year exemptions from ad valorem property taxation for qualified new multifamily housing located in designated residential targeted areas. (Ord. 664 § 1, 2018)


3.43.020 Definitions.

(1) “City” means the City of Woodinville, Washington.

(2) “Director” means Director of the City’s Development Services Department, or of any other City office, department or agency that shall succeed to its functions with respect to this chapter, or the Director’s designee.

(3) “Owner” means the property owner of record.

(4) “Multiple-unit housing” or “multifamily housing” means a building having four or more dwelling units not designed or used as transient accommodations (such as hotels or motels) and designed for permanent residential occupancy. Multifamily units may result from new construction or rehabilitation or conversion of vacant, underutilized, or substandard buildings to multifamily housing.

(5) “Permanent residential occupancy” means multiunit housing that provides either rental or owner occupancy on a nontransient basis. This includes owner-occupied or rental accommodation that is leased for a period of at least one month. This excludes hotels and motels that predominantly offer rental accommodation on a daily or weekly basis.

(6) “Rehabilitation improvements” means modifications to existing structures vacant for 12 months or longer that are made to achieve a condition of substantial compliance with existing building codes, or modifications to existing occupied structures which increase the number of multifamily housing units.

(7) “Residential targeted area” means an area within an urban center or urban growth area that has been so designated by the City Council pursuant to this chapter.

(8) “Substantial compliance” means compliance with local building or housing code requirements that are typically required for rehabilitation as opposed to new construction. (Ord. 664 § 1, 2018)


3.43.030 Tax exemption.

The value of improvements qualifying under this chapter shall be exempt from ad valorem property taxation for eight successive years beginning January 1st of the year immediately following the calendar year after issuance of the final certification of tax exemption.

The exemption does not apply to the value of land or to the value of non-housing-related improvements not qualifying under this chapter, nor does the exemption apply to increases in assessed valuation of land or nonqualifying improvements. The exemption does not apply to increases made by lawful order of the King County Board of Equalization, Washington State Department of Revenue, State Board of Tax Appeals, or King County, to a class of property throughout the County or a specific area of the County to achieve uniformity of assessment or appraisal as required by law. In the case of rehabilitation of existing buildings, the exemption does not include the value of improvements constructed prior to submission of the completed application required under this chapter. (Ord. 664 § 1, 2018)


3.43.040 Residential targeted areas – Criteria – Designation – Rescission.

(1) Following notice and a public hearing as prescribed in RCW 84.14.040, the City Council may designate one or more residential targeted areas upon a finding by the City Council, in its sole discretion, that the residential targeted area meets the following criteria:

(a) The residential targeted area is within an urban center;

(b) The residential targeted area lacks sufficient available, desirable, and convenient residential housing to meet the needs of the public who would be likely to live in the urban center if such places to live were available;

(c) The providing of additional housing opportunity in the area will assist in achieving one or more of the stated goals of Chapter 84.14 RCW – specifically, encouraging increased residential opportunities within the targeted area, stimulating the construction of new multifamily housing, and encouraging the rehabilitation of existing vacant and underutilized buildings for multifamily housing.

(2) The City Council may, by ordinance, amend or rescind the designation of the residential targeted area at any time pursuant to the same procedure set forth in this chapter for original designation.

(3) The following described area, comprised of approximately 159 acres, which is shown as Area A on the map attached to Ordinance No. 679 as Exhibit A and incorporated herein by reference, meets the criteria of this chapter on residential targeted areas and is designated as such: The area bounded on the west by 131st Avenue NE; on the south by NE 171st Street; on the east by 140th Avenue NE; and on the north by NE 175th St.; together with the area bounded on the west by 132nd Avenue NE; on the south by NE 175th Street; on the east by 140th Avenue NE; and on the north by Woodinville-Snohomish Road NE.

(4) The following described area, comprised of approximately 102 acres, which is shown as Area B on the map attached to Ordinance No. 679 as Exhibit A and incorporated herein by reference, meets the criteria of this chapter on residential targeted areas and is designated as such: The area bounded on the west by 140th Avenue NE; on the south by NE 171st Street; on the east by the approximate north-south alignment of NE Woodinville Duvall Road; and on the north by a projection of the existing alignment of NE 185th Street.

(5) The following described area, comprised of approximately 14 acres, which is shown as Area C on the map attached to Ordinance No. 679 as Exhibit A and incorporated herein by reference, meets the criteria of this chapter on residential targeted areas and is designated as such: The area bounded on the southwest by a line running parallel and approximately 100 feet southwest of NE 173rd Place; on the southeast by approximately 128th Place NE; on the northeast by the leg of the Eastside Rail Corridor running directly parallel to the northeast of NE Woodinville Drive; and on the northwest by the western margin of the electric transmission corridor crossing NE 173rd Place approximately at its junction with 124th Avenue NE. (Ord. 679 § 1, 2019; Ord. 664 § 1, 2018)


3.43.050 Project eligibility.

The property owner applying under this chapter must meet the following requirements:

(1) The new or rehabilitated multiple-unit housing must be located in a residential targeted area as designated by the City.

(2) The multiple-unit housing must meet guidelines as adopted by the governing authority that may include height, density, public benefit features, number and size of proposed development, parking, income limits for occupancy, limits on rents or sale prices, and other adopted requirements indicated necessary by the City.

(3) The new, converted, or rehabilitated multiple-unit housing must provide for a minimum of 50 percent of the space for permanent residential occupancy. In the case of existing occupied multifamily development, the multifamily housing must also provide for a minimum of four additional multifamily units. Existing multifamily vacant housing that has been vacant for 12 months or more does not have to provide additional multifamily units.

(4) New construction multifamily housing and rehabilitation improvements must be completed within three years from the date of approval of the application.

(5) Property proposed to be rehabilitated must fail to comply with one or more standards of the applicable State or local building or housing codes on or after July 23, 1995. If the property proposed to be rehabilitated is not vacant, an applicant must provide each existing tenant housing of comparable size, quality, and price and a reasonable opportunity to relocate.

(6) The applicant must enter into a contract with the City approved by the City Council, under which the applicant has agreed to the implementation of the development on terms and conditions satisfactory to the City Council, including compliance with this chapter.

(7) The project must:

(a) Have as a component the renovation and preservation of facilities listed on the National Register of Historic Places; and/or

(b) Provide affordable housing as provided herein.

(i) For each occupancy type identified in Table 3.43.050, the project must meet one of the identified combinations of minimum percentage of affordable units and minimum affordability level by reference to percentage of the King County median household income as specified in subsection (7)(b)(ii) of this section.

Table 3.43.050 

	Occupancy Type	Percentage of Affordable Units	Affordability Level

	Owner-occupied	8%	50%

	20%	80%

	Renter-occupied	12%	50%

	20%	70%

(ii) As used in this subsection (7)(b), “affordable” means housing reserved for occupancy by eligible households and affordable to households whose household annual income meets the applicable percentage of the King County median household income identified in Table 3.43.050, adjusted for household size, as determined by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), and no more than 30 percent of monthly household income is paid for monthly housing expenses:

(A) In the event that HUD no longer publishes median income figures for King County, the City may use another method to determine the King County median income, adjusted for household size.

(B) “Monthly housing expenses” includes rent, parking and an appropriate utility allowance for renter-occupied dwelling units. It includes mortgage, mortgage insurance, property taxes, property insurance, parking, and homeowners’ dues for owner-occupied dwelling units.

(C) If the percentage of affordable units in the project required to qualify for an exemption pursuant to this subsection (7)(b) is a fraction, then the number of required affordable units shall be rounded up to the next whole number (unit) if the fraction of the whole number is at least 0.50.

(iii) For any affordable units required in this section, the following shall apply:

(A) The mix and configuration of affordable units (e.g., very small units, studio, one bedroom, two bedroom, etc.) at each affordability level shall be substantially proportional to the mix and configuration of the total housing units in the project unless otherwise approved by the Director.

(B) The location of the affordable housing units shall be approved by the Director, with the intent that they generally be intermingled with all other units in the development.

(C) The quality of construction and finish materials in those affordable units used to qualify for the exemption shall be the same as other housing units in the project.

(iv) If a project provides affordable housing as described in this subsection (7)(b), prior to issuing a certificate of occupancy, an agreement in a form acceptable to the City Attorney that addresses price restrictions, eligible household qualifications, long-term affordability, and any other applicable topics of the affordable housing units shall be recorded with the King County Recorder’s Office. This agreement shall be a covenant running with the land and shall be binding on the assigns, heirs, and successors of the applicant. Housing units identified for households with household annual income restrictions that are provided under this section shall continue to be made available to households with the identified household annual income restrictions for a minimum of 50 years from the date of initial owner occupancy for ownership of affordable housing units and for the life of the project for rental affordable housing units.

(8) The project shall be designed in a manner generally consistent with the City’s Downtown Vision and Illustrative Guide.

(9) The project shall be designed to meet the LEED Certified Standard or higher, as established by the U.S. Green Building Council, unless the City Council specifically grants the project an exemption from this requirement.

(10) No application may result in the net loss of existing affordable housing which receives housing assistance through Federal low or moderate income housing programs (e.g., HUD Section 8 program). (Ord. 679 § 2, 2019; Ord. 664 § 1, 2018)


3.43.060 Application procedure – Fee.

An owner of property seeking tax incentives under this chapter must complete the following procedures:

(1) In the case of rehabilitation or where demolition or new construction is required, the owner must secure from the City verification of property noncompliance with applicable building and housing codes before commencement of rehabilitation improvements or new construction.

(2) In the case of new and rehabilitated multifamily housing, the owner must apply to the City on forms adopted by the City Council. The application shall contain such information as the Director may deem necessary or useful, and shall include:

(a) A brief written description of the project, preliminary schematic site plan, preliminary floor plans of the multifamily units and the structure(s) in which they are proposed to be located;

(b) A brief statement setting forth the grounds for qualification for exemption;

(c) A statement from the owner acknowledging the potential tax liability when the property ceases to be eligible for an exemption under this chapter;

(d) Verification by oath or affirmation of the information submitted;

(e) The application must be accompanied by the application fee.

(f) For rehabilitation projects, the applicant shall also submit an affidavit that existing dwelling units have been unoccupied for a period of 12 months prior to filing the application. (Ord. 664 § 1, 2018)


3.43.070 Application review and issuance of conditional certificate.

The Director shall approve or deny an application within 90 days after receipt of the application. The Director may approve an application which he or she determines to comply with the requirements of this chapter and where the proposed project is, or will be at the time of completion, in conformance with all approved plans, and all applicable requirements of the Woodinville Municipal Code or other applicable requirements or regulations in effect at the time the application is approved.

If the application is approved, the City shall issue the owner of the property a conditional certificate of acceptance of tax exemption. The certificate shall contain a statement by the Director or designee that the property has complied with the requirements of this chapter.

If the application is denied, the Director or his designee shall state in writing the reasons for denial and send the notice to the applicant at the applicant’s last known address within 10 days of the denial. An applicant may appeal the denial to the City Council within 30 days after receipt of the denial. The appeal before the City Council shall be based upon the record made before the Director with the burden of proof on the applicant to show that there was no substantial evidence to support the Director’s decision. The decision of the City Council in denying or approving the application is final. (Ord. 664 § 1, 2018)


3.43.080 Final certificate – Application –Issuance – Denial and appeal.

(1) Upon completion of rehabilitation or new construction for which an application for a limited tax exemption under this chapter has been approved and after issuance of the certificate of occupancy, the owner must file with the City the following:

(a) A statement of the amount of rehabilitation or construction expenditures made with respect to each housing unit and the composite expenditures made in the rehabilitation or construction of the entire property;

(b) A description of the work that has been completed and a statement that the rehabilitation improvements or new construction on the owner’s property qualify the property for limited exemption under this chapter;

(c) A statement that the work (including renovation and preservation of facilities listed on the National Register of Historic Places if such is relied upon to satisfy the requirements of WMC 3.43.050(7)) has been completed within three years of the issuance of the conditional certificate of tax exemption or any approved extension; and

(d) Any additional information requested by the City.

(2) Within 30 days after receiving the statements specified above, the City shall determine whether the work completed is consistent with the application and the contract approved by the City and is qualified for a limited tax exemption under this chapter. The City shall also determine which specific improvements completed meet the requirements and required findings.

(3) If the rehabilitation, conversion, or construction is completed within three years of the date the application for a limited tax exemption is filed under this chapter, or within an authorized extension of this time limit, and the Director determines that improvements were constructed consistent with the application and other applicable requirements and the owner’s property is qualified for a limited tax exemption under this chapter, the City shall file the certificate of tax exemption with the County Assessor within 10 days of the expiration of the 30-day period provided above.

(4) The Director shall notify the applicant that a certificate of tax exemption is not going to be filed if the Director determines that:

(a) The rehabilitation or new construction was not completed within three years of the application date, or within any authorized extension of the time limit;

(b) The improvements were not constructed consistent with the application or other applicable requirements; or

(c) The owner’s property is otherwise not qualified for limited exemption under this chapter.

(5) If the Director finds that construction or rehabilitation of multiple-unit housing was not completed within the required time period due to circumstances beyond the control of the owner and that the owner has been acting and could reasonably be expected to act in good faith and with due diligence, the City Council or Director may extend the deadline for completion of construction or rehabilitation for a period not to exceed 24 consecutive months.

(6) Appeal. The owner may appeal a decision by the Director that the owner is not entitled to a certificate of tax exemption to the Hearing Examiner in accordance with Chapter 2.27 WMC. The owner may appeal a decision by the Hearing Examiner that the owner is not entitled to a certificate of tax exemption in Superior Court under RCW 34.05.510 through 34.05.598, if the appeal is filed within 30 days of notification by the City to the owner of the decision being challenged. (Ord. 664 § 1, 2018)


3.43.090 Annual compliance review – Cancellation of exemption.

(1) Thirty days after the anniversary of the date of the certificate of tax exemption and each year for the tax exemption period, the owner of the rehabilitated or newly constructed property must file with the Director or designee an annual report indicating the following:

(a) A statement of occupancy and vacancy of the rehabilitated or newly constructed property during the 12 months ending with the anniversary date;

(b) A certification by the owner that the property has not changed use;

(c) A description of changes or improvements constructed after issuance of the certificate of tax exemption;

(d) The total monthly rent of each unit; 

(e) The income of each household at the time of initial occupancy and their current income; 

(f) The value of the tax exemption for the project; and

(g) Any additional information requested by the City in regards to the units receiving a tax exemption.

(2) In addition, at the time of submittal of the annual report, the owner shall pay to the City a fee in an amount necessary to cover the City’s administrative costs for collecting and reporting information to the Washington Department of Commerce as required by RCW 84.14.100.

(3) If the Director discovers that a portion of the property is changed or will be changed to a use that is other than residential or that housing or amenities no longer meet the requirements as previously approved or agreed upon by contract between the City and the owner and that the multifamily housing, or a portion of the housing, no longer qualifies for the exemption, the tax exemption will be cancelled and additional taxes, interest and penalties imposed pursuant to State law. Upon determining that a tax exemption shall be cancelled, the Director shall notify the owner by certified mail, return receipt requested. The owner may appeal the determination by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within 30 days, which must specify the factual and legal basis on which the determination of cancellation is alleged to be erroneous. The appeal may be heard by the Hearing Examiner. An aggrieved party may appeal the decision of the Hearing Officer to the Superior Court under RCW 34.05.510 through 34.05.598. (Ord. 679 § 3, 2019; Ord. 664 § 1, 2018)


3.43.100 City’s reporting requirements.

The City shall comply with the reporting requirements of RCW 84.14.100(2). (Ord. 664 § 1, 2018)

 


Title 4 (Reserved)


Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS

Chapters:

5.02    Business Licenses

5.03    Repealed

5.04    Door-to-Door Canvassers, Peddlers and Solicitors

5.05    Practice of Massage

5.06    Gambling

5.07    Sexually Oriented Businesses (SOB)

5.09    Repealed

5.50    Cable Television


Chapter 5.02 BUSINESS LICENSES

Sections:

5.02.010    Chapter and purpose.

5.02.020    Definitions – General.

5.02.025    Engaging in business.

5.02.030    Business license required – Posting.

5.02.040    Exempt from the City fee.

5.02.050    Exempt from City business license.

5.02.060    Program application and renewal.

5.02.070    License term or expiration.

5.02.080    Fee.

5.02.090    Late renewal.

5.02.100    License denial or revocation.

5.02.110    Violation – Enforcement.

5.02.120    Rules and rulings.


5.02.010 Chapter and purpose.

The primary purpose of the City’s business license program is for regulatory purposes to ensure that businesses are authorized and permitted in the proper zoning district. Additionally, for public safety and emergency purposes, the City requires current contact and operating information about each entity operating within its jurisdictional boundaries. Maintenance of current information with respect to business, trade, service, commercial and professional activities carried on within the City allows the City to carry out the duties and authorities delegated to it by the Washington State Constitution and the laws of the State of Washington as a noncharter code city. Such information can best be accumulated and maintained on a current basis through the establishment of a program for the license of such business activities. The business license program (“program”) is hereby established to protect the public and promote economic development and not intended to benefit any individual or class. (Ord. 587 § 2, 2014)


5.02.020 Definitions – General.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given in this section:

(1) “Business,” “occupation” or “pursuit” means and includes all activities, occupations, trades, pursuits, professions, and matters located or engaged in within the City with the object of gain, benefit, or advantage to the applicant for business license or other person, directly or indirectly, whether part-time or full-time, whether resident or nonresident.

(2) “Casual or isolated sale” means a sale made by a person who is not engaged in the business of selling the type of property involved on a routine or continuous basis.

(3) “City” means the City of Woodinville, Washington.

(4) “Clerk” means such City employees or agents as the City Manager shall designate to administer this chapter, or any designee thereof.

(5) “Engaging in business” is defined in WMC 5.02.025.

(6) “Person,” “firm,” or “corporation,” used interchangeably in this chapter, means any individual, receiver, assignee, trustee in bankruptcy, trust, estate, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, club, company, joint stock company, business trust, corporation, association, canvasser, peddler, solicitor, society, or any group of individuals acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit or otherwise, and includes the United States or any instrumentality thereof. (Ord. 662 § 1, 2018; Ord. 587 § 2, 2014)


5.02.025 Engaging in business.

(1) The term “engaging in business” means commencing, conducting, or continuing in business, and also the exercise of corporate or franchise powers, as well as liquidating a business when the liquidators thereof hold themselves out to the public as conducting such business.

(2) This section sets forth examples of activities that constitute engaging in business in the City, and establishes safe harbors for certain of those activities so that a person who meets the criteria may engage in de minimis business activities in the City without having to pay a business license fee. The activities listed in this section are illustrative only and are not intended to narrow the definition of “engaging in business” in subsection (1) of this section. If an activity is not listed, whether it constitutes engaging in business in the City shall be determined by considering all the facts and circumstances and applicable law.

(3) Without being all-inclusive, any one of the following activities conducted within the City by a person, or its employee, agent, representative, independent contractor, broker or another acting on its behalf, constitutes engaging in business and requires a person to register and obtain a business license:

(a) Owning, renting, leasing, maintaining, or having the right to use, or using, tangible personal property, intangible personal property, or real property permanently or temporarily located in the City.

(b) Owning, renting, leasing, using, or maintaining, an office, place of business, or other establishment in the City.

(c) Soliciting sales.

(d) Making repairs or providing maintenance or service to real or tangible personal property, including warranty work and property maintenance.

(e) Providing technical assistance or service, including quality control, product inspections, warranty work, or similar services on or in connection with tangible personal property sold by the person or on its behalf.

(f) Installing, constructing, or supervising installation or construction of real or tangible personal property.

(g) Soliciting, negotiating, or approving franchise, license, or other similar agreements.

(h) Collecting current or delinquent accounts.

(i) Picking up and transporting tangible personal property, solid waste, construction debris, or excavated materials.

(j) Providing disinfecting and pest control services, employment and labor pool services, home nursing care, janitorial services, appraising, landscape architectural services, security system services, surveying, and real estate services including the listing of homes and managing real property.

(k) Rendering professional services such as those provided by accountants, architects, attorneys, auctioneers, consultants, engineers, professional athletes, barbers, baseball clubs and other sports organizations, chemists, consultants, psychologists, court reporters, dentists, doctors, detectives, laboratory operators, teachers, veterinarians.

(l) Meeting with customers or potential customers, even when no sales or orders are solicited at the meetings.

(m) Training or recruiting agents, representatives, independent contractors, brokers or others, domiciled or operating on a job in the City, acting on its behalf, or for customers or potential customers.

(n) Investigating, resolving, or otherwise assisting in resolving customer complaints.

(o) In-store stocking or manipulating products or goods, sold to and owned by a customer, regardless of where sale and delivery of the goods took place.

(p) Delivering goods in vehicles owned, rented, leased, used, or maintained by the person or another acting on its behalf.

(4) If a person, or its employee, agent, representative, independent contractor, broker or another acting on the person’s behalf, engages in no other activities in or with the City but the following, it need not register and obtain a business license:

(a) Meeting with suppliers of goods and services as a customer.

(b) Meeting with government representatives in their official capacity, other than those performing contracting or purchasing functions.

(c) Attending meetings, such as board meetings, retreats, seminars, and conferences, or other meetings wherein the person does not provide training in connection with tangible personal property sold by the person or on its behalf. This provision does not apply to any board of director member or attendee engaging in business such as a member of a board of directors who attends a board meeting.

(d) Renting tangible or intangible property as a customer when the property is not used in the City.

(e) Attending, but not participating in, a “trade show” or “multiple vendor events.” Persons participating at a trade show shall review the City’s trade show or multiple vendor event ordinances.

(f) Conducting advertising through the mail.

(g) Soliciting sales by phone from a location outside the City.

(5) A seller located outside the City merely delivering goods into the City by means of common carrier is not required to register and obtain a business license; provided, that it engages in no other business activities in the City. Such activities do not include those in subsection (4) of this section.

The City expressly intends that engaging in business include any activity sufficient to establish nexus for purposes of applying the license fee under the law and the Constitutions of the United States and the State of Washington. Nexus is presumed to continue as long as the taxpayer benefits from the activity that constituted the original nexus generating contact or subsequent contacts. (Ord. 662 § 2, 2018)


5.02.030 Business license required – Posting.

(1) Any person or entity that engages in any business, occupation, home occupation or pursuit, including nonprofit activities, in the City shall license that business with the City’s program. To license under the program a person must submit an application in accordance with the procedures established by the City and pay the applicable license fee.

(2) Any person or business whose annual value of products, gross proceeds of sales, or gross income of the business in the City is equal to or less than $2,000 and who does not maintain a place of business within the City shall be exempt from the general business license requirements in this chapter. The exemption does not apply to regulatory license requirements or activities that require a specialized permit.

(3) It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or association, unless specifically exempted herein, to maintain, conduct or operate any device, vehicle or thing for the purpose of engaging in or operating any business or occupation, or to engage in any business, calling, profession, trade, occupation or activity, without first having secured the license to do so, and paying all fees prescribed herein.

(4) A business license shall be posted in a conspicuous location at the place of the business. (Ord. 662 § 3, 2018; Ord. 610 § 1, 2015; Ord. 587 § 2, 2014)


5.02.040 Exempt from the City fee.

Fees adopted by resolution, pursuant to WMC 5.02.080, do not apply to:

(1) The performance of governmental or proprietary functions by any instrumentality of the United States, the State of Washington, or any political subdivision thereof, including City of Woodinville sponsored civic events.

(2) Accredited public or private schools, colleges, or universities, as to their education endeavors only; churches and other religious bodies, as to their religious activities only; political groups and organizations as to their political activities only.

(3) Organizations exempt from taxation under 26 USC 501(c)(3) and (4) must register under the business license program, but shall be exempt from paying the license fee. This shall not constitute an exemption from all other applicable taxes and fees, including administration and renewal fees established by the State of Washington, pursuant to RCW 19.02.075. Such organization must be able to show satisfactory proof of such status to the City. (Ord. 610 § 1, 2015; Ord. 587 § 2, 2014)


5.02.050 Exempt from City business license.

Licensing requirements and the fees adopted by resolution, pursuant to WMC 5.02.080, do not apply to:

(1) Minors, a person under the age of 18, engaged in business or operating a business concern where no other person is employed by the minor.

(2) Casual or isolated sales.

(3) Real Estate Agents. For the purposes of this chapter, “real estate agent” means a person who is licensed under Chapter 18.85 RCW and whose license is being retained by a broker licensed as a broker under Chapter 18.85 RCW (“designated broker”). Due to the unique legal controls placed upon the real estate agent/broker relationship, a real estate agent whose license is retained by a designated broker holding a currently valid City of Woodinville business license is not required to have his/her own separate business license if the real estate agent engages in no business in Woodinville other than the work with the designated broker and the designated broker includes the real estate agent in counting the number of employees. (Ord. 662 § 4, 2018; Ord. 610 § 1, 2015; Ord. 587 § 2, 2014)


5.02.060 Program application and renewal.

(1) A person shall register a business with the program by submitting an application in accordance with the procedures established by the City, in coordination with the Clerk, giving such information as is deemed reasonably necessary to enable the enforcement of this chapter.

(2) If a business is located at two or more separate locations within the City, a separate business license shall be required for each business. 

(3) If more than one business is conducted or operated on premises, a separate business license shall be required for each business that meets the requirements for business license. Each business owner must separately register a business with the program.

(4) A business license is transferable. A person engaged in business within the City shall notify the Clerk of a change of business location within 30 days of the location change or by the next license renewal date, whichever date occurs first.

(5) A person who has registered a business under the City’s program shall renew the license on an annual basis, in the same manner as the original application for license including payment of fees.

(6) A person engaged in business within the City must comply with all applicable City ordinances and code provisions, and State and Federal laws. (Ord. 587 § 2, 2014)


5.02.070 License term or expiration.

A business license shall be valid for a term of 12 months, unless otherwise established, and shall expire on the date determined by the City. (Ord. 587 § 2, 2014)


5.02.080 Fee.

The fee to register with the City’s program, or renew such license, shall be as set forth in a fee resolution adopted by the City Council. (Ord. 587 § 2, 2014)


5.02.090 Late renewal.

Each business license issued must be renewed annually on or before the expiration date, or expiration of any prorated period. Failure to renew a business license by the expiration date may result in an increase in the amount of the renewal fee by 50 percent. (Ord. 587 § 2, 2014)


5.02.100 License denial or revocation.

(1) An application for license required under this chapter may be denied or revoked by the City based on any of the grounds provided below:

(a) If the person who obtains the license or any of the business officers, directors, agents, owners or employees of the business fail to comply with the requirements of this chapter.

(b) If a person procures license by fraud or misrepresentation of fact, or the person who obtains the license or any of the business officers, directors, agents, owners or employees of the business obtain license so as to practice some illegal act or some act injurious to the public health, safety and welfare.

(c) Whenever a person fails or refuses to pay the license or renewal fee.

(2) The City shall not deny or revoke a business license without cause. (Ord. 587 § 2, 2014)


5.02.110 Violation – Enforcement.

A violation of this chapter shall constitute a violation of this code subject to the provisions of Chapter 1.03 WMC, General Penalty. (Ord. 685 § 7, 2019; Ord. 587 § 2, 2014)


5.02.120 Rules and rulings.

The City Manager may, from time to time, adopt, publish and enforce rules and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter or with State law. The purpose of such rules and regulations is to carry out the provisions of this chapter. The City Manager may also issue letter rulings from time to time which are applicable only to specific businesses. Such administrative rulings shall be binding on the City and the applicable business. (Ord. 587 § 2, 2014)


Chapter 5.03 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS

(Repealed by Ord. 610)


Chapter 5.04 DOOR-TO-DOOR CANVASSERS, PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS

Sections:

5.04.010    Purpose.

5.04.020    Definitions.

5.04.030    Business license required.

5.04.040    Special peddler’s registration and permits required.

5.04.050    Rules of operation.

5.04.060    Violations and penalties.


5.04.010 Purpose. 

The City Council finds that the public health, safety and welfare require that the citizens of the City be provided with information relating to persons and organizations who solicit within the City, that such activities be regulated, and that the citizens of the City be protected from deceptive and dishonest practices. (Ord. 610 § 1, 2015)


5.04.020 Definitions.

The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

(1) A “master peddler” is a person or firm which employs or uses agents or employees to act as peddlers, solicitors, or canvassers.

(2) A “peddler, solicitor, or canvasser” is any person who sells, offers for or exposes for sale or who trades, deals or traffics in any services, magazines, periodicals or any other personal property at retail in the City, by going from house to house or by indiscriminately approaching individuals; provided, however, that this subsection shall not be deemed applicable to any salesman or canvasser who solicits trade from wholesale or retail dealers in the City. “Peddle, solicit, or canvass” means to engage in such actions.

(3) “Peddler, solicitor, or canvasser” excludes: (a) members of religious, political, or community organizations engaged in noncommercial door-to-door solicitation activities; (b) any farmer, gardener, or other person selling, delivering, or peddling any fruits, vegetables, berries, eggs, or any farm produce or edibles raised, gathered, produced, or manufactured by such person; (c) newspaper carriers; and (d) any person who, after having been requested by another to do so, calls upon that other person at a prearranged time for the purpose of displaying or delivering goods, literature or giving information about any article, thing, product or service. (Ord. 610 § 1, 2015)


5.04.030 Business license required.

No person, firm, organization, or corporation shall transact, engage in or carry on any peddling, soliciting, or canvassing activity within the City of Woodinville without first having obtained a City business license, as provided in Chapter 5.02 WMC. (Ord. 610 § 1, 2015)


5.04.040 Special peddler’s registration and permits required.

No person, firm, organization, or corporation shall transact, engage in or carry on any peddling, soliciting, or canvassing activity within the City of Woodinville without first having obtained a peddler’s permit. To obtain a peddler’s permit, an applicant shall complete and submit, upon a form designated by the City Manager, an application for peddler’s permit. If approved by the City, each master peddler and peddler, solicitor, or canvasser shall conduct its activities in accordance with the rules specified in WMC 5.04.050.

A peddler’s permit shall be valid for a term of six months and shall not be transferable to another party or individual, except upon approval of the City.

The fee for a peddler’s permit shall be established by resolution approved by the Woodinville City Council. (Ord. 610 § 1, 2015)


5.04.050 Rules of operation.

(1) List of Peddlers. Any business which conducts canvassing, peddling or soliciting activities must provide a listing of all persons who will be canvassing, peddling or soliciting within the City before they begin peddling activities. The listing must include first, middle and last name, date of birth, and a legible copy of government issued photo identification. The listing must be submitted to the City at least seven days before commencement of any peddling activities.

(2) Approval Required. All canvassing, peddling or soliciting activities must be approved by the City before commencement of said activities.

(3) Display of Business License and Identification. Business licenses and peddler’s permits, or copies thereof, shall be carried at all times by each licensee and/or all of the licensee’s employees, agents or representatives for whom issued when peddling, soliciting or canvassing within the City and shall be displayed along with photo identification visibly upon their person.

(4) Hours of Peddling. Canvassing, peddling or soliciting activities are only allowed between the hours of 10:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.

(5) No Soliciting or Trespassing on Posted Properties. All canvassers, peddlers or solicitors must abide by all posted restrictions on private property for said activities. It shall be unlawful for any peddler, solicitor or canvasser to enter upon any private premises posted with visible signs or other notifications stating “No Peddlers” or “No Solicitors” or “No Canvassers” singularly or in combination with one another.

(6) Written Records of Orders. All orders taken by licensed solicitors shall be in writing, in duplicate, stating the name of the solicitor, as it appears on the license, the solicitor’s permit number as issued under this chapter, the address of both the solicitor and his employer, the terms of the order or agreements, and the amount of money or checks paid to the solicitor. One copy of such order or agreement shall be given to the purchaser. (Ord. 610 § 1, 2015)


5.04.060 Violations and penalties.

Any violation of these requirements shall constitute a violation subject to the provisions of Chapter 1.03 WMC, General Penalty. (Ord. 685 § 8, 2019; Ord. 610 § 1, 2015)


Chapter 5.05 PRACTICE OF MASSAGE

Sections:

5.05.010    Definitions.

5.05.020    Massage practitioner’s license required.

5.05.030    Exemptions.

5.05.040    Proof of State licensing required.

5.05.050    Violation and penalty.


5.05.010 Definitions.

(1) For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, words and phrases shall have the following meanings:

(a) “Massage,” “massage treatment” or “massage therapy” means the external manipulation or pressure of soft tissue of the body of another including, but not limited to, rubbing, kneading, hitting or any other manipulation whether manually or by the use of equipment, machinery, or appliances, with or without the aids of superficial heat, cold, water, lubricants or salts. Massage does not include diagnosis or attempts to adjust or manipulate any articulations of the body or spine or mobilization of these articulations by the use of a thrusting force.

(b) “Massage practitioner” means any person giving massages or massage treatments.

(c) “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.

(d) “Authorized health care practitioner” has the same meaning as set forth in RCW 18.74.010(7), i.e., a physician, osteopathic physician, chiropractor, naturopath, podiatrist or dentist licensed by the State of Washington; provided, that massage treatments are within the scope of his State license.

(2) All references herein in the masculine gender shall include the feminine gender, and the feminine the masculine. All references to the singular shall include the plural, and the plural the singular. (Ord. 610 § 1, 2015)


5.05.020 Massage practitioner’s license required.

It shall be unlawful for any person to practice massage unless:

(1) The massage is given on the licensee’s business premises or on premises which are exempt from the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 610 § 1, 2015)


5.05.030 Exemptions.

The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:

(1) Authorized health care practitioners or their employees;

(2) Massages given in a private residence when no fee, compensation, or any other consideration is charged or paid, directly or indirectly, for such services;

(3) Massage treatments given in a private residence by a massage practitioner who is administering such treatments pursuant to a written prescription from an authorized health care practitioner;

(4) Athletic coaches or trainers giving massages while affiliated with public or private educational institutions or athletic organizations;

(5) Students enrolled in schools of massage performing therein such practices of massage as are incidental to their course of study;

(6) Massage treatments given in any licensed hospital, licensed nursing or convalescent home;

(7) Licensed beauty operators and barbers who perform only such acts of massage as are customarily given in beauty salons and barber shops for purposes of beautification only. (Ord. 610 § 1, 2015) 


5.05.040 Proof of State licensing required.

No massage practitioner’s license or renewal of same shall be issued unless the applicant provides evidence to the satisfaction of the Woodinville Finance Director or his/her designee that he holds a current, valid massage practitioner’s license issued by the State of Washington pursuant to Chapter 18.108 RCW, as now existing or hereafter amended, or otherwise possesses a current, valid professional license issued by the State of Washington pursuant to RCW Title 18, as now existing or hereafter amended, which authorizes him to give massage treatments. A licensee shall notify the Woodinville Finance Director or his/her designee within three business days of receiving any notification from the State of Washington that his license which authorizes him to give massages has been suspended or revoked. Upon receipt of notice from any source that a licensee’s State license has been suspended or revoked, the Finance Director or his/her designee shall suspend or revoke the licensee’s City license until such time as the licensee presents satisfactory proof that his State license has been reinstated. (Ord. 610 § 1, 2015)


5.05.050 Violation and penalty.

Any violation of these requirements shall constitute a violation subject to the provisions of Chapter 1.03 WMC, General Penalty. (Ord. 685 § 9, 2019; Ord. 610 § 1, 2015)


Chapter 5.06 GAMBLING

Sections:

5.06.010    Definitions.

5.06.020    Gambling tax imposed.

5.06.030    Exemptions.

5.06.040    Administration of tax.

5.06.050    Tax due date – Delinquency.

5.06.060    Financial records.

5.06.070    Charitable, nonprofit organization – Declaration of intent to conduct gambling activity.

5.06.080    Card games prohibited.

5.06.090    Unlawful acts.

5.06.100    Penalty.


5.06.010 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the terms used herein shall have the same meanings as defined in Chapter 9.46 RCW as now exists or as may hereafter be amended. (Ord. 12 § 7, 1993)


5.06.020 Gambling tax imposed.

Pursuant to RCW 9.46.110 as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended, there is levied upon all persons, associations or organizations a tax on all gambling activity occurring within the City as permitted by State law at the following rates:

(1) Any bingo or raffle activity at a rate of 10 percent of the gross revenues received therefrom less the amount paid for as prizes;

(2) Any amusement game shall be taxed only at a rate sufficient to pay the actual costs of enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 9.46 RCW and such taxation shall equal two percent of the sum of the gross revenues received therefrom less the amount paid for as prizes;

(3)  Any punchboard or pull-tab activity at a rate of five percent of the gross receipts. (Ord. 12 § 1, 1993)


5.06.030 Exemptions.

No tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter on bingo or amusement games when such activities or any combination thereof are conducted by a bona fide charitable or nonprofit organization as defined in RCW 9.46.0209 as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended, which organization has no paid operating or management personnel and has gross income from bingo or amusement games or any combination thereof not exceeding $5,000 per year less the amount paid for as prizes. No tax shall be imposed on the first $10,000 of net proceeds from raffles conducted by bona fide charitable organizations. (Ord. 12 § 2, 1993)


5.06.040 Administration of tax.

The administration and collection of the tax imposed by WMC 5.06.020 shall be by the Finance Director and pursuant to the rules and regulations of the Washington State Gambling Commission.

The Finance Director is instructed and authorized to adopt appropriate reporting requirements, to ensure the effective administration of license holders exempt from the payment of said tax and to make such further rules and regulations for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this title. (Ord. 530 § 11, 2012; Ord. 12 § 3, 1993)


5.06.050 Tax due date – Delinquency.

(1) The tax imposed by WMC 5.06.020 shall be due and payable in quarterly installments, and remittance therefor shall accompany such return and be made on or before 45 days after the end of the quarter in which the tax accrued.

(2) For each payment due, if such payment is not made by the due date thereof, there shall be added a penalty as follows:

(a) If paid on or before 60 days from the quarterly period in which the tax accrued, 10 percent with a minimum penalty of $5.00;

(b) If paid on or before 75 days from the quarterly period in which the tax accrued, 15 percent with a minimum penalty of $10.00;

(c) Failure to make payment by the seventy-fifth day from the end of the quarterly period in which the tax accrued shall result in a penalty of 20 percent with a minimum penalty of $15.00. (Ord. 574 § 1, 2013; Ord. 66 § 1, 1993; Ord. 12 § 5, 1993)


5.06.060 Financial records.

It shall be the responsibility of all officers, directors and managers of any corporation conducting any gambling activities subject to taxation under this chapter to make available at all reasonable times such financial records as the Finance Director may require in order to determine full compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 530 § 11, 2012; Ord. 12 § 6, 1993)


5.06.070 Charitable, nonprofit organization – Declaration of intent to conduct gambling activity.

For the purpose of identifying who shall be subject to the tax imposed by WMC 5.06.020, any bona fide charitable or nonprofit corporation intending to conduct or operate any bingo game, raffle or amusement game which requires licensing as provided in and authorized by Chapter 9.46 RCW, as the same now exists or may be hereafter amended, shall, prior to commencement of any such activity, file with the Finance Director a sworn declaration of intent to conduct or operate such activity, together with a copy of the license issued in accordance with Chapter 9.46 RCW, as the same now exists or may be hereafter amended, as amended. Thereafter, for any period covered by such State license or any renewal thereof, any such licensed bona fide charitable or nonprofit corporation shall, on or before the fifteenth day of the month following the end of the quarterly period in which the tax accrued, file with the Finance Director a sworn statement, on a form to be provided and prescribed by the Finance Director for the purpose of ascertaining the tax due for the preceding quarterly period. (Ord. 530 § 11, 2012; Ord. 12 § 4, 1993)


5.06.080 Card games prohibited.

Social card games, as defined in RCW 9.46.0281, are hereby prohibited. (Ord. 12 § 8, 1993)


5.06.090 Unlawful acts.

It is unlawful for any person liable for the tax imposed by this chapter to fail to pay the tax when due or for any person to make any false or fraudulent return or any false statement in connection with said return. (Ord. 12 § 9, 1993)


5.06.100 Penalty.

Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof punished pursuant to State law or City ordinance. (Ord. 12 § 10, 1993)


Chapter 5.07 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES (SOB)

Sections:

5.07.010    Licensing and permitting requirements.


5.07.010 Licensing and permitting requirements.

See Chapter 21.25 WMC for the licensing and permitting requirements for sexually oriented businesses as defined in WMC 21.25.030. (Ord. 610 § 1, 2015)


Chapter 5.09 TAXICABS

(Repealed by Ord. 610)


Chapter 5.50 CABLE TELEVISION

Sections:

5.50.010    Definitions.

5.50.020    Terms of franchise.

5.50.030    Application.

5.50.040    Franchise issuance.

5.50.050    Franchise renewal.

5.50.060    Acceptance.

5.50.070    Police powers.

5.50.080    Rules and regulations by the City.

5.50.090    Construction standards.

5.50.100    Undergrounding and landscaping.

5.50.110    Construction in right-of-way.

5.50.120    Safety requirements.

5.50.130    Building moving.

5.50.140    Tree trimming.

5.50.150    Rates.

5.50.160    Cable availability.

5.50.170    Franchise fee.

5.50.180    External franchising costs.

5.50.190    Cable television system evaluation.

5.50.200    Audit by City.

5.50.210    Public, educational and government access.

5.50.215    Channel blockage – Availability – Notice to subscribers.

5.50.220    Institutional networks (I-Nets).

5.50.230    Access and institutional network equipment.

5.50.240    Nondiscrimination.

5.50.250    Continuity of service.

5.50.260    Transfer of ownership.

5.50.270    Removal and abandonment of property of franchisee.

5.50.280    Revocation for cause – Lesser sanctions.

5.50.290    Effect of termination for noncompliance.

5.50.300    Indemnity and hold harmless.

5.50.310    Insurance.

5.50.320    Performance bond.

5.50.330    Letter of credit.

5.50.340    Recourse against bonds and other security.

5.50.350    Franchising costs.

5.50.360    Equalization of civic contributions.

5.50.370    Inconsistency.

5.50.380    Independent contractors.

5.50.390    Ratification.


5.50.010 Definitions.

(1) “Access channels” (public, educational or governmental access facilities) means:

(a) Channel capacity designated for public, educational, and government use; and

(b) Facilities and equipment for the use of such channel capacity.

(2) “The Act” means the “Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992”, the “Telecommunications Reform Act of 1996”, and the “Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984”, as now existing or hereafter amended.

(3) “Addressability” means the ability of a system allowing a franchisee to authorize by remote control subscriber terminals to receive, change or to cancel any or all specified programming.

(4) “Applicant” means any person or entity that applies for a franchise.

(5) “Basic cable service” means all signals of local television broadcast stations provided to any subscriber (except a signal secondarily transmitted by satellite carrier beyond the local service area of such station, regardless of how such signal is ultimately received by the cable television system), any public, educational, and governmental programming required by the franchise to be carried on the basic tier, and any additional video programming signals and service added to the basic tier by a cable franchisee.

(6) “Cable services” means:

(a) The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming service; and

(b) Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use by the subscriber of such video programming.

(7) “Cable television system” means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service and other service to subscribers, but such term does not include: 

(a) A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations;

(b) A facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-of-way;

(c) A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, except that such facilities shall be considered a cable television system to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services;

(d) An open video system that complies with 47 U.S.C. Section 573 as now existing or hereafter amended; or

(e) Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility system.

(8) “Channel” means a single path or section of the spectrum which carries a television signal.

(9) “Character generator” means a device used to generate alphanumerical programming to be cablecast on a cable channel.

(10) “City” means the City of Woodinville, a municipal corporation of the State of Washington.

(11) “Council” means the City of Woodinville Council acting in its official capacity.

(12) “Data transmission” means:

(a) The movement of encoded information by means of electrical or electronic transmission systems; and

(b) The transmission of data from one point to another over communications channels.

(13) “Dwelling units” means residential living facilities as distinguished from temporary lodging facilities such as hotel and motel rooms and dormitories, and includes single-family residential units and individual apartments, condominium units, mobile homes within mobile home parks, and other multiple-family residential units.

(14) “Emergency” means a condition of imminent danger to the health, safety and welfare of property or persons located within the City including, without limitation, damage to persons or property from natural consequences, such as storms, earthquakes, riots or wars.

(15) “FCC” means the Federal Communications Commission, a regulatory agency of the United States government.

(16) “Fiber optics” means the technology of guiding and projecting light for use as a communications medium.

(17) “Franchise” means the initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the City which grants the nonexclusive right and authority for the construction and operation of a cable television system for the purpose of offering cable service or other service to subscribers.

(18) “Franchisee” means the person, firm or corporation to whom or which a franchise is granted by the Council under this chapter and the lawful successor, transferee or assignee of said person, firm or corporation subject to such conditions as may be defined in City ordinance.

(19) “Gross revenues” means any and all receipts and revenues received directly or indirectly from all sources, derived from the operation of the cable television system to provide cable services by a franchisee, including franchise fees, and such revenues as obtained from local and national advertising, home shopping channels, and similar sources, but excluding bad debt, transactions related to real property receipts by a franchisee and any taxes on services furnished by a franchisee, imposed on any subscriber or used by any governmental unit, agency or instrumentality and collected by a franchisee for such entity.

(20) “Headend” means the electronic equipment located at the start of a cable television system, usually including antennas, preamplifiers, frequency converters, demodulators and related equipment.

(21) “Installation” means the connection of the cable television system from feeder cable to subscribers’ terminals.

(22) “Institutional networks (I-Nets)” means a cable television system designated principally for the provision of nonentertainment services to schools, public agencies or other nonprofit agencies, separate and distinct from the cable television system, or on secured channels of the cable television system.

(23) “Interactive services” means services provided to subscribers where the subscriber either:

(a) Both receives information consisting of either television or other signals and transmits signals generated by the subscriber or equipment under his/her control for the purpose of selecting what information shall be transmitted to the subscriber or for any other purpose; or

(b) Transmits signals to any other location for any purpose.

(24) “Office” means the person or entity designated by the City as being responsible for the administration of a franchise for the City.

(25) “Property of franchisee” means all property owned, installed or used by a franchisee in the conduct of its business in the City under the authority of a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter.

(26) “Proposal” means the response, by an individual or organization, to a request by the City regarding the provision of cable services; or an unsolicited plan submitted by an individual or organization seeking to provide cable services in the City.

(27) “Public right-of-way” or “street” means the land owned, dedicated or conveyed to the City or a unit of government, including, but not limited to, any public alley, boulevard, lane, way, place, drive, easement, right-of-way or sidewalk, or any portion thereof, under the jurisdiction of the City.

(28) “Subscriber” means a person or entity or user of the cable television system who lawfully receives cable services or other service therefrom with franchisee’s express permission. (Ord. 190 § 1, 1997)


5.50.020 Terms of franchise.

(1) It shall be unlawful to engage in or commence construction, operation, or maintenance of a cable television system without a franchise issued under this chapter. The Council may, by ordinance, award nonexclusive franchises to construct, operate and maintain cable television systems which comply with the terms and conditions of this chapter.

(2) Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be nonexclusive and shall not preclude the City from granting other or further franchises or permits or preclude the City from using any public rights-of-way, streets, or other public properties for any lawful purpose or affect its jurisdiction over them or any part of them, or limit the full power of the City to make such changes, as the City shall deem necessary, including the dedication, establishment, maintenance, and improvement of all new public rights-of-way and other public properties.

(3) The provisions of this chapter shall be incorporated by reference in any franchise approved hereunder. The provisions of any proposal submitted and accepted by the City shall be incorporated by reference in the applicable franchise. In the event of any conflict between the proposal, this chapter and the franchise, the franchise shall be the prevailing document.

(4) Any franchise granted hereunder by the City shall authorize a franchisee, subject to the provisions herein contained:

(a) To engage in the business of operating and providing cable service and the distribution and sale of such service to subscribers within the City;

(b) To erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across and along any street such amplifiers and appliances, lines, cables, conductors, vaults, manholes, pedestals, attachments, supporting structures, and other property as may be reasonably necessary and appurtenant to the cable television system; and provide similar cable facilities, or properties rented or leased from other persons, firms or corporations, including but not limited to any public utility or other franchisee franchised or permitted to do business in the City. No privilege or exemption shall be granted or conferred upon a franchisee by any franchise except those specifically prescribed therein, and any use of any street shall be consistent with any prior lawful occupancy of the street or any subsequent improvement or installation therein.

(5) The duration of a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be for a period of time appropriate to the circumstances of the particular grant. (Ord. 190 § 1, 1997)


5.50.030 Application.

An applicant for an initial franchise to construct, operate, and maintain a cable television system within the City shall file an application in a form prescribed by the City, accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee as deemed appropriate by the City. (Ord. 190 § 1, 1997)


5.50.040 Franchise issuance.

Prior to the granting of a franchise, the City Council shall conduct a public hearing to determine the following:

(1) That the public will be benefited by the granting of a franchise to the applicant;

(2) That the applicant has the requisite financial and technical resources and capabilities to build, operate and maintain a cable television system in the area;

(3) That the applicant has no conflicting interests, either financial or commercial, which will be contrary to the interests of the City;

(4) That the applicant will comply with all terms and conditions placed upon a franchisee by this chapter;

(5) That the applicant is capable of complying with all relevant Federal, State, and local regulations, codes and standards pertaining to the construction, operation and maintenance of the cable facilities and systems incorporated in its application for a franchise;

(6) That the public rights-of-way have the capacity to accommodate the cable television system;

(7) That the proposed franchise is consistent with the City’s present and future use of the public rights-of-way to be used by the cable television system;

(8) That the benefit to the public from the cable television system outweighs the potential disruption to existing users of the public rights-of-way to be used by the cable television system, and the resultant inconvenience which may occur to the public; and

(9) That all other conditions resulting from the grant of the franchise have been considered by the City and that the City determines that the grant is still in the public’s best interest. (Ord. 190 § 1, 1997)


5.50.050 Franchise renewal.

(1) The City may, on its own initiative, during the six-month period which begins with the thirty-sixth month before the franchise expiration, commence a proceeding which affords the public in the franchise area appropriate notice and participation for the purpose of identifying the future cable-related community needs and interests and reviewing the performance of the franchisee under the franchise during the current franchise term. If the franchisee submits, during said six-month period, a written renewal notice requesting the commencement of such a proceeding, the City shall commence such a proceeding not later than six months after the date such notice is submitted.

(2) Upon completion of a proceeding under subsection (1) of this secion, a franchisee seeking renewal may, on its own initiative, or at the request of the City, submit a proposal for renewal.

(3) Upon submittal by a franchisee of a proposal for the renewal of a franchise, the City shall provide prompt public notice of such proposal comprised of the publication of a notice of application in the official newspaper of the City for two consecutive weeks and by posting a notice of application at City Hall. Within four months of the date of the submission of an application found to be acceptable for filing, the City shall renew the franchise or issue a preliminary assessment that the franchise should not be renewed.

(4) Notwithstanding subsections (1) through (3) of this section, a franchisee may submit an application for renewal of a franchise at any time, and the formal procedures set forth in subsections (1) through (3) of this section shall not apply to the review of said application.

(5) In the course of considering an application for a renewed franchise, the City Council shall hold a public hearing in which the public and the franchisee seeking renewal shall be offered an opportunity to speak, offer evidence and question witnesses as limited by such reasonable rules of procedure as may be adopted by the City. A transcript or recording shall be made of such hearing. Based on the record of such hearing and the application (including any negotiations relative thereto), the City Council shall determine whether to grant a renewed franchise and shall issue a written opinion stating the reasons for its decision applying the following standards:

(a) Whether the franchisee has substantially complied with the material terms of the existing franchise and with applicable law;

(b) Whether the quality of the franchisee’s service, including signal quality, response to consumer complaints, and billing practices (but without regard to the mix, quality, or level of cable services or other services provided over the cable television system) has been reasonable in light of community needs;

(c) Whether the franchisee has the financial, legal, and technical ability to provide the services, facilities, and equipment as set forth in the franchisee’s proposal; and

(d) Whether the operator’s proposal is reasonable to meet the future cable-related community needs and interests, taking into account the cost of meeting such needs and interests. (Ord. 190 § 1, 1997)


5.50.060 Acceptance.

(1) No franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall become effective unless and until it has been accepted by the franchisee.

(2) In its acceptance, the franchisee shall declare that it has carefully read the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise and unconditionally accepts all of the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise and agrees to abide by same. In accepting a franchise, a franchisee shall indicate that it has relied upon its own investigation of all relevant facts, that it was not induced to accept the franchise, and that it accepts all reasonable risks related to the interpretation of the franchise.

(3) Within 60 days after the effective date of the ordinance granting a franchise, or within such extended period of time as the Council in its discretion may authorize, a franchisee shall file with the City Clerk its written acceptance of the franchise and all of its terms and conditions, in a form satisfactory to the City Attorney, together with any bond required by WMC 5.50.320, evidence of insurance required by WMC 5.50.310, and any other security required by this chapter of a franchise. If a franchisee fails to file a timely acceptance, the franchise shall be null and void. (Ord. 190 § 1, 1997)


5.50.070 Police powers.

By accepting a franchise, a franchisee acknowledges that its rights thereunder are subject to the legitimate exercise of the police power of the City to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to protect the safety and welfare of the public and it agrees to comply with all applicable general laws enacted by the City pursuant to such power. The City Council expressly reserves unto itself all its police powers to adopt ordinances necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public in relation to the rights granted under this franchise. The City reserves the right to use, occupy and enjoy any public rights-of-way or other public places for any lawful purpose, including without limitation the construction of any water, sewer or storm drainage system, installation of traffic signals, street lights, trees, landscaping, bicycle paths and lanes, equestrian trails, sidewalks, pedestrian amenities, City services, and other public street improvement projects. (Ord. 190 § 1, 1997)


5.50.080 Rules and regulations by the City.

In addition to the inherent powers of the City to regulate and control any franchise it issues, the authority granted to it by the Act, and those powers expressly reserved by the City, or agreed to and provided for in a franchise, the right and power is hereby reserved by the City to promulgate such additional regulations of general applicability as it may find necessary in the exercise of its lawful police powers. The City Council reserves the right to delegate its authority for franchise administration to a designated agent. (Ord. 190 § 1, 1997)


5.50.090 Construction standards.

(1) All cable facilities constructed under this chapter shall be placed and maintained at such places and positions in or upon such public rights-of-way and public places as shall not interfere with the passage of traffic and the use of adjoining property, and shall conform to the applicable section of the National Electrical Code, codes of the State of Washington, and City rules, regulations, ordinances, codes, standards and policies pertaining to such construction.

(2) At least seven days prior to any intended construction, a franchisee shall inform all residents in the affected area that a construction project will commence, the dates and nature of the project, and provide a toll-free telephone number which the subscriber may call for further information. A preprinted door hanger may be used for this purpose.

(3) The City reserves the right, as the interest of the public may require, to ensure that:

(a) The public rights-of-way have the capacity to accommodate the cable television system;

(b) The proposed construction is consistent with the City’s present and future use of the public rights-of-way;

(c) The benefit to the public from the construction of the cable television system outweighs the potential disruption to existing users of the public rights-of-way and the resultant inconvenience which may occur to the public, and may require the installation or construction of new cable facilities proposed by the franchisee to be constructed in arterial thoroughfares or to be installed in alternate public rights-of-way which are substantially comparable in terms of the expense to franchisee for installation or construction, and which provide distribution to all affected parcels of property that is equal or better to the requested installation route. The City shall give particular preference to the alternate installation location in cases in which the existing improvements to the public right-of-way would be affected by the proposed installation, or where the structural integrity of the surface of the right-of-way, or inconvenience to the public caused by the proposed installation cannot be mitigated through alternative means.

(4) At least 24 hours prior to entering private property or easements adjacent to or on such private property to perform new plant construction or reconstruction, a notice indicating the nature and location of the work to be performed shall be physically posted upon the affected property. A franchisee shall make a good faith effort to comply with the property owner’s/resident’s preferences, if any, on location or placement of underground installations (excluding aerial cable lines utilizing existing poles and existing cable paths), consistent with sound engineering practices.

(5) The notice requirements of subsection (1) of this section shall not apply for purposes of entry upon private property to perform repairs at the subscriber’s request or in the event of system outage repairs or other emergencies in which insufficient time is available to provide notice to subscribers.

(6) After performance of work, a franchisee shall restore private property as nearly as possible to its condition prior to construction. Any disturbance of landscaping, fencing, or other improvements on private property shall, at the sole expense of a franchisee, be promptly repaired and restored (including replacement of such items as shrubbery and fencing) to the reasonable satisfaction of the property owner.

(7) In connection with the original installations of cable facilities, the franchisee shall locate the cable facilities in a manner which is compatible with the existing location of other utilities and within the right-of-way and in compliance with all applicable Federal, State, and local laws. In all cases where practicable, the cable facilities shall be laid in those sections of the streets so as not to unnecessarily or unreasonably tear up the streets except where necessary and required to cross streets as determined by the franchisee and approved by the City, and shall be laid as to make cable available to all of the City customers along the affected street.

(8) The franchisee shall at all times keep full and complete plans, plat or plats, specifications, profiles and records showing the location, and size of all the cable facilities constructed in the City. These records shall be subject to inspection at all reasonable times by the proper officials and agents of the City, and a copy of these plans, plat or plats, specifications, profiles, and records shall be furnished to the City within 10 days of request.

(9) The franchisee will locate underground cable facilities within 48 hours upon request by the City by marking the location on the ground. The location of the underground cable facilities shall be identified by using orange spray paint. The marked location shall be within two feet of the actual location. (Ord. 190 § 1, 1997)


5.50.100 Undergrounding and landscaping.

In those areas and portions of the City where the transmission or distribution facilities of the public utility providing telephone or electric service are underground or hereafter may be placed underground, then a franchisee shall likewise construct, operate and maintain all of its transmission and distribution cable facilities in the same area underground upon City approval. Such undergrounding activities shall be made concurrently and in cooperation with the other affected utilities. Amplifiers and associated equipment in a franchisee’s transmission and distribution lines may be in appropriate housing upon the surface of the ground, accompanied by landscaping and screening approved by the City; provided, however, that City approval of landscaping and screening shall not be unreasonably delayed, withheld or denied. (Ord. 190 § 1, 1997)


5.50.110 Construction in right-of-way.

(1) A franchisee shall submit an application for, pay the permit fee, and obtain a permit to perform work in any public rights-of-way pursuant to Chapter 15.42 WMC as now existing or hereafter amended. No work, other than emergency repairs or standard installations, shall commence without such a permit. Emergency repairs may be made immediately with notification given to the City no later than the next business day.

(2) In accordance with the permit issued, all transmission lines, equipment, and structures shall be located and installed so as to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners, and at all times shall be maintained in a safe condition, and in good order and repair. Suitable barricades, flags, lights, flares, or other devices shall be used at such times and places as are reasonably required for the safety of the public. Any poles or other fixtures placed in any street by a franchisee shall be placed in such manner as not to interfere with the usual travel on such public way.

(3) When installing, locating, laying, or maintaining cable facilities, apparatus, or improvements, a franchisee shall not interfere with the use of any street to any greater extent than is necessary, and shall leave the surface of any such street in as good condition as it was prior to performance by franchisee of such work. Any facility, apparatus, or improvement under this chapter shall be laid, installed, located, or maintained in conformance with City rules, regulations, ordinances, standards and policies. In any event, a franchisee shall, at its own expense, and to the satisfaction of the City in accordance with the terms of the right-of-way permit, restore to City standards and specifications any damage or disturbance caused to streets as a result of franchisee’s construction or operations.

(4) Upon receipt of 60 days’ prior written notice, a franchisee, at its own expense, and within the time period prescribed by the City, shall protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate, or remove any of its cable facilities or property within the public rights-of-way when, in the judgment of the City, the same is required by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, improvements by governmental agencies, and/or any other City use of the franchise area. Nothing herein shall be deemed a taking of the property of a franchisee, and franchisee shall be entitled to no surcharge by reason of this section.

(5) After receipt of 30 days’ prior written notice, and upon the failure of a franchisee to commence, pursue, or complete any work required by the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any applicable Federal, State or City laws, ordinances, rules, regulations or standards to be performed on any street, within the reasonable time prescribed and to the satisfaction of the City, the City may, at its option, cause such work to be done, and a franchisee shall pay to the City the reasonable cost thereof, which costs may include the City’s reasonable overhead and administrative expense, within 30 days after receipt of demand. (Ord. 190 § 1, 1997)


5.50.120 Safety requirements.

(1) A franchisee, in accordance with applicable Federal, State, and local safety requirements shall, at all times, employ reasonable care and shall install and maintain and use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injury, or nuisance to the public. All structures and all lines, equipment and connections in, on, over, under, across and upon public rights-of-way or places of a franchise area, wherever situated or located, shall at all times be kept and maintained in a safe, suitable condition, and in good order and repair.

(2) The City reserves the right to see that the cable television system of a franchisee is constructed and maintained in a safe condition. (Ord. 190 § 1, 1997)


5.50.130 Building moving.

Whenever any person shall have obtained permission from the City to use any street for the purpose of moving any building, a franchisee, upon seven days’ written notice from the City, shall raise or remove, at the expense of the permittee desiring to move the building, any of a franchisee’s wires which may obstruct the removal of such building; provided, that the moving of such building shall be done in accordance with all City codes, regulations and general ordinances of the City. A franchisee shall be indemnified and held harmless by the permittee from any and all damages or claims whatsoever kind or nature, caused directly or indirectly from this action, except to the extent such damages or claims are the result of franchisee’s negligent action. A franchisee may also require payment in advance from the permittee. (Ord. 190 § 1, 1997)


5.50.140 Tree trimming.

Upon approval of the City, and in accordance with all City ordinances, policies and standards, a franchisee may, at its sole expense, trim trees upon and overhanging streets and public rights-of-way within the franchise area so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of a franchisee. A franchisee shall be responsible for debris removal from such activities. Unless otherwise provided in the City’s approval, all tree trimming shall be under the direction of an arborist certified by the International Society of Arboriculture; provided, however, that the requirements of this section shall not apply to the removal or trimming of specific trees during a bona fide emergency when said trees threaten to damage, or have damaged, a franchisee’s system. (Ord. 190 § 1, 1997)


5.50.150 Rates.

(1) Within 30 days after the grant of an initial franchise hereunder, a franchisee shall file with the City a complete schedule of all present rates charged to all subscribers.

(2) Prior to implementation of any change in rates or charges for any service or equipment provided by a franchisee, a franchisee shall provide the City and all subscribers a minimum of 30 days’ prior written notice of such change.

(3) The City reserves the right to regulate the rates or charges for providing basic cable service and equipment and may establish rate regulation review procedures pursuant to the Act and FCC regulations promulgated thereunder. (Ord. 190 § 1, 1997)


5.50.160 Cable availability.

Cable service shall not be denied to any group of potential residential cable subscribers because of the income of the residents of the local area in which such group resides. (Ord. 190 § 1, 1997)


5.50.170 Franchise fee.

A franchisee shall pay to the City quarterly, on or before the forty-fifth day after the end of each quarter (March, June, September, December), a percentage of gross revenues as defined herein for the preceding three months. Such remittances shall be accompanied by forms approved by City, which identify specific information as to the sources of various applicable income streams. (Ord. 190 § 1, 1997)


5.50.180 External franchising costs.

The franchisee may pass through to its subscribers such external costs as are allowed under the Act and regulations promulgated thereunder. However, the franchisee shall not proceed with any franchise-required activity where the cost of such may be passed through to subscribers externally unless it has first provided written notice to the City. Such notice shall include an analysis (description of service and calculation methodology per subscriber) of the financial impact of the activity to subscribers. The City, upon receiving such notice, shall consider waiving the franchise requirement, and, if so waived, the franchise shall be deemed amended. If the City has not waived the requirement, or otherwise responded to the notice within 60 days, the franchisee shall proceed with the required activity and shall pass through the external costs in accordance with Federal law. (Ord. 190 § 1, 1997)


5.50.190 Cable television system evaluation.

In addition to periodic meetings, the City may require reasonable evaluation sessions on an annual basis during the term of a franchise. However, additional evaluations may be held if the City and the franchisee agree that such evaluations are warranted. Such evaluations shall cover areas such as customer service, a franchisee’s performance under and compliance with the terms of a franchise, and such other matters as may be reasonably designated by the City. (Ord. 190 § 1, 1997)


5.50.200 Audit by City.

The City may, upon seven days’ advance notice, inspect the books and records of the franchisee during normal business hours for the purpose of ascertaining the actual gross revenues collected by a franchisee for the previous year. In the event that such audit discloses a discrepancy of more than 10 percent between the financial report submitted by the franchisee with a quarterly payment and the actual quarterly gross revenues collected by the franchisee, the franchisee agrees to pay to the City the costs of such audit. In the event that such audit results in a determination that additional franchise fees are due the City, interest shall be charged at the maximum legal rate or 12 percent, whichever is greater, from the date on which such additional franchise fees were due and payable. The City agrees to close the audit within six months. (Ord. 190 § 1, 1997)


5.50.210 Public, educational and government access.

(1) The City may require the provision of public, educational and government (“PEG”) access as a condition of a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter. In the event that the City requires the provision of public access as a condition of a franchise, the franchisee shall notify all subscribers, on an on-going basis, of the option to have the public access channel removed from their channel line-up upon request. The City Manager’s office shall review and approve the content of all such notices.

(2) In the event that additional franchises are granted by the City, subsequent franchisees shall provide all PEG access channels currently available to the subscribers of existing franchisees. In order to provide these access channels, subsequent franchisees shall interconnect, at their cost, with existing franchisees, subject to any reasonable terms and conditions that the existing franchisee providing the interconnection may require. These interconnection agreements shall be made directly between the franchisees.

(3) In the event of a dispute between two or more franchisees regarding the interconnection of PEG channels, the City Council may be called upon to arbitrate regarding these arrangements. To the extent permitted by applicable law, the decision of the City Council in such cases shall be final and binding upon all parties. (Ord. 190 § 1, 1997)


5.50.215 Channel blockage – Availability – Notice to subscribers.

In addition to the notice subscriber notification requirements set forth in WMC 5.50.210(1), each franchisee shall notify all subscribers, on an on-going basis, of the option to have any channel removed from their channel line-up upon request. The City Manager’s office shall review and approve the content of all such notices. In the event that a franchisee receives a request to remove a channel from a subscriber’s channel line-up, the franchisee shall block the channel from the subscriber’s channel line-up within a reasonable period of time, not to exceed 30 days. (Ord. 190 § 1, 1997)


5.50.220 Institutional networks (I-Nets).

(1) If required in its franchise, a franchisee’s cable television system shall have the capability of serving designated educational and public buildings with uni- or bi-directional video/audio signals (the “I-Net”). The I-Net system shall be for the purpose of private communications and the signals so provided shall not be transmitted via the subscriber network system. The linkage may be by cable, microwave or other means deemed appropriate by a franchisee; provided, that the communication system, if connected by microwave, shall be furnished suitable encoding and decoding devices.

(2) An entity desiring the activation of such a system shall make application thereof to the City. At a public hearing to evaluate such a request both the requester and the franchisee shall be provided the opportunity to present the public benefits as well as the costs of such implementation. Upon a finding by the City Council that these features are reasonably required to meet community needs, taking into account the cost of meeting such needs, the City Council may require the implementation of such services in a reasonable time.

(3) As an alternative, in order to enable designated public buildings and schools the opportunity to communicate with each other as well as outside of the community, if required in its franchise, a franchisee shall furnish access to the internet via appropriate wired connection and modems. One such outlet will be provided without charge for installation nor equipment and unlimited hours to each facility designated by the City. Additional outlets shall be made available on a time and material basis. (Ord. 190 § 1, 1997)


5.50.230 Access and institutional network equipment.

A franchisee may be required to contribute either goods and services and/or monies for the purpose of providing facilities and equipment in order to broadcast PEG access programming as well as provide communications via the institutional networks. (Ord. 190 § 1, 1997)


5.50.240 Nondiscrimination.

(1) In connection with rates, charges, cable facilities, rules, regulations and in all franchisee’s services, programs or activities, and all franchisee’s hiring and employment made possible by or resulting from this franchise, there shall be no discrimination by franchisee or by franchisee’s employees, agents, subcontractors or representatives against any person because of sex, age (except minimum age and retirement provisions), race, creed, national origin, marital status or the presence of any disability, including sensory, mental or physical handicaps, unless based upon a bona fide occupational qualification in relationship to hiring and employment. This requirement shall apply, but not be limited to, the following: employment, advertising, layoff or termination, rates of pay or other forms of compensation, and selection for training, including apprenticeship. Franchisee shall not violate any applicable Federal, State or local law or regulation regarding nondiscrimination.

(2) Any material violation of this section shall be grounds for termination of any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter and may result in the franchisee becoming ineligible for entering into further franchises, agreements, and/or contracts with the City; provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit the establishment of a graduated scale of charges and classified rate schedules to which any subscriber coming within such classification would be entitled; and provided further, that connection and/or service charges may be waived or modified during promotional campaigns of a franchisee. (Ord. 190 § 1, 1997)


5.50.250 Continuity of service.

(1) It shall be the right of all subscribers to continue receiving cable service so long as their financial and other obligations to a franchisee are fulfilled. In this regard, a franchisee shall act so far as it is reasonably within its control to ensure that all subscribers receive continuous uninterrupted service during the term of the franchise.

(2) In the event a franchisee fails to operate a cable television system for 72 continuous and consecutive hours without prior notification to and approval of the City Council or without just cause such as an impossibility to operate the cable television system because of the occurrence of an emergency or other circumstances reasonably beyond a franchisee’s control, the City may, after notice and an opportunity for a franchisee to commence operations at its option, operate the cable television system or designate a third party to operate the cable television system until such time as a franchisee restores cable service to conditions acceptable to the City or a replacement franchisee is selected. If the City elects to operate the cable television system or designate a third party to do so, a franchisee shall reimburse the City for all reasonable costs or damages in excess of revenues from the cable television system received by the City that are the result of a franchisee’s failure to perform. (Ord. 190 § 1, 1997)


5.50.260 Transfer of ownership.

(1) A franchise issued pursuant to this chapter shall not be sold, assigned, transferred, leased, or disposed of, either in whole or in part, either by involuntary sale or by voluntary sale, merger, consolidation, or otherwise hypothecated in any manner, nor shall title thereto, either legal or equitable, or any right, interest, or property therein pass to or vest in any person or entity, or the controlling interest in any corporation holding a franchise hereunder be changed, without the prior consent of the City Council, and then only under such conditions as may be required by the City Council. Such a transfer of control is not limited to major interest holders but includes actual working or de facto control by minor interest holders in whatever manner exercised. Every change, transfer or acquisition of control of the franchisee shall make the franchise subject to cancellation unless and until the City shall have consented. Such consent shall not be unreasonably withheld.

(2) The franchisee shall promptly notify the City of any proposed change in control of the franchisee. A formal application for approval of a proposed transfer of control shall be filed within 30 days of such notification and the City Council shall render its formal decision within 120 days of receipt of said application by the City, unless the franchisee and the applicant shall agree in writing to an extension of said period. The application shall include, among other things, a copy of any and all documents relating to the sale or transfer and any filings by any party to the transaction at any State or Federal agency including, but not limited to, the FCC, the Department of Justice, the Federal Trade Commission, and the Securities and Exchange Commission. An original and three copies of the text of the application shall be filed and additional copies as the City may request.

(3) The proposed purchaser, transferee, or assignee must show financial responsibility as determined by the City and must agree to comply with all provisions of the franchise and this chapter, including any provisions which the City may amend or add prior to approval of the transfer.

(4) For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to such change, transfer, or acquisition of control, the City may inquire into all qualifications of the prospective controlling party, and the franchisee shall assist the City in any such inquiry. The City may require any reasonable conditions which it deems necessary at the time of review to ensure that the cable television system will satisfy the public interest of the City and its citizens for the balance of the term of the franchise.

(5) WMC 5.50.040 shall apply to any transfer as if the transferee were an applicant for a new franchise.

(6) Subsection (1) of this section notwithstanding, this section shall not be deemed to require City approval of: 

(a) Transfers from a franchisee to another person or entity controlling, controlled by, or under common control with a franchisee; or

(b) Transfers required for mortgaging or similar financing purposes associated with the construction or operation of a cable television system which involve pledging the system as collateral. (Ord. 190 § 1, 1997)


5.50.270 Removal and abandonment of property of franchisee.

(1) The City may direct a franchisee to temporarily disconnect or bypass any equipment of a franchisee in order to complete street construction or modification or install and remove underground utilities. Such removal, relocation or other requirement shall be at the sole expense of a franchisee.

(2) In the event that the use of any part of the cable television system is discontinued for any reason for a continuous period of 12 months, or in the event such system or property has been installed in any street or public place without complying with the requirements of the franchise or other City ordinances or the franchise has been terminated, canceled or has expired, a franchisee shall promptly, upon being given 10 days’ written notice, remove, at its expense, within 180 days from the streets or public places all such property and poles of such system other than any which the City may permit to be abandoned in place. Following such removal, a franchisee shall promptly restore the street or other areas from which such property has been removed to a condition satisfactory to the City.

(3) Any property of a franchisee remaining in place 180 days after the termination or expiration of the franchise shall be considered permanently abandoned. The City may extend such time not to exceed an additional 90 days; provided, however, that a franchisee may not abandon any of its property within public rights-of-way, streets, or other places without the prior written consent of the City.

(4) Upon permanent abandonment of the property of a franchisee in place, the property shall become that of the City, and a franchisee shall submit to the City Clerk an instrument in writing, to be approved by the City Attorney, transferring to the City the ownership of such property. (Ord. 190 § 1, 1997)


5.50.280 Revocation for cause – Lesser sanctions.

(1) Any franchise granted by the City may be terminated during the period of such franchise for failure by a franchisee to comply with material provisions of this chapter and/or the franchise. In addition to termination, the City may impose lesser sanctions, including, but not limited to, monetary penalties, for violation of this chapter and/or a franchise.

(2) Unless a franchisee requests termination of its franchise, the following procedures shall be followed by the City:

(a) The City shall provide franchisee with a detailed written notice, by certified mail, detailing the violation, the steps necessary to cure such violation, and time period within which the violation must be cured. Within 30 days thereafter, the franchisee shall respond demonstrating that no violation occurred, that any problem has been corrected, or with a proposal to correct the problem within a specified period of time.

(b) The franchisee may request an extension of time to cure an alleged violation if construction is suspended or delayed by the City, or where unusual weather, natural consequences (e.g., earthquakes, floods, etc.), extraordinary acts of third parties, or other circumstances which are reasonably beyond the control of the franchisee delay progress; provided, that the franchisee has not, through its own actions or inactions, contributed to the delay. The amount of additional time allowed will be determined by the City. The extension of time in any case shall not be greater than the extent of the actual noncontributory delay experienced by the franchisee.

(c) If said response is not satisfactory to City, the City may declare a franchisee to be in default, with written notice, by certified mail, to the franchisee. Within 10 business days after notice to the franchisee, the franchisee may deliver to the City a request for a hearing before the City Council. If no such request is received, the City may declare the franchise terminated for cause or impose lesser sanctions.

(d) If the franchisee files a timely written request for a hearing, such hearing shall be held within 30 days after the City’s receipt of the request therefor. Such hearing shall be open to the public and the franchisee and other interested parties may offer written and/or oral evidence explaining or mitigating such alleged noncompliance. Within 10 days after the hearing, the City Council, on the basis of the record, will make the determination as to whether there is cause for termination, whether the franchise will be terminated, or whether lesser sanctions should be imposed. The City Council may in its sole discretion fix an additional time period to cure violations. If the deficiency has not been cured at the expiration of any additional time period or if the City Council does not grant any additional period, the City Council may by resolution declare the franchise to be terminated and forfeited or impose lesser sanctions.

(e) If a franchisee appeals revocation and termination, such revocation may be held in abeyance pending judicial review by a court of competent jurisdiction; provided, a franchisee is otherwise in compliance with the franchise.

(f) Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the issuance of a new franchise containing terms substantially the same or identical to a franchise which previously was revoked, upon satisfactory assurances made to the City that the terms and conditions of this chapter can be met by the new franchisee.

(3) In the event that the City elects to impose monetary penalties upon a franchisee for failure by to comply with the material provisions of this chapter and/or a franchise, said penalties shall be assessed at $500.00 per day, per violation, for each day beyond 30 days that the franchisee has been in violation. 

(4) Monetary penalties may be assessed retroactive to the date that notification was provided to the franchisee in such cases where the franchisee has been nonresponsive in correcting the violation or in the case of flagrant violations. If payment of any penalty is delinquent by three months or more, the City may: (1) require partial or total forfeiture of the performance bond or other surety posted by the franchisee; (2) terminate the franchise; and/or (3) commence a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction to collect said penalty. (Ord. 190 § 1, 1997)


5.50.290 Effect of termination for noncompliance.

Subject to State and Federal law, if any franchise is terminated by the City by reason of a franchisee’s noncompliance, that part of the cable television system under such franchise located in the streets and public rights-of-way shall, at the election of the City, become the property of the City at a cost consistent with the provisions of the Act.   If the City, or a third party, does not purchase the system, a franchisee shall, upon order of the City Council, remove the cable television system as required under WMC 5.50.270. (Ord. 190 § 1, 1997)


5.50.300 Indemnity and hold harmless.

No franchise shall be granted pursuant to this chapter unless it contains language requiring the franchisee to indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the City from any and all liabilities, fees, costs and damages, except gross negligence and/or willful misconduct of the City, caused by reason of the construction, operation, maintenance, repair and alteration of a franchisee’s facilities or any other actions of a franchisee in the City of Woodinville. The indemnification language required by this section shall specifically provide that a franchisee will indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the City from claims against the City: (1) by the franchisee’s employees; (2) based upon the City’s ownership or control of the public rights-of-way; and (3) based upon the City’s inspection or lack of inspection of the franchisee’s facilities. In addition, each franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall contain language requiring the franchisee to assume the risk of damage to its facilities by City activities, except in the case of gross negligence or willful or malicious action on the part of the City. (Ord. 190 § 1, 1997)


5.50.310 Insurance.

Upon acceptance of a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter, and prior to commencement of any work, construction, maintenance, or operations within the City, a franchisee shall furnish the City with a certified copy or original of a comprehensive liability insurance policy naming the City as an additional insured. The amount of such policy shall be as deemed appropriate by the City. This insurance shall be maintained in full force at the franchisee’s expense throughout the entire period of the franchise. The City may delineate more specific details concerning such insurance prior to the award of any given franchise. (Ord. 190 § 1, 1997)


5.50.320 Performance bond.

(1) Prior to exercising any of the rights granted under a franchise or undertaking any of the work, installation, improvements, construction, repair, relocation or maintenance authorized by a franchise, the franchisee shall furnish a performance bond reasonably acceptable to the City in an aggregate amount sufficient to assure the franchisee’s performance of all covenants, terms, conditions and obligations under the franchise. The performance bond shall be issued by a corporate surety authorized to do surety business in the State of Washington. The performance bond shall be maintained during the term of the franchise (including any extension thereof) and for a one-year period thereafter. The amount of the performance bond shall be established based upon the legal, financial, and technical qualifications of the franchisee; provided, however, that the City may from time to time review the amount of surety and determine an appropriate level based upon the franchisee’s performance of the covenants, terms, conditions and obligations under the franchise. In the event that the City elects to raise the amount of surety required, written notice shall be provided to the franchisee setting forth the reasons for doing so.

(2) The performance bond shall contain the following endorsement:

It is hereby understood and agreed that this bond shall not be canceled by the surety, nor the intention not to renew be stated by the surety, until 60 days after receipt by the City, by registered mail, of a written notice of such intent to cancel or not to renew.

(3) The performance bond required by this section shall be in addition to any other bonds which may be required by specific provisions of the Woodinville Municipal Code, including, but not limited to, construction bonds for work or construction activities within public rights-of-way; provided, however, that a franchisee shall not be required to obtain said additional bonds if the performance bond required by this section is sufficient in its scope and amount to satisfy the requirements of the specific provision of the Woodinville Municipal Code requiring said additional bond. (Ord. 190 § 1, 1997)


5.50.330 Letter of credit.

(1) The City may at its discretion require in a franchise that a franchisee obtain a standby letter of credit. When and if the City should so require, the franchisee shall deposit with the City a letter of credit from a financial institution chosen by the franchisee and approved by the City in the amount set by the City, but not to exceed $50,000. The letter of credit may not be revoked or terminated during the term of the franchise plus an additional 60 days except with written approval of the City. The form and content of such letter of credit shall be approved by the City Attorney. The letter of credit shall be used to insure the faithful performance by the franchisee of all provisions of the franchise and this chapter, compliance with all orders, permits, and directions of any agency, commission, board, department, division, or office of the City having jurisdiction over its acts or defaults under the franchise, and the payment by the franchisee of any costs, claims, liens, liquidated damages, and taxes due the City which arise by reason of the construction, operation, or maintenance of the system, or breach or termination of the franchise.

(2) The letter of credit shall be maintained by the franchisee at $50,000 or such lesser amount as the City shall determine during the entire term of the franchise, as the City may require, even if funds are drawn against it pursuant to this chapter.

(3) The letter of credit shall contain the following endorsement:

It is hereby understood and agreed that this letter of credit may not be canceled by the surety nor the intention not to renew be stated by the surety until 30 days after receipt by the City Clerk, by certified mail, of a written notice of such intention to cancel or not to renew.

(4) At the City’s option, it may draw against the letter of credit for any unpaid liquidated damages, franchise fees or other amounts owing to it under the franchise which are 30 days or more past due.

(5) The rights reserved to the City with respect to the letter of credit are in addition to all other rights of the City, whether reserved by this chapter or related documents or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to such letter of credit shall affect any other right the City may have. (Ord. 190 § 1, 1997)


5.50.340 Recourse against bonds and other security.

(1) The bonds and other security required by this chapter may be utilized by the City for the following purposes:

(a) Reimbursement of the City by reason of a franchisee’s failure to pay the City any sums due under the terms of this chapter or a franchise;

(b) Reimbursement of the City for reasonable costs borne by the City to correct franchise violations not corrected by a franchisee after due notice;

(c) Monetary remedies or damages assessed against a franchisee due to default or violations of a franchise or this chapter; and

(d) Any other lawful purpose.

(2) In the event a franchisee has been declared to be in default by the City under WMC 5.50.280 and fails to pay the City any franchise fee, penalties, or monetary sanctions, or fails to perform any of the conditions lawfully imposed by the City, the City may thereafter foreclose against the performance bond and/or withdraw from any other security an amount sufficient to compensate the City’s damages, with interest at the maximum legal rate or 12 percent, whichever is greater. Upon such foreclosure or withdrawal, the City shall notify a franchisee in writing, by certified mail, postage prepaid, of the amount and date thereof.

(3) Within 30 days after mailing notice to a franchisee that the City has foreclosed franchisee’s performance bond or that any amount has been withdrawn by the City from the other security pursuant to subsection (1) of this section, a franchisee shall deposit such further bond or sum of money, or other security, as the City may require, sufficient to meet the requirements of this chapter.

(4) The rights reserved to the City with respect to any bond or security are in addition to all other rights of the City whether reserved by this chapter or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding, or exercise of a right with respect to any bond or other security shall constitute an election or waiver of any rights or other remedies the City may have. (Ord. 190 § 1, 1997)


5.50.350 Franchising costs.

Upon acceptance of any initial franchise or renewal granted hereunder, the franchisee shall pay to the City the City’s out-of-pocket costs associated with the franchising process. Costs shall include such items as the costs of publishing notices and ordinances, etc. Such payment is not to be considered in lieu of franchise fee payments. Payment is due within 30 days of receipt of appropriate invoice from the City. (Ord. 190 § 1, 1997)


5.50.360 Equalization of civic contributions.

(1) In the event of one or more franchises being granted, the City may require that subsequent franchisees pay to the City an amount proportionally equal to costs contributed by the original franchisee. These costs may include but are not limited to such features as access and institutional network costs, bi-directional or equivalent cable installed to municipal buildings and similar expenses.

(2) On the anniversary of the grant of each later awarded franchise, such subsequent franchisees shall pay to the City an amount proportional to the amount contributed by the original franchisee, based upon the number of subscribers held by such subsequent franchisees. Such payments will be based upon incremental increases in subscribers, if any. (Ord. 190 § 1, 1997)


5.50.370 Inconsistency.

If any portion of this chapter should be inconsistent or conflict with any Federal or State statute or regulation now or hereafter adopted, then to the extent of the inconsistency or conflict the statute or regulation shall control for so long as such statute or regulation shall remain in effect; provided, the remaining provisions of this chapter shall not be affected thereby. (Ord. 190 § 1, 1997)


5.50.380 Independent contractors.

No franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be construed to create a relationship whereby the franchisee is an agent or legal representative of the City for any purpose whatsoever. No franchisee shall be granted any express or implied right or authority to assume or create any obligation or responsibility on behalf of or in the name of the City or to bind the City in any manner or thing whatsoever. (Ord. 190 § 1, 1997)


5.50.390 Ratification.

Any act consistent with this chapter and prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter is hereby ratified and affirmed. (Ord. 190 § 1, 1997)


Title 6 ANIMALS

Chapters:

6.03    Animal Control


Chapter 6.03 ANIMAL CONTROL

Sections:

6.03.010    Animal control regulations.

6.03.020    Animal control authority.

6.03.030    Penalties and procedures for enforcement.

6.03.040    Conflicting ordinances.


6.03.010 Animal control regulations.

(1) The following chapters of the King County Code (KCC) are hereby adopted by reference as if set forth in full. A copy of the referenced chapters of the King County Code shall be kept on file with the City Clerk for review.

KCC 

11.04    Animal Control Regulations

11.12    Rabies Control

11.20    Disposition of Fowl and Rabbits

11.24    Stock Restricted Area

11.28    Exotic Animals 

11.32    Guard Dogs

11.08.270    Dog Control Zone

(2) The following chapters of the Revised Code of Washington are hereby adopted by reference as if set forth in full. A copy of each referenced State chapter shall be kept on file with the City Clerk for review.

RCW 

16.08    Dogs (Dangerous Dogs)

16.52    Cruelty to Animals

(Ord. 32 § 1, 1993)


6.03.020 Animal control authority.

The King County Animal Control Department is designated by this reference as the agency authorized to enforce the animal control regulations.

King County animal control officers shall be utilized for the enforcement of this chapter and these officers shall include any individuals employed, contracted or appointed by the animal control authority for the purpose of aiding in the enforcement of this chapter or any other law or ordinance relating to the licensing, control or seizure and impoundment of animals. Any State or municipal peace officer, sheriff, constable or other employee in such position shall also have authority to enforce the regulations of this chapter or any other applicable law or ordinance relating to the regulation of animals in the City. (Ord. 32 § 2, 1993)


6.03.030 Penalties and procedures for enforcement.

Any violation of this chapter shall be subject to the applicable penalty provisions of the King County Code which shall include but not be limited to sections 11.04.170 through 11.04.200. (Ord. 32 § 3, 1993)


6.03.040 Conflicting ordinances.

In the event any provision of this chapter conflicts with a provision of the zoning code, any subsequent amendment thereto, the provisions of the zoning code shall control. (Ord. 32 § 4, 1993)


Title 7 (Reserved)


Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY

Chapters:

8.03    Fireworks

8.05    False Alarms

8.07    Nuisances

8.08    Noise Regulation

8.10    Emergency Management

8.12    Special Events

8.14    Motorized Watercraft


Chapter 8.03 FIREWORKS*

Sections:

8.03.010    Definitions.

8.03.020    Sale of fireworks unlawful.

8.03.030    Use and discharge of fireworks unlawful.

8.03.040    Permit required to display fireworks.

8.03.050    Permit fees.

8.03.060    Issuance – Nontransferable – Voiding.

8.03.070    Application for public display permit.

8.03.080    Standards for public fireworks displays.

8.03.090    Special effects for entertainment media.

8.03.100    Nonprohibited acts – Signal purposes – Forest protection.

8.03.110    Ordinance in connection with State law.

8.03.120    Enforcement.

8.03.130    Penalty.

*Code reviser’s note: The effective date of Ord. 235 is June 21, 2000.


8.03.010 Definitions.

RCW 70.77.120 through and including 70.77.230, as now exist or as hereinafter amended, are adopted by this reference and a copy of such shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk for public use and inspection. In addition, the following term is defined:

(1) “Dangerous fireworks” means any fireworks not defined as a “common fireworks” under the provisions of RCW 70.77.136. (Ord. 235 § 2, 1999)


8.03.020 Sale of fireworks unlawful.

It is unlawful for any person to sell any fireworks within the City; provided, that this prohibition does not apply to duly authorized public displays. (Ord. 235 § 3, 1999)


8.03.030 Use and discharge of fireworks unlawful.

Except as authorized by State license and City permit granted pursuant to RCW 70.77.260(2) (public display) or 70.77.311(2) (use by group or individual for religious or other specific purpose on approved date and at an approved location), it is unlawful for any person to use, discharge or explode any fireworks of any kind within the City. (Ord. 235 § 4, 1999)


8.03.040 Permit required to display fireworks.

It is unlawful for any person to hold, conduct or engage in a public display of fireworks within the City without first having obtained and being the holder of a valid permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 235 § 5, 1999)


8.03.050 Permit fees.

The fee for a “public display permit” for the public display of fireworks shall be $100.00, payable in advance. (Ord. 235 § 6, 1999)


8.03.060 Issuance – Nontransferable – Voiding.

Each public display permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for the specific authorized public display evening only, shall be used only by the designated permittee and shall be nontransferable. Any transfer or unauthorized use of a permit is a violation of this chapter and shall void the permit granted in addition to all other sanctions provided in this chapter. (Ord. 235 § 7, 1999)


8.03.070 Application for public display permit.

Applications for a permit to hold, conduct, or operate a public display of fireworks as defined under Chapter 70.77 RCW shall be made to the Building Official for a permit. Applications shall be made at least 14 days prior to the scheduled event. Applications shall meet all qualifications and requirements of State law regarding public display of fireworks and all fire and safety requirements as set forth in the standards for public display and, in particular, shall hold a pyrotechnic operator license issued by the State of Washington as defined by Chapter 70.77 RCW and Chapter 212-17 WAC. (Ord. 235 § 8, 1999)


8.03.080 Standards for public fireworks displays.

All public fireworks displays shall conform to the following minimum standards and conditions:

(1) All public fireworks displays must be planned, organized, and discharged by a State-licensed pyrotechnician.

(2) The permit shall include the name of the applicant and his address; the name of the pyrotechnician and address; the exact location, date and time of the proposed display; the number, type and class of fireworks to be displayed; the manner in which the fireworks are being stored prior to the public fireworks display.

(3) The applicant for a public display of fireworks permit shall include with the application, evidence of a bond issued by an authorized surety or a certificate of public liability insurance. Such bond or certificate shall conform to the requirements set forth in RCW 70.77.285 and 70.77.355, as now exist or as may hereafter be amended.

(4) A drawing shall be submitted with the application showing a plan view of the fireworks discharge site and the surrounding area within a 500-foot radius. The drawing shall include all structures, fences, barricades, streets, fields, streams, and any other significant factors that may be subjected to ignition or that may inhibit firefighting capabilities.

(5) When, in the discretion of the Building Official, such requirement is necessary to preserve the public health, safety and welfare, the permit may require that specified equipment and personnel shall be on site prior to and after the conclusion of the display. All compensation for personnel and apparatus will be paid by the applicant.

(6) All combustible debris and trash shall be removed by the applicant from the area of discharge for a distance of 300 feet in all directions.

(7) Applicant shall dispose of all unfired or “dud” fireworks in a safe manner.

(8) Applicant shall provide the fireworks discharge site a minimum of two 2A-rated pressurized water fire extinguishers and one fire blanket.

(9) The permit may be immediately revoked at any time deemed necessary by the Building Official or his/her designee due to any noncompliance, weather conditions such as extremely low humidity or wind factor. The display may also be canceled by accidental ignition of combustible or flammable material in the vicinity due to fall debris from display.

(10) Areas of public access shall be determined by the Building Official or his/her designee and maintained by the applicant in an approved manner. (Ord. 235 § 9, 1999)


8.03.090 Special effects for entertainment media.

This chapter does not prohibit the assembling, compounding, use and display of special effects of whatever nature by any person engaged in the production of motion pictures, radio, or television productions, theatricals or operas when such use and display is a necessary part of the production and such person possesses a valid permit issued by the City of Woodinville to purchase, possess, transport or use such fireworks. (Ord. 235 § 10, 1999)


8.03.100 Nonprohibited acts – Signal purposes – Forest protection.

This chapter does not prohibit the use of flares or fuses in connection with the operation of motor vehicles, railroads or other transportation agencies for signal purposes or illumination or for use in forest protection activities. (Ord. 235 § 11, 1999)


8.03.110 Ordinance in connection with State law.

This chapter is intended to implement Chapter 70.77 RCW, and shall be construed in connection with that law and any and all rules or regulations issued pursuant thereto. (Ord. 235 § 12, 1999)


8.03.120 Enforcement.

The Building Official or his/her designee, in coordination with the Fire Chief, is authorized to enforce all provisions of this chapter. The Building Official or his/her designee may revoke any permit issued pursuant to this chapter for failure to comply with any provisions of this chapter, for failure to comply with any of the conditions of the permit, or upon any failure or refusal of the permittee to comply with the orders and directives of the Building Official or his/her designee, and/or to comply with any provisions of this chapter relating to temporary structures. (Ord. 235 § 13, 1999)


8.03.130 Penalty.

Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, punished as set forth in Chapter 1.03 WMC. (Ord. 235 § 15, 1999)


Chapter 8.05 FALSE ALARMS

Sections:

8.05.010    Purpose.

8.05.020    Definitions.

8.05.030    Alarm user’s contact card registration required.

8.05.040    Exceptions.

8.05.050    Service charges for excessive false alarms.

8.05.070    Additional duties of alarm user.

8.05.080    Alarm business duties.

8.05.090    Nonpermitted system and uses.

8.05.100    Special registrations.

8.05.110    Appeals – Administrative hearing.

8.05.130    Severability.


8.05.010 Purpose.

It is the intent of this chapter to reduce the number of false alarms occurring within the City and the resultant waste of City resources by providing for corrective administrative action, including imposition of fees. (Ord. 516 § 1, 2011)


8.05.020 Definitions.

Unless the context or subject matter otherwise requires, terms defined herein shall have the following meanings when used in this chapter:

“Alarm business” means the business by any individual, partnership, corporation, or other entity of selling, leasing, maintaining, monitoring, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing any alarm system or causing to be sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced, moved or installed any alarm system or real property.

“Alarm system” means any system, device or mechanism which, when activated, transmits a telephone message to a private monitoring company or some other number, or emits an audible or visible signal that can be heard or seen by persons outside the protected premises, or transmits a signal beyond the premises in some other fashion, except any system, device or mechanism primarily protecting a motor vehicle, or a medical alarm.

“Alarm user” means the person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind to whom a contact card registration is required under this chapter.

“Automatic dialing device” means a device that is interconnected to a telephone line and is programmed to select a predetermined telephone number and transmit by voice message or code signal an emergency message indicating a need for emergency response.

“Burglary alarm system” means an alarm system designed or used for detection and reporting of an unauthorized entry or attempted unauthorized entry upon real property protected by the system.

“Calendar year” means a period of 12 months beginning January 1st and ending December 31st. 

“Chief” means the Chief of Police for the City of Woodinville.

“City” means the City of Woodinville.

“Contact card registration” means registration of authorized persons designated by the alarm user to respond, access establishment and correct (reset) or shut off alarm.

“Contact card registration year” means January 1st to and including December 31st.

“Department” means the King County Sheriff’s Office.

“False alarm” means the activation of any burglary and/or robbery alarm system when no crime is being committed or attempted on the premises. An alarm shall be presumed to be false if the police officers responding do not locate any evidence of an intrusion or commission of an unlawful act or emergency on the premises which might have caused the alarm to sound, but does not include alarms caused by violent conditions of nature or other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm business operator or alarm user.

“Interconnect” means to connect an alarm system including an automatic dialing device to a telephone line, either directly or through a mechanical device that utilizes a telephone, for the purpose of using the telephone line to transmit a message upon the activation of the alarm system.

“Panic/trouble alarm” means an alarm system designed or used for alerting police of the need for immediate assistance or aid in order to avoid injury or serious bodily harm.

“Premises” means any area and any portion of any area protected by an alarm system.

“Response” occurs when the Police Department begins to proceed towards the premises as a result of the activation of the alarm system.

“Robbery alarm system” means an alarm system designed or used for alerting others of a robbery or other crime in progress which involves potential serious bodily injury or death.

“Sheriff” means the King County Sheriff or his/her designee.

“System subscriber” means the person, corporation, firm, partnership, association, company, organization or other business entity who purchased or contracted for any alarm system.

“Verification” means an independent method of determining that a signal from an automatic alarm system reflects a need for immediate police assistance or investigation. (Ord. 516 § 1, 2011)


8.05.030 Alarm user’s contact card registration required.

(1) No person shall operate or use an alarm system on any premises within the City, under that person’s control, without first having obtained from the Woodinville Police Department a separate contact card registration for each premises protected by an alarm system.

(2) The City’s police may not respond to any alarm system for which a contact card has not first been obtained and completed.

(3) For the purposes of this section, a person shall be deemed to be an operator or user of an alarm system if:

(a) The person controls both the alarm system and the premises upon which it is installed;

(b) The person controls the premises and is the subscriber, client or tenant of the system subscriber; or

(c) The person is the system subscriber or alarm user.

(4) Information required to be provided on the contact card registration form includes, but is not limited to:

(a) Subscriber’s and/or alarm user’s name, address and telephone number(s);

(b) Names and telephone numbers of three additional persons who will respond in the event of alarm activation in the absence of the alarm user and said person will provide access to premises and be able to deactivate alarm, or said persons will provide information on whom to contact for access;

(c) The electrical inspection permit number;

(d) Name of the alarm business responsible for regular maintenance and that company’s electrical contractor’s license number;

(e) The information required in subsections (4)(c) and (d) of this section shall not apply to alarms which are installed by the homeowner/tenant;

(f) The information required in subsection (4)(c) of this section shall not apply to (i) existing alarms, or (ii) alarms which are installed in multiple-tenant buildings.

(5) Failure to complete the required information will result in automatic denial of the contact card registration.

(6) Contact card registrations shall not be transferable.

(7) Completed applications for an alarm user’s contact card registration shall be filed with the Woodinville Police Department.

(8) Any person who owns, operates, or possesses any alarm system within the City, which does not conform to the requirements of this chapter, shall disconnect that alarm and render it inoperable or alter it in accordance with this chapter.

(9) The alarm user shall notify the Woodinville Police Department within 10 days of any change of information from that contained on the contact card. (Ord. 516 § 1, 2011)


8.05.040 Exceptions.

This chapter shall not be construed to apply to the City or other persons duly authorized to test or activate an alarm when such may be deemed proper by the Chief. (Ord. 516 § 1, 2011)


8.05.050 Service charges for excessive false alarms.

(1) Service charges will be assessed by the City for excessive false alarms during the registration year as follows:

	For Commercial Alarms:

Third, Fourth and Fifth False Alarms	Fee Set Forth in Fee Resolution

	 	 

	For Residential Alarms:

Fourth and Fifth False Alarms	Fee Set Forth in Fee Resolution

	 	 

	For Commercial and Residential Alarms:

Sixth and Additional False Alarms	Fee Set Forth in Fee Resolution

(2) The City shall notify the alarm user and the alarm business by regular mail of the third commercial false alarm or fourth residential false alarm, the service charge due and the consequences of the failure to pay the service charge. The City shall also inform the alarm user of the right to appeal the validity of the false alarm determination, as provided in WMC 8.05.110. If the service charge has not been received in the City’s office within 60 days from the day the notice of service charge was mailed by the City, and there is no appeal pending on the validity of the false alarm, the City shall send the notice of service charges by certified mail. If payment is not received within 10 days of the day of this notice, the City may initiate enforcement of penalties. (Ord. 516 § 1, 2011)


8.05.070 Additional duties of alarm user.

(1) The premises shall display a contact card registration decal at or near the main entrance, which shall be clearly visible and readable from the exterior of the premises.

(2) The premises shall display the street address at or near the front of the premises and at other places where access is available, such as from an alley or parking lot. The street address shall be clearly visible and readable from the exterior of the premises.

(3) If requested to do so by the Chief or his/her designee, the alarm user or his or her designee shall respond to a premises following activation of an alarm system for which a contact call has been issued within a reasonable time, and, in any event, within one hour after said notification. (Ord. 516 § 1, 2011)


8.05.080 Alarm business duties.

Every alarm system monitoring company engaging in business activities in the City shall:

(1) Submit user instructions to the Woodinville Police Department.

(2) Provide the Chief’s office with information about the nature of its property alarms, burglary alarms, robbery alarms and panic alarms; its method of monitoring; its program for preventing false alarms, and its method of disconnecting audible alarms.

(3) Furnish the alarm user with instructions that provide information to enable the user to operate the alarm system properly and information on how to obtain service for the alarm system at any time. The alarm business shall also inform each alarm user of the requirements to obtain a contact card and where it can be obtained.

(4) Establish a process for alarm verification. The verification process shall not take more than five minutes, calculated from the time that the alarm signal has been accepted by the alarm business monitoring the system, until a decision is made whether to call for a police dispatch. The means of verification may include one or more of the following:

(a) The establishment of voice communication with an authorized person at or near the premises who may indicate whether or not need for immediate police assistance or investigation exists;

(b) A feature that permits the alarm system user or a person authorized by the user to send a special signal to the alarm system monitoring company that will cancel an alarm immediately after it has been sent and prevent the monitoring company calling for a police dispatch;

(c) The installation of a video system that provides the alarm system monitoring company when the signal is received with the ability to ascertain that activity is occurring which warrants immediate police assistance or investigation;

(d) A confirmation that a signal reflects a need for immediate police assistance or investigation either by the alarm system user, or a person at or near the premises before dispatching police; or

(e) An alternate system that the Chief determines has, or is likely to have, a high degree of reliability.

(5) Coordinate with the Chief’s office or his/her designee to develop a process to cancel an alarm dispatch that is consistent with the communication center’s standard operating procedures.

(6) Provide the Chief’s office or his/her designee when requesting an alarm response with a subscriber’s and/or alarm user’s name and phone number for that premises, and the police may not respond if the subscriber’s information is not provided. (Ord. 516 § 1, 2011)


8.05.090 Nonpermitted system and uses.

(1) No person shall operate or use an alarm system which emits an audible sound where such emission does not automatically cease within 15 minutes. Nothing in this section shall limit the duration of a fire or other evacuation alarm during a bona fide emergency when the sound may assist in saving life or avoiding injury.

(2) No person shall use an alarm system to protect more than one business and/or private residence without completing a separate contact card registration for each business and/or private residence to be protected.

(3) No person shall operate or use any alarm system for which the contact card registration has been revoked.

(4) No person shall operate or use any alarm system which automatically dials the department or City directly and delivers a prerecorded message. (Ord. 516 § 1, 2011)


8.05.100 Special registrations.

(1) An alarm user required by Federal or State law, regulation, rule or ordinance to install, maintain and operate an alarm system shall be subject to the alarm system regulations of this chapter, provided:

(a) The contact card shall designate the special alarm user’s status.

(b) A special alarm user’s contact card for a system that has false alarms during the calendar year shall pay the service charges set forth in the fee resolution.

(2) An alarm user that is a governmental political unit shall be subject to this chapter; but shall not be subject to service charges provided herein. (Ord. 516 § 1, 2011)


8.05.110 Appeals – Administrative hearing.

(1) An alarm user may appeal the validity of a false alarm determination to the City’s Hearing Examiner. The appeal shall be in writing and shall be requested within 10 days of the notice of penalty received from the City. Failure to contest the false alarm determination in the required time period will result in a conclusive decision that the alarm was false.

(2) If a hearing is timely requested, written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be mailed to the alarm user by certified mail, or served personally on the alarm user, at least 10 days prior to the date set forth in the hearing; provided, that with respect to business premises, mailing or personal delivery to the manager or chief administrator regularly assigned or employed at the premises at the time of the occurrence of a false alarm shall be deemed to be mailing or personal delivery to the owner. The hearing shall not be more than 21 nor less than 10 days after the filing of the request for hearing.

(3) The alarm user and the Chief or his/her designee shall have the right to present written and oral evidence. The Hearing Examiner shall consider all of the evidence, any record of past false alarms, any corrective action taken and any inspection reports on the cause of the false alarm. If the Hearing Examiner determines that the false alarms alleged have occurred in a calendar year, the Hearing Examiner shall issue written findings pursuant to WMC 2.27.050, waiving, expunging or entering a false alarm designation on the alarm user’s record. If false alarm designations are entered on the alarm user’s record, the City shall pursue the collection of the service fees. If the civil penalty is not found to be proper, then the alarm user shall bear no costs.

(4) If a hearing is canceled more than 10 days after its request, then the amount of the service fees owing must be paid.

(5) A final decision of the Hearing Examiner may be appealed in the manner set forth in WMC 1.06.190. (Ord. 516 § 1, 2011)


8.05.130 Severability.

If any provision of this chapter or its application to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter or the application of the provision to other persons or circumstances is not affected. (Ord. 516 § 1, 2011)


Chapter 8.07 NUISANCES

Sections:

8.07.010    Findings and purpose.

8.07.020    Prohibited acts.

8.07.030    Definitions.

8.07.040    Public nuisance defined.

8.07.050    Determination of public nuisance.

8.07.060    Administrative abatement of nuisance on public property.

8.07.070    Abatement of a public nuisance.

8.07.080    Summary abatement.

8.07.090    Abatement by City – Safeguards.

8.07.100    Abatement cost collection.

8.07.110    Public nuisance – Criminal offense.

8.07.120    Remedies not exclusive.


8.07.010 Findings and purpose.

(1) It is hereby found that there sometimes exist within the City of Woodinville conditions which are inimical to the health and welfare of the public. 

(2) The purpose of this chapter is to set forth procedures to address nuisances and to protect, promote and preserve the health, security, general welfare and safety of the public. (Ord. 686 § 7 (Att. A), 2019)


8.07.020 Prohibited acts. 

(1) It is unlawful for any responsible party to permit, maintain, suffer, carry on or allow, upon any premises or in any lake, river, stream, drainage way or wetlands, any of the acts or things declared by this chapter to be public nuisances.

(2) It is unlawful for any person to create, maintain, carry on or do any of the acts or things declared by this chapter to be a public nuisance. (Ord. 686 § 7 (Att. A), 2019)


8.07.030 Definitions.

(1) Words in this chapter used in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall include the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.

(2) The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:

“City” means City of Woodinville.

“City Manager” means the person appointed pursuant to WMC 2.09.010. 

“Code Enforcement Officer” means the Director, or a person or persons designated by the Director, to enforce this chapter. 

“Costs” means, but is not limited to, contract expense and City employee labor expense incurred in abating a nuisance, a rental fee for City equipment used in abatement, costs of storage, disposal or destruction, legal expenses and attorneys’ fees associated with civil judicial enforcement of abatement orders or in seeking abatement orders, and any other costs incurred by the City excluding, however, fees and expenses associated with appeals authorized by this chapter or by State law.

“Director” means the person or persons designated by the City Manager to administer this chapter.

“Graffiti” means unauthorized markings, visible from premises open to the public, that have been placed upon any property through the use of paint, ink, dye or any other substance capable of marking property.

“Omission” means a failure to act.

“Responsible parties” means, as applicable, the owners of the property constituting the nuisance, the owners of the property upon which the nuisance is occurring and any other persons, corporations or other entities responsible for creating, allowing, maintaining or continuing the nuisance.

“Restoration” means to take steps determined necessary by the Code Enforcement Officer to return a property to the condition in which it existed before a violation occurred. 

“Violation” means an act or omission contrary to an adopted regulation. A violation continues to exist until abated and each day, or a portion thereof, that a violation exists constitutes a separate and distinct offense. (Ord. 686 § 7 (Att. A), 2019)


8.07.040 Public nuisance defined.

The following activities and conditions that annoy, injure, or endanger the health, welfare, safety, or comfort of the public are declared to constitute public nuisances: 

(1) Depositing or disposing of any junk, trash, garbage, litter, discarded lumber or other offensive material in any public space or area that is visible from the public right-of-way or other private property;

(2) Any attractive nuisance located outside of a building dangerous to children including, but not limited to: 

(a) Abandoned, broken or neglected equipment;

(b) Potentially dangerous machinery;

(c) Refrigerators and freezers and other appliances;

(d) Excavations, wells or shafts that are not properly secured or covered;

(3) Broken or discarded furniture or household equipment located outside of a building, which is visible from the public right-of-way or other private property; 

(4) The accumulation of any materials or objects in a location when the same endangers property, safety or constitutes a fire hazard;

(5) Graffiti on the exterior of any building, fence or other structure in any front yard, side yard, rear yard or on any object in a vacant lot, which is visible from the public right-of-way or other private property;

(6) Vehicle parts or other articles of personal property which are discarded or left in a state of disrepair in any front yard, side yard, rear yard or vacant lot, which is visible from the public right- of-way or other private property;

(7) Permitting or maintaining vacant, unused or unoccupied buildings and structures within the City in a manner detrimental to the health, welfare or safety of the public;

(8) Performing any trade, employment, or manufacture in the City which results in offensive odors, hazardous wastes, or other annoyances and which annoys, injures or is offensive or detrimental to the health, welfare or safety of employees or to members of the public;

(9) Storing, maintaining, or using, in or upon any public or private place in the City so as to be offensive or injurious to the health, welfare or safety of the public, or unpleasant or disagreeable to the adjacent residences or persons, any unsound, putrid or unwholesome substance; any structure, drain, sewer or septic tank; or any noxious, offensive, hazardous or otherwise dangerous chemicals or substances;

(10) Maintaining or operating premises, buildings and vehicles whereon or wherein intoxicating liquor or marijuana is manufactured, sold, furnished, or consumed, in violation of the laws of the State or the ordinances of the City;

(11) Maintaining buildings, vehicles or other structures, or any parts thereof, wherein any gambling, as defined by RCW 9.46.020, may be found, and any gambling device, as defined by RCW 9.46.020, may be found, except as licensed and within the scope of the license required under State or City law;

(12) Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs, or tends to obstruct, or renders dangerous for passage, a public park, street, alley, highway, or other public area;

(13) The existence of any tree, shrub or foliage which is apt to destroy, or to substantially impair, interfere or restrict:

(a) Streets, sidewalks, sewers, utilities or other public improvements;

(b) Visibility on, or free use of, or access to such public improvements; 

(c) Reasonable visibility to vehicular traffic at intersections;

(14) Stagnant water that affords a breeding place for mosquitoes and other insect pests; 

(15) Any business within the City that is operated either in violation of City or State law or has been found to violate Federal law;

(16) Any act, omission, or property which includes, causes, or involves one or more violations of any City ordinance, including but not limited to those code violations subject to Chapter 1.06 WMC, adopted to further the public interest in protecting, maintaining, or restoring the physical and natural environment; or 

(17) The existence of every other thing, substance or act that is determined by the City Council to be injurious or detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare of the City. (Ord. 686 § 7 (Att. A), 2019)


8.07.050 Determination of public nuisance.

The Director shall determine whether the act, omission or property complained of, or otherwise discovered, constitutes a public nuisance. (Ord. 686 § 7 (Att. A), 2019)


8.07.060 Administrative abatement of nuisance on public property.

(1) A public nuisance found upon a right-of-way, public easement or other public property shall be abated summarily by the Director by removal and disposal or destruction at the Director’s discretion.

(2) Private property removed and not disposed of or destroyed may be held by the City or its designee for 30 days from the date removed. Thereafter, if the property is unclaimed, the property may be sold by auction and the proceeds from the sale may be retained by the City. The owner of the property may claim the property until sold by paying all costs incurred by the City in removing and holding the property. (Ord. 686 § 7 (Att. A), 2019)


8.07.070 Abatement of a public nuisance.

(1) A Code Enforcement Officer having knowledge of any public nuisance may cause any owner or other responsible person to be notified of the existence of a public nuisance on any premises and shall direct the owner or other responsible person to abate the condition within a reasonable period.

(2) Applicable enforcement provisions for a notice of violation, including penalties and appeals as set forth in Chapter 1.06 WMC, and as supplemented by this chapter, shall apply in abating a public nuisance. 

(3) In all cases where the Code Enforcement Officer has determined to proceed with abatement, 10 working days after giving notice, the City shall acquire jurisdiction to abate the condition at the person’s expense as herein provided. 

(4) If and when responsible party shall undertake to abate a public nuisance, whether by order of the Code Enforcement Officer or otherwise, all needful and legal conditions pertinent to the abatement may be imposed by the Code Enforcement Officer. It is a violation of this chapter for a responsible party to fail to comply with such conditions. 

(5) Nothing in this chapter shall relieve a responsible party of the obligation of obtaining any required permit to do any work incidental to the abatement.

(6) Upon the abatement of the condition or any portion thereof by the City, all the expenses thereof shall constitute a civil debt owing to the City jointly and severally by such of the persons who have been given notice as herein provided. The debt shall be collectable in the same manner as any other civil debt owing to the City. (Ord. 686 § 7 (Att. A), 2019)


8.07.080 Summary abatement.

Whenever any condition on or use of property causes or constitutes or reasonably appears to cause or constitute an imminent or immediate danger to the health or safety of the public or a significant portion thereof, the Director shall have the authority to summarily and without notice abate the same. The expenses of such abatement shall become a civil debt against the owner or other responsible party and may be collected as provided herein or in any other manner allowed by law. (Ord. 686 § 7 (Att. A), 2019)


8.07.090 Abatement by City – Safeguards.

Any abatement of a nuisance by the City must be implemented with due care so as to minimize risk of injury to persons or unnecessary destruction of property. In all cases the City employee abating the nuisance is authorized to employ such assistance and adopt such means as may be necessary to effect the abatement of the nuisance. (Ord. 686 § 7 (Att. A), 2019)


8.07.100 Abatement cost collection.

(1) The Code Enforcement Officer shall forward to the responsible parties, by registered or certified mail, a notice setting forth the total costs of abatement.

(2) If the abatement costs are not paid within 30 days from the date of the notice, at the Director’s discretion, the costs of abatement and fines shall be a lien against and collected from the sale of the property constituting the nuisance, the responsible parties, who shall be jointly and severally liable for the costs, or both.

(3) The City shall maintain an account of all costs incurred in performing an abatement.

(4) In addition to other powers given in this chapter to collect abatement costs, the City Attorney may bring suit for recovery of the costs of any abatement in any court of competent jurisdiction, in the name of the City, against the subject property or the responsible parties. (Ord. 686 § 7 (Att. A), 2019)


8.07.110 Public nuisance – Criminal offense.

(1) Any person who creates, causes, allows, maintains, or continues a public nuisance is guilty of a misdemeanor.

(2) Additionally, any person(s) subject to a final order of abatement who fails to abate the nuisance as provided in a final order of abatement shall be guilty of a gross misdemeanor, and each day the nuisance is maintained shall be a separate offense.

(3) In addition to such other penalties as may be imposed, a court entering a judgment of guilty under subsection (1) or (2) of this section may order as a condition of sentence: (a) the abatement of the public nuisance on such terms and conditions as may be just and equitable; and (b) the reimbursement of the City for any abatement costs as defined in this chapter.

(4) For purposes of subsection (2) of this section, a “final order” means an order of abatement that was not appealed, or an order of abatement affirmed on appeal and from which affirmance no further appeal is or could be taken. (Ord. 686 § 7 (Att. A), 2019)


8.07.120 Remedies not exclusive.

The remedies provided in this chapter, including but not limited to fines, recovery of costs and criminal prosecution, are not exclusive and the City retains the right to pursue all other rights or remedies that might be available. Further, the remedies provided in this chapter, and any other rights or remedies available, are cumulative and any or all may be pursued concurrently or at any separate time. (Ord. 686 § 7 (Att. A), 2019)


Chapter 8.08 NOISE REGULATION

Sections:

8.08.010    Declaration of policy.

8.08.020    Definitions.

8.08.030    Identification of environments.

8.08.040    Maximum permissible environmental noise levels.

8.08.050    Exemptions.

8.08.060    Public nuisance and disturbance noises.

8.08.070    Citizen complaints.

8.08.080    Motor vehicle noise levels.

8.08.090    Variances.

8.08.100    Repealed.


8.08.010 Declaration of policy.

The City Council finds that inadequately controlled noise adversely affects the health, safety and welfare of the people, the value of property, and the quality of the environment. Therefore, it is hereby declared to be the policy of the City of Woodinville to minimize the exposure of citizens to the harmful, physiological and psychological effects of excessive noise. It is the express intent of the City to control the level of noise in a manner which promotes commerce, the use, value and enjoyment of property, sleep and repose, and the quality of the environment. (Ord. 219 § 1, 1998)


8.08.020 Definitions.

All technical terminology used in this chapter, not otherwise defined, shall be interpreted in conformance with Chapters 173-60 and 173-62 WAC. The following words and phrases shall have the meanings indicated below:

(1) “dBA” means the sound pressure level in decibels measured using the “A” weighing network on a sound level meter. The sound pressure level, in decibels, of a sound is 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the sound to a reference pressure of 20 micropascals.

(2) “EDNA” means the environmental designation for noise abatement, being an area or zone (environment) within which maximum permissible noise levels are established.

(3) “Noise” means the intensity, duration and character of sounds, from any and all sources.

(4) “Person” means any individual, corporation, partnership, association, governmental body, State agency or other entity whatsoever.

(5) “Property boundary” means the surveyed line at ground surface, which separates the real property owned, rented, or leased by one or more persons, from that owned, rented, or leased by one or more other persons, and its vertical extension.

(6) “Receiving property” means real property within which the maximum permissible noise levels specified herein shall not be exceeded from sources outside such property.

(7) “Sound level meter” means a device which measures sound pressure levels and conforms to Type 1 or Type 2 as specified in the America National Standards Institute Specification S1.4-1971. (Ord. 219 § 1, 1998)


8.08.030 Identification of environments.

(1) Class A EDNA. Lands where human beings reside and sleep, including all properties in the City which are zoned and single-family residential or multiple-family residential classifications.

(2) Class B EDNA. Lands involving uses requiring protection against noise interference with speech, including all properties in the City which are zoned in neighborhood business, community business, general commercial and freeway service classifications.

(3) Class C EDNA. Lands involving economic activities of such a nature that higher noise levels than experienced in other areas is normally to be anticipated. Persons working in these areas are normally covered by noise control regulations of the Department of Labor and Industries. Such areas shall include all properties in the City which are zoned in light industrial and general industrial classifications. (Ord. 219 § 1, 1998)


8.08.040 Maximum permissible environmental noise levels.

No person shall cause or permit noise to intrude into the property of another person which noise exceeds the maximum permissible noise level set forth in WAC 173-60-040, which section is hereby adopted by reference, with all amendments thereto. (Ord. 219 § 1, 1998)


8.08.050 Exemptions.

The exemptions to the maximum permissible environmental noise levels set forth in WAC 173-60-050 are hereby adopted by reference, with all amendments thereto. Additionally, the following events shall be exempt from maximum permissible environmental noise levels as follows:

(1) Permitted events at approved venues, parks, or stadiums such as sporting events and concerts, outdoor movies, festivals, or permitted parades; or any outdoor activity in the Tourist District Overlay that is approved or permitted by the City. Such events shall comply with the noise restrictions as required under the City’s permit process on a case-by-case basis. Criteria for establishing the noise restrictions include: (a) location of the event and proximity to residential properties; (b) the proposed time and day of the week of the event; (c) proposed amplification of sound; and (d) the proposed duration of the event. The noise restrictions for special events generally should limit noise between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. as set forth in WAC 173-60-040, but may be modified by the Director based on the above criteria. The applicant may appeal any noise restriction imposed as a condition of such permit as provided in WMC 8.12.100. (Ord. 552 § 1, 2012; Ord. 219 § 1, 1998)


8.08.060 Public nuisance and disturbance noises.

It is unlawful for any person to cause, or for any person in possession of property to allow to originate from said property, sound that is a public nuisance. The following sources of sound are defined to be public nuisances, except to the extent that they may be specifically exempted by other provisions of this chapter:

(1) Frequent, repetitive or continuous noise made by any animal which unreasonably disturbs or interferes with peace, comfort and repose of property owners or possessors, except that such sounds shall be exempt when originating from lawfully operated animal shelters, kennels, pet shops, and veterinary clinics, during the hours between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.;

(2) The frequent, repetitive or continuous sounding of any horn or siren attached to a motor vehicle, except as a warning of danger or as specifically permitted or required by law;

(3) The creation of frequent, repetitive or continuous noise in connection with the starting, operation, repair, rebuilding, or testing of any motor vehicle, motorcycle, off-highway vehicle, or internal combustion engine within Class A EDNA, so as to unreasonably disturb or interfere with the peace, comfort and repose of owners or possessors of real property;

(4) Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on or near the public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time and place so as to unreasonably disturb or interfere with peace, comfort and repose of owners or possessors of real property;

(5) The use of a sound amplifier or other device capable of producing or reproducing amplified sound on public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or sales or for attracting the attention of the public to any vehicle, structure or property or the contents therein, except that vendors whose sole method of selling is from a moving vehicle shall be exempt from this subsection;

(6) The making of any loud and raucous noise which unreasonably interferes with the use of any residential property, school, church, hospital, sanitarium, nursing or convalescent facility;

(7) Any sound made by the construction, excavation, repair, demolition, destruction, or alteration of any building or property or upon any building site anytime on Sundays and holidays and outside the hours of 7:00 a.m. through 7:00 p.m., Monday through Friday and 9:00 a.m. through 5:00 p.m. on Saturday, or, from Memorial Day to Labor Day, anytime on Sundays and holidays and outside the hours of 7:00 a.m. through 9:00 p.m., Monday through Friday and 9:00 a.m. through 5:00 p.m. on Saturday, excepting:

(a) Highway construction;

(b) Sounds originating from residential property relating to temporary projects for the maintenance or repair of homes, grounds, and appurtenances between 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. any day of the week;

(c) Nothing herein shall be construed to limit or prohibit different or more restrictive hours for any work authorized under a development permit issued under any chapter of this code as may be specified in any determining or decision issued under this code;

(8) The creation of frequent, repetitive or continuous sounds which emanate from any building, structure, apartment, or condominium which unreasonably interferes with the peace, comfort and repose of owners or possessors of real property;

(9) Sound from motor vehicle audio systems, such as, but not limited to, tape players, radios, and compact disc players, operated at a volume so as to be audible greater than 50 feet from the source;

(10) Sound from audio equipment, such as, but not limited to, tape players, radios and compact disc players, operated at a volume so as to be audible greater than 50 feet from the source; and

(11) The provisions of this section shall not apply to permitted events at approved and permitted venues, parks or stadiums such as: sporting events, concerts, outdoor movies, festivals, or permitted parades; or any outdoor activity in the Tourist District Overlay that is approved or permitted by the City. (Ord. 552 § 1, 2012; Ord. 219 § 1, 1998)


8.08.070 Citizen complaints. 

Whenever it is stated in writing by two or more persons having separate residences in a neighborhood that any person is violating any of the provisions of WMC 8.08.060, the Code Enforcement Officer shall advise the person originating the noise or owing or in possession of the property from which the noise originates that such noise is a nuisance and must cease. This section shall not be interpreted to require a minimum of two complaints before the City can investigate and enforce violations of this chapter. (Ord. 219 § 1, 1998)


8.08.080 Motor vehicle noise levels.

(1) Noise Standards – Violations. No person shall operate any motor vehicle or any combination of such vehicles upon any public highway in violation of standards specified in WAC 173-62-060(l) through (4), which section is hereby adopted by reference, with all future amendments thereto. For purposes of this chapter, “public highway” means the entire width between the boundary lines of every road, street, alley, lane, boulevard, parking lot, and every way or place in the City, whether publicly or privately maintained, when any part thereof is open at any time to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic.

(2) Exemptions. The exemptions to motor vehicle noise as stated in WAC 173-62-040 are hereby adopted by reference, with all future amendments thereto. (Ord. 219 § 1, 1998)


8.08.090 Variances.

(1) Variances may be granted to any person from any requirement of WMC 8.08.040, if findings are made by the Planning Director or his/her designee that immediate compliance with such requirement cannot be achieved because of special circumstances rendering immediate compliance unreasonable in light of economic or physical factors, encroachment upon an existing noise source, or because of nonavailability of feasible technology or control methods. Variances shall not be granted for any requirement of WMC 8.08.060.

(2) Any such variance, or renewal thereof, shall be granted only for the minimum time period found to be necessary under the facts and circumstances.

(3) Variances shall be a Type I permit under WMC 21.83.020, and the decision of the Director shall be governed by the criteria set forth in Chapter 21.80 WMC for purposes of decision making, notice and appeal procedures. (Ord. 496 § 2 (Att. B), 2010; Ord. 219 § 1, 1998)


8.08.100 Penalty for violation.

Repealed by Ord. 230. (Ord. 219 § 1, 1998)


Chapter 8.10 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT

Sections:

8.10.010    Purpose.

8.10.020    Emergency management policy.

8.10.030    Definitions.

8.10.040    Basic emergency management plan and emergency management program.

8.10.050    Disaster powers of the City Manager and Emergency Manager.

8.10.060    Emergency Management Organization.

8.10.070    Mutual aid and interlocal agreements.

8.10.080    No private liability.

8.10.090    Penalty.

8.10.100    Special relationship clause.

8.10.110    Regional disaster plan adopted.

8.10.120    Emergency public works contracting.


8.10.010 Purpose.

The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans, including mock or practice drills, for mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery for persons and property within the City of Woodinville in the event of an emergency or disaster, whether natural or manmade. Further, it is to provide for the coordination of emergency functions and services of the City of Woodinville with all other public agencies and affected private persons, corporations and organizations. Any expenditures made in connection with such emergency management activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the habitants and property of the City of Woodinville. (Ord. 648 § 2, 2017)


8.10.020 Emergency management policy.

It is the policy of the City of Woodinville to make effective preparation and use of personnel, resources, and facilities for dealing with any emergency or disaster that may occur. Disasters and emergencies, by their very nature, may disrupt or destroy existing systems and the capability of the City of Woodinville to respond to protect life, public health and public and private property. Therefore, citizens are advised to be prepared to be on their own for up to 14 days or as the Washington State Emergency Management Department recommends, whichever is more stringent, following a disaster or emergency. (Ord. 648 § 2, 2017)


8.10.030 Definitions.

(1) “Emergency Manager” shall mean the person appointed by the City Manager upon the basis of ability and training to be responsible for the administration and operation of the emergency management program and plan for the City of Woodinville and other duties as assigned by the City Manager.

(2) “Disaster” as used in this chapter shall mean an event or set of circumstances which:

(a) An event expected or unexpected, in which a community’s available resources are expended; or the need for resources exceeds availability.

(b) Demands the immediate action to preserve public health, protect life, protect public and private property, or to provide relief to any area within the City overtaken by such occurrences.

(c) Reaches such a degree as to warrant the City Manager proclaiming the existence of a disaster or emergency or the Governor declaring a state of emergency in accordance with appropriate local and State statutes.

(d) A disaster is a dangerous event that causes significant human and economic loss and demands a crisis response beyond the scope of any single agency or service. Disasters are distinguished from emergencies by the greater level of response required.

(3) “Emergency management” means the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency functions, other than functions for which the military forces are primarily responsible, to mitigate, prepare for, respond to and recover from emergencies and disasters caused by all disasters or emergencies, whether natural or manmade, and to provide support for search and rescue operations for persons and property in distress.

(4) “Emergency” as used in this chapter shall mean an event or set of circumstances which:

(a) An event, expected or unexpected, involving shortages of time and resources; that places life, property or the environment in danger and that requires response beyond routine incident response resources.

(b) Demands immediate action to preserve public health, protect life, protect public and private property, or to provide relief to any area within the City overtaken by such occurrences.

(c) Reaches such a degree of destructiveness as to warrant the City Manager proclaiming the existence of a disaster or emergency or the Governor declaring a state of emergency in accordance with appropriate local and State statutes.

(d) An emergency is an event that normally can be managed at the local level. (Ord. 648 § 2, 2017)


8.10.040 Basic emergency management plan and emergency management program.

(1) In accordance with Chapter 38.52 RCW as presently constituted or as may be amended, the City Council shall adopt by motion a basic emergency management plan for the City of Woodinville, which shall be submitted to the Washington State Emergency Management Division.

(2) In accordance with the basic plan of the Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan (CEMP), the Emergency Manager shall be appointed by the City Manager and be the administrative head and have direct responsibility for the organization, administration and operation of the emergency management program for the City of Woodinville and direct responsibility for the emergency operations of City departments.

(3) The City Manager and Emergency Manager are authorized to develop and implement a CEMP for the City of Woodinville including, but not limited to, the establishment of a resource planning committee with neighboring jurisdictions and districts, citizen volunteers, and whoever else may have a role in disaster response for the City of Woodinville. The City Manager and Emergency Manager may also form a citizen volunteer structure that will focus on disaster response through various programs such as community emergency response training (CERT).

(4) The Policy Team for the City of Woodinville related to emergency management services shall consist of the City Manager and City Council members or staff as designated by the City Manager. In the event the City Manager is not available during an emergency, City Council shall determine the Policy Team and/or elect an Interim City Manager as established in Chapter 2.09 WMC.

(5) The basic plan identifies disaster and emergency powers of the City Manager, Emergency Manager, Policy Team, and City Council. (Ord. 648 § 2, 2017)


8.10.050 Disaster powers of the City Manager and Emergency Manager.

In the event of a disaster as herein provided, the City Manager and/or Emergency Manager are hereby empowered:

(1) To implement the emergency response plan and emergency preparedness operating plan based on the current Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan (CEMP) for the City conforming to the county and the State Office of Emergency Management plan and program;

(2) To control and direct the effort of the emergency preparedness organization of this City for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter;

(3) To direct coordination and cooperation between departments, services and staff of the emergency preparedness organization of this City, and to resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them;

(4) To represent the emergency preparedness organization of this City in all dealings with public or private agencies pertaining to emergency preparedness and disaster;

(5) To assign functions and duties to departments, services and staff and to set forth the form of organization and establish the designation of division and services for the officers and employees. (Ord. 648 § 2, 2017)


8.10.060 Emergency Management Organization.

The Emergency Management Organization is all officers and employees of the City of Woodinville, together with those citizens enrolled to aid them during a disaster, and all groups, organizations, and persons who may be, by agreement or operation of law, including persons pressed into service under the provisions of WMC 8.10.050 who shall be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in this City during such disaster, shall constitute the Emergency Management Organization of the City. The Emergency Management Organization is not shared with any other entity and as such no cost sharing for the operating capital budget is required. The costs related to supporting the organization are allocated within the City budget process. (Ord. 648 § 2, 2017)


8.10.070 Mutual aid and interlocal agreements.

The City Manager shall have the power to sign, on behalf of the City, mutual aid and interlocal agreements with other municipalities, the county and other governmental subdivisions, which have been approved by the City Council. All previous mutual aid agreements which have been signed by the City Manager are hereby confirmed and ratified, provided the same, or parts thereof, are not inconsistent with this chapter. (Ord. 648 § 2, 2017)


8.10.080 No private liability.

No individual, firm, association, corporation or other party owning, maintaining or controlling any building or premises, who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the City of Woodinville a license or privilege or otherwise permits said City to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part or parts of such building or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending, mock or practice emergency or disaster, or their successors in interest, or the agents or employees of any of them, shall be subject to liability for injuries sustained by any person while in or upon said building or premises as a result of any act or omission in connection with the upkeep or maintenance thereof, except a willful act of misconduct, when such a person has entered or gone into or upon said building or premises for the purpose of seeking refuge therein during an emergency or disaster or any attack by enemies of the United States or during a disaster drill, exercise or test ordered by a lawful authority. All legal liability for damage to property or injury or death to persons caused by acts done, or attempted, under color of this chapter and a bona fide attempt to comply therewith, other than acts done in bad faith, gross negligence, or willful misconduct, shall be the obligation of the State of Washington. The City is immune from liability under this chapter to the fullest extent allowed by law. (Ord. 648 § 2, 2017)


8.10.090 Penalty.

Any person who shall willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the Emergency Management Organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter or in the performance of any duty imposed upon such member by virtue of this chapter; or do any act forbidden by any lawful rules or regulations issued pursuant to this chapter if such act is of such a nature as to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of this City, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof, or wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the Emergency Management Agency of the State, shall upon conviction, be misdemeanor punishable as provided in WMC 1.03.010(1). (Ord. 648 § 2, 2017)


8.10.100 Special relationship clause.

By creating an emergency services organization with a goal of protecting life, health, and property in the event of emergency or disaster situations, the City does not mean to extend any assurances to any particular individual or class of individuals that the City will in fact succeed in its goal. (Ord. 648 § 2, 2017)


8.10.110 Regional disaster plan adopted.

Repealed by Ord. 642 (superseded by Res. 493). (Ord. 648 § 2, 2017)


8.10.120 Emergency public works contracting.

Public works contracting and purchasing may waive competitive bidding requirement in accordance with RCW 39.04.280(e). If Federal funding is being used as part of the Recovery Act, then the public works contracting shall be pursuant of RCW 39.28.010 to 39.28.030 and comply with competitive bidding procedures. Alternative bidding procedures may be used in accordance with and approval of the Capital Projects Advisory Review Board (CPARB). The criteria for the alternative bidding procedures shall be in accordance with RCW 39.10.330. (Ord. 648 § 2, 2017)


Chapter 8.12 SPECIAL EVENTS

Sections:

8.12.020    Definitions.

8.12.030    Special event permit required – Violation.

8.12.040    Exemptions from permit requirements.

8.12.045    Issuance of a special event permit does not obligate City services.

8.12.050    Permit application.

8.12.055    Priority of special event permit issuance.

8.12.060    Permit issuance.

8.12.065    Special expressive events.

8.12.070    Action on permit application for special event.

8.12.080    Grounds for denial and/or revocation of permit for special event.

8.12.090    Permit conditions for special event.

8.12.095    Use of City seal, logo or name prohibited.

8.12.100    Appeal procedures for special event.

8.12.110    Indemnification agreement for special event.

8.12.120    Insurance requirement for special event.

8.12.130    Fees for City services for special event.

8.12.140    Damage deposit.

8.12.150    Revocation of permits for special events.

8.12.160    Delegation of Development Services Director’s authority.

8.12.165    City Manager authorized to adopt rules and regulations.

8.12.170    Responsibility – No duty created.


8.12.020 Definitions.

(1) “City-sponsored special event” means a special event that is designated by the City Council as such and is sponsored financially or in-kind in whole or in part by the City. The Council hereby designates “Celebrate Woodinville” as a City-sponsored special event.

(2) “Special event” means any event meeting all of the following four criteria:

(a) Lasts fewer than 25 consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any calendar year;

(b) Is conducted wholly or partially on a public right-of-way or City park, or involves the installation of tents or other temporary structures requiring inspection or review by the City;

(c) Does not require a temporary use permit pursuant to Chapter 21.36 WMC;

(d) Has a significant impact upon the normal use of the public right-of-way, or consists of a gathering of more than 30 people at a City park, except for Woodinville Sports Fields, pursuant to WMC 8.12.040.

Special events may include, but are not limited to, fun runs, races on foot, bicycle, or rollerskates, other athletic events, fundraising events, auctions, bike-a-thons, parades, carnivals, shows or exhibitions, filmmaking, circuses, block parties and fairs.

(3) “Special expressive event” means a special event organized primarily to convey ideas, opinions, or thoughts through words or conduct. Examples of special expressive events include political demonstrations and/or rallies, picketing, and similar types of speech or conduct typically given a higher level of constitutional protection than commercial speech.

(4) “Significant impact” is defined as creating an unusual need for City-provided emergency or protective services such as police, fire or medical aid and/or necessitating special traffic control measures such as barricades, traffic direction by police, or similar measures.

(5) “Technical review committee” means a committee of City staff members representing each City department responsible for reviewing, regulating, or promulgating specific aspects of the municipal code as it relates to special events. Members may include City staff from the Development Services, Public Works, Police, and/or Administrative Services Departments. (Ord. 616 § 1 (Att. A), 2016; Ord. 548 § 1, 2012; Ord. 310 § 1, 2002)


8.12.030 Special event permit required – Violation.

(1) Any person desiring to conduct or sponsor a special event in the City of Woodinville shall first obtain a special event permit from the City.

(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to sponsor, conduct, or participate in a special event requiring a special event permit pursuant to this chapter without a valid special event permit.

(3) The special event permit authorizes the permit holder/sponsor to conduct only such an event as is described in the permit, and to do so in accordance with the terms and conditions of the permit. It is unlawful to violate the terms and conditions of these permits, or to continue with the event after the permit is revoked or expired.

(4) Violations of this chapter shall be enforced pursuant to Chapter 1.06 WMC. (Ord. 616 § 1 (Att. A), 2016; Ord. 310 § 1, 2002)




8.12.040 Exemptions from permit requirements.

A special event permit is not required for events which do not meet the definition of special event. The following is a nonexhaustive list of events and activities that do not constitute special events:

(1) Regularly scheduled school events, such as athletic events, which use existing parking, traffic controls, and public safety support.

(2) Funeral and wedding processions.

(3) Gatherings of 30 or fewer people in a City park, unless merchandise or services are offered for sale or trade to the public, in which case a special event permit is required.

(4) Temporary sales conducted by businesses on private property, such as holiday sales, grand opening sales, or anniversary sales.

(5) Garage sales, rummage sales, lemonade stands, and car washes conducted on private property. 

(6) Private events held entirely on private property that do not involve the use of or have an impact on public property or facilities and that do not require the provision of City public services.

(7) Lawful picketing on sidewalks that does not impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic and with an attendance of 30 or fewer people.

(8) Normal permitted uses of the Woodinville Sports Fields for routine athletic practices, games, or events that do not require set-up of permitted structures (such as large tents or bounce houses), additional sanitation facilities, or additional off-site parking. (Ord. 616 § 1 (Att. A), 2016; Ord. 310 § 1, 2002)


8.12.045 Issuance of a special event permit does not obligate City services.

Issuance of a special event permit under this chapter does not obligate or require the City of Woodinville to provide City services, equipment, or personnel in support of a special event. (Ord. 616 § 1 (Att. A), 2016)


8.12.050 Permit application.

(1) Any person desiring to sponsor a special event, other than a special expressive event, shall apply for a special event permit by filing a complete application with the City no less than 90 days and no greater than one year prior to the date on which the event is to occur. A complete application shall include the name of the sponsor, the date, time, and location of the event, the number of participants and attendees expected at the event, the type of activities expected to occur at the event, a signed indemnification agreement, and payment of a permit fee. A meeting with the technical review committee may be scheduled to review and discuss the application upon submittal of a complete application.

(2) An application for a special expressive event shall be filed with the Development Services Director no less than seven calendar days before the time when it is proposed to conduct the special expressive event if there are anticipated impacts to traffic safety and/or a need for police presence. If the special expressive event is not anticipated to impact traffic safety or require police presence, an application for a permit shall be filed no less than three calendar days before the time when it is proposed to conduct the special expressive event. Upon good cause shown and provided that there is no significant risk or burden to the City, the Development Services Director may, in his or her discretion, allow a later filing.

(3) The Technical Review Committee will meet with applicants for special events to recommend what conditions for the Development Services Director to place upon the special event permit. Technical review may include, but is not limited to, review of traffic plans and traffic control measures, appropriate levels of police and fire support, conflicts with other events or construction projects, aspects of the event that might compromise public safety, and ways to mitigate impacts upon City property, neighborhoods and businesses. The technical review meeting may also be used to inform the applicant of codes and regulations that would apply to the event.

(4) The use of a float shall require a permit from the fire official and is subject to any conditions set forth in the fire code. (Ord. 616 § 1 (Att. A), 2016; Ord. 310 § 1, 2002)


8.12.055 Priority of special event permit issuance. 

City-sponsored events shall have priority when scheduling dates and public venues for special events. All other events, except for special expressive events, shall be scheduled on a first-come, first-served basis not more than one year prior to the proposed date of the event. When on the same business day one or more than one applicant requests the same date and venue for their event, the following criteria will be applied in the following order:

(1) The event and/or the event organizer have a demonstrated history of success in producing events in Woodinville.

(2) The event has been recommended for funding by the Lodging Tax Advisory Committee or has received any other City grant.

(3) The event supports a City Council goal or City work program initiative. (Ord. 616 § 1 (Att. A), 2016)


8.12.060 Permit issuance. 

The City shall issue its decision regarding a special event permit within 60 days of receiving a complete application, or not less than 30 days in advance of the special event, other than for a special expressive event permit. (Ord. 616 § 1 (Att. A), 2016; Ord. 310 § 1, 2002)


8.12.065 Special expressive events. 

When a special expressive event permit is sought, the following exceptions shall apply:

(1) Where the special event will not require temporary street closures, cost recovery shall be limited solely to a fee based on the cost of processing the permit application.

(2) The insurance requirements of WMC 8.12.120 may be waived by the Development Services Director; provided, that the event organizer has filed with the application a verified statement that he or she intends the event purpose to be First Amendment expression and the cost of obtaining insurance is financially burdensome and would constitute an unreasonable burden on the right of First Amendment expression.

(3) The City cost recovery requirements of WMC 8.12.130 may be waived by the Development Services Director in part or in full if the event organizer has filed a verified statement that the event’s purpose is First Amendment expression, and that the cost of City services and equipment is so financially burdensome that it would constitute an unreasonable burden on the right of First Amendment expression.

(4) The City may deny a special expressive event permit under the conditions for permit denial listed in WMC 8.12.080. (Ord. 616 § 1 (Att. A), 2016)


8.12.070 Action on permit application for special event. 

All permits issued under this chapter shall be issued by the Development Services Director or designee. Upon receipt of the comments of affected City departments on the application, the Development Services Director shall proceed to consider whether or not the permit should be issued. A permit may be issued to the applicant only if all of the following criteria and conditions for issuance are met:

(1) Adequate plans for parking exist to meet the need generated for the proposed event;

(2) The proposed special event or proposed use of the street will not intrude onto or over any portion of a public right-of-way open to vehicle or pedestrian travel in such a manner as to create a likelihood of endangering vehicles or pedestrians;

(3) The proposed event will not unreasonably compound impacts of other activities such as events or construction on the date(s) requested;

(4) The proposed event location has not been unreasonably impacted by the number of events in a one-year period;

(5) City personnel and resources are available to assist with the event as deemed necessary by the Development Services Director;

(6) Such other and further conditions as the Development Services Director deems necessary to reasonably ensure that the proposed special event does not in any way create a likelihood of endangering those who may participate or be spectators. (Ord. 616 § 1 (Att. A), 2016; Ord. 310 § 1, 2002)


8.12.080 Grounds for denial and/or revocation of permit for special event. 

A special event permit may be denied and/or the permit may be revoked if the Development Services Director finds one or more of the following situations to exist:

(1) The event cannot be conditioned to avoid endangering the public health or safety;

(2) Neither the City nor the applicant is able to provide sufficient public safety personnel or other necessary staff to accommodate the event so that it may occur in a safe manner;

(3) The applicant has not provided sufficient safety, health, or sanitation equipment services, or facilities that are reasonably necessary to ensure that the special event will be conducted with due regard for safety;

(4) The application has not provided sufficient off-site parking or shuttle service, or both, when required, to minimize any substantial adverse impacts on general parking and traffic circulation in the vicinity of the special event;

(5) The applicant has not provided an adequate first aid or emergency medical services plan based on special event risk factors;

(6) The applicant has not met all of the requirements for submitting a timely and complete application for a special event permit, or has not submitted a complete application after having been notified of additional information or documents required;

(7) The applicant has not conducted an authorized or exempted special event in accordance with law or terms of the permit, or both;

(8) Information contained in the application, or supplemental information requested from the applicant is found to be materially false;

(9) The applicant refuses or fails to agree or comply with all of the conditions and terms of the permit;

(10) The time and location of the event will substantially interfere with any construction or maintenance work scheduled to take place upon or along public property or right-of-way;

(11) The event shall occur at a time and place where a school is in session at a route or location adjacent to the school or class thereof, and the noise created by the activities of the event would substantially disrupt the educational activities of the school or class;

(12) Another special event permit application has already been received, or has already been approved, to hold another event at the same time and place requested by the applicant, or so close in time and place as to cause undue traffic congestion, or the Police Department and/or other City departments are unable to meet the needs for police and other City services for both events, or for other scheduled events or unscheduled governmental functions;

(13) The applicant’s insurance has lapsed or is canceled;

(14) The event would create or constitute a public nuisance;

(15) The event would cause damage to public property or facilities in excess of that which would be reasonably expected from an event of similar type; or

(16) The event would require the diversion of so many public employees that allowing the event would unreasonably deny service to the remainder of the City. (Ord. 616 § 1 (Att. A), 2016; Ord. 310 § 1, 2002)


8.12.090 Permit conditions for special event.

The Development Services Director may condition the issuance of a special event permit by imposing reasonable requirements concerning the time, place and manner of the event, and such requirements as are necessary to protect the safety and rights of persons and property, and the control of traffic. Such conditions may include but are not necessarily limited to:

(1) Alteration of the date, time, route or location of the event proposed on the event application;

(2) Conditions relating to the safety of the event area;

(3) Compliance with City right-of-way permit conditions including the posting of bonds to provide assurances concerning accommodation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including restricting the event to only a portion of the street or right-of-way, and requirements for the use of traffic cones or barricades;

(4) Requirements for the provision of first aid and/or sanitary facilities;

(5) Requirements for use of event monitors and providing notice of permit conditions to event participants;

(6) Restrictions on the number and type of vehicles, animals or structures at the event, and inspection and approval of floats, structures, and decorated vehicles for safety;

(7) Compliance with animal protection ordinances and laws;

(8) Compliance with food safety and public health ordinances and laws;

(9) Requirements for use of garbage containers, cleanup, and restoration of City property including litter/damage deposits;

(10) Restrictions on the use of amplified sound and compliance with noise regulations and laws;

(11) Notice to residents and/or businesses regarding any activity which would require a street closure and/or cause other significant impacts;

(12) Restrictions on the sale and/or consumption of alcohol;

(13) Elimination of an activity which cannot be mitigated to ensure public safety, or which would expose the City to undue liability;

(14) Requirements regarding the use of City personnel and equipment; or

(15) Compliance with any other applicable Federal, State or local law or regulation, including but not limited to the City’s admission tax ordinance and sign code regulations. (Ord. 616 § 1 (Att. A), 2016; Ord. 310 § 1, 2002)


8.12.095 Use of City seal, logo or name prohibited. 

It is unlawful for any event organizer to use in the title of an event the words “The City of Woodinville” or “City of Woodinville,” or facsimile of the seal or logo of the City of Woodinville without prior approval of the City Manager. (Ord. 616 § 1 (Att. A), 2016)


8.12.100 Appeal procedures for special event. 

The applicant shall have the right to appeal the denial of a special event permit or the imposition of a condition of approving such a permit, including, but not limited to, the amount of fees or cleanup deposits imposed pursuant to WMC 8.12.130, or a determination by the Development Services Director that the applicant’s certificate of insurance does not comply with the requirements specified in WMC 8.12.120. A written notice of appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk and the Development Services Department, along with the applicable appeal fee, within three business days of receiving either a notice of denial or a conditional approval. The written notice of appeal shall set forth the specific grounds for the appeal. The appeal shall be scheduled before the Hearing Examiner, whose decision shall be final. (Ord. 616 § 1 (Att. A), 2016; Ord. 310 § 1, 2002)


8.12.110 Indemnification agreement for special event. 

Upon application for a special event permit, the permit applicant and authorized officer of the sponsoring organization must agree to reimburse the City for any costs incurred by it in repairing damage to City property and indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the City, its officers, employees, and agents from all causes of action, claims or liabilities occurring in connection with the permitted event, except those which occur due to the City’s sole negligence. (Ord. 616 § 1 (Att. A), 2016; Ord. 310 § 1, 2002)


8.12.120 Insurance requirement for special event. 

The following insurance shall be required in connection with the issuance of a special event permit: $1,000,000 commercial general liability insurance per occurrence, and $2,000,000 general aggregate, unless waived by the City Manager or his designee.

The applicant is required to provide written proof of such insurance within 30 days after permit approval, but not less than 15 days in advance of the event. The insurance policy shall be written on an occurrence basis, shall name the City as an additional insured, shall be written for a period of at least 24 hours prior to the event and extending for a period of at least 24 hours following the completion of the event, and shall contain a provision prohibiting cancellation of the policy or reduction in coverage except upon 30 days’ written notice to the City.

The City reserves the right to require a higher level of insurance for events that pose a significant level of risk as determined through consultation with its risk pool. (Ord. 616 § 1 (Att. A), 2016; Ord. 310 § 1, 2002)


8.12.130 Fees for City services for special event.

(1) An application for a special event permit shall be submitted to the Development Services Department with an application fee in an amount to be set by City Council resolution. Such resolution shall include a discounted fee for special event permit applications for youth nonprofit merchandise sales held at City parks that do not require City personnel and equipment to support the event.

(2) Upon approval of an application for a special event permit, the Finance Director shall provide the applicant with a statement of the estimated cost of providing City personnel and equipment to support the event that exceeds the standard costs for City services paid in the permit application fee. The applicant/sponsor of the event will be required to prepay these estimated costs according to the statement at least 10 days prior to the special event. City services and equipment may include the use of police officers and public works employees for traffic and crowd control, pick up and delivery of traffic control devices, picnic tables, extraordinary street sweeping and any other requested or required City services and the cost of operating City equipment to provide such services.

(3) If the actual cost for City services and equipment on the date(s) of the event is less than the estimated cost in the schedule, the applicant/sponsor will be refunded the difference by the City in a timely manner after all costs have been determined. If the actual cost for City services and equipment on the date(s) of the event is greater than the estimated cost, the applicant/sponsor will be billed for the difference.

(4) Permit fees and fees for the use of City services and equipment may not be waived. In cases where a contract exists between the City and the event sponsor, such as for a City-sponsored event, fees may be credited. 

(5) If an application for a special events permit is denied, the applicant will receive a refund for fees paid, less the portion of the permit fee for application review. (Ord. 616 § 1 (Att. A), 2016; Ord. 310 § 1, 2002)


8.12.140 Damage deposit.

(1) The applicant/sponsor of a special event involving the sale of food or beverages for immediate consumption, erection of structures, presence of horses or other large animals, water aid stations or any other event likely to create a substantial need for cleanup may be required to provide a deposit prior to the issuance of a special event permit. A deposit may also be required to cover damage or losses to City fixtures or equipment such as barricades, curbs, signs, fences, etc.

(2) The deposit may be returned after the event if the area used for the permitted event has been cleaned and restored to the same condition as existed prior to the event and all equipment has been returned in good working order.

(3) If the property used for the event has not been properly cleaned or restored, the applicant/sponsor shall be billed for the actual cost by the City for cleanup, restoration, or for the replacement cost of lost or damaged equipment. The deposit shall be applied toward the payment of the bill. (Ord. 616 § 1 (Att. A), 2016; Ord. 310 § 1, 2002)


8.12.150 Revocation of permits for special events.

In addition to the reasons specified elsewhere in this chapter, any special event permit issued under this chapter may be revoked by the Development Services Director at any time for reasons of disaster, public calamity, riot or other emergency or exigent circumstances, or when the Development Services Director determines that the safety of the public or property requires such immediate revocation. The Development Services Director may also revoke any permit issued pursuant to this chapter if the permit has been issued based upon false information or when the permit holder exceeds the scope of the permit or fails to comply with any condition of the permit. Notice of such action revoking a permit shall be delivered in writing to the applicant by personal service or certified mail at the address specified by the applicant in the application. If a special event permit fee is revoked, the applicant will receive no refunds for any fees paid. (Ord. 616 § 1 (Att. A), 2016; Ord. 310 § 1, 2002)


8.12.160 Delegation of Development Services Director’s authority.

The Development Services Director may delegate any or all of his or her functions under this chapter to his or her deputies or subordinates. (Ord. 616 § 1 (Att. A), 2016)


8.12.165 City Manager authorized to adopt rules and regulations.

The City Manager is authorized to promulgate additional rules and regulations that are consistent with and that further the terms and requirements set forth within this chapter and the provisions of law that pertain to the conduct and operation of a special event. (Ord. 616 § 1 (Att. A), 2016)


8.12.170 Responsibility – No duty created.

This chapter shall not create any duty owed by the City of Woodinville as to any specific person, party or class. Any duty nevertheless deemed to exist or arise in connection with the City’s permitting function shall be deemed exclusively a duty to the general public as a whole and not to any specific person, party or class. (Ord. 616 § 1 (Att. A), 2016; Ord. 310 § 1, 2002)




Chapter 8.14 MOTORIZED WATERCRAFT

Sections:

8.14.010    Definitions.

8.14.020    Motorized watercraft prohibited.

8.14.030    Exceptions.

8.14.040    Enforcement – Penalty.


8.14.010 Definitions.

As utilized in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth below:

(1) “Lake” means a standing body of fresh water with an aquatic surface area exceeding four acres in size and surrounded substantially by land.

(2) “Motorized watercraft” means a boat, ship, vessel, recreational vehicle or other watercraft propelled wholly or partially by an internal combustion engine, electric motor, jet pump propulsion system or similar mechanized apparatus, but excluding any craft propelled exclusively by manual means such as foot pedals, paddles or oars.

(3) “Operation” means the engagement or activation of the internal combustion engine, electric motor, jet pump propulsion system or similar mechanized propulsion apparatus of a motorized watercraft.

(4) “Pond” means a standing body of fresh water with an aquatic surface area less than four acres in size and surrounded substantially by land. (Ord. 412 § 2, 2006)


8.14.020 Motorized watercraft prohibited.

The operation of motorized watercraft upon any lake or pond located within the City of Woodinville is prohibited except as expressly authorized by this chapter. (Ord. 412 § 2, 2006)


8.14.030 Exceptions.

(1) The prohibitions set forth in this chapter shall not apply to the following:

(a) The operation of a motorized watercraft by an employee or agent of a governmental entity while acting within the scope of his/her governmental duties.

(b) The operation of a motorized watercraft to the actual extent necessary to avert or otherwise respond to an emergency involving immediate danger to human life.

(c) The operation of motorized watercraft necessary to perform in water work, including but not limited to maintenance, construction, mitigation and/or restoration work. Such exemption shall be requested in writing and approved by the City prior to commencing any activities.

(2) A person seeking to avoid criminal or civil penalties for an alleged violation of WMC 8.14.020 shall bear the exclusive burden of demonstrating the applicability of any exception established by this section. (Ord. 462 § 2, 2008; Ord. 412 § 2, 2006)


8.14.040 Enforcement – Penalty.

Violation of this chapter shall subject the violator to civil and criminal penalties pursuant to WMC Title 1. Violation of this chapter shall also constitute a public nuisance subject to abatement pursuant to Chapter 8.07 WMC and applicable State law. The City of Woodinville Public Works Director is authorized to issue administrative interpretations of this chapter. (Ord. 686 § 8, 2019; Ord. 412 § 2, 2006)


Title 9 CRIMINAL CODE

Chapters:

9.03    Criminal Code

9.06    Vehicle Impoundment upon Arrest of Driver for Driving While License Suspended or Revoked


Chapter 9.03 CRIMINAL CODE

Sections:

9.03.010    General provisions.

9.03.015    Statutory provisions – Amendments included.

9.03.020    Alcoholic beverages.

9.03.030    Crimes relating to children and minors.

9.03.040    Contributing to the delinquency of a minor.

9.03.050    Leaving unattended children in parked or standing vehicles.

9.03.060    Controlled substances, paraphernalia, poisons and toxic fumes.

9.03.070    Drug paraphernalia definitions.

9.03.080    Possession of drug paraphernalia prohibited.

9.03.090    Crimes relating to fire.

9.03.100    Firearms and dangerous weapons.

9.03.110    Weapons prohibited on liquor sale premises.

9.03.120    Frauds, swindles and false representations.

9.03.130    Crimes relating to persons.

9.03.140    Placing a person in fear or apprehension by threat.

9.03.150    Crimes relating to property.

9.03.160    Crimes relating to public morals.

9.03.162    Lewd conduct.

9.03.170    Crimes relating to public officers.

9.03.180    Repealed.

9.03.190    Public officer defined.

9.03.200    Crimes relating to public peace.

9.03.210    Miscellaneous crimes.

9.03.220    Throwing objects at moving vehicles.

9.03.230    Disorderly conduct.

9.03.240    Adoption of RCW sections not specifically set forth.


9.03.010 General provisions.

The following State statutes, including all future amendments, additions or deletions are adopted by reference:

RCW 

7.21.010    Definitions

7.21.020    Sanctions – Who may impose

7.21.030    Remedial sanctions – Payment for losses

7.21.040    Punitive sanctions – Fines

7.21.050    Sanctions – Summary imposition – Fines

7.21.060    Administrative actions or proceedings – Petition to court for imposition of sanctions

7.21.070    Appellant review

9.01.055    Citizen immunity if aiding officer

9.01.110    Omission, when not punishable

9.01.130    Sending letter, when complete

9A.04.010    General requirements of culpability

9A.04.020    Purposes – Principles of construction

9A.04.040    Classes of crime

9A.04.050    People capable of committing crimes – Capability of children

9A.04.060    Common law to supplement statutes

9A.04.070    Who amenable to criminal statutes

9A.04.090    Application of general provisions of the code

9A.04.100    Proof beyond a reasonable doubt

9A.04.110    Definitions

9A.08.020    Liability of conduct of another – Complicity

9A.08.030    Criminal liability of corporations and persons acting under a duty to act in their behalf

9A.12.010    Insanity

9A.16.010    Definition

9A.16.020    Use of force – When lawful

9A.16.060    Duress

9A.16.070    Entrapment

9A.16.080    Action for being detained on mercantile establishment of premises for investigation – “Reasonable grounds” as defense

9A.16.090    Intoxication

9A.16.100    Use of force on children

9A.20.021    Gross misdemeanor and misdemeanor penalties

9A.28.020    Criminal attempt

9A.28.030    Criminal solicitation

9A.28.040    

    (1), (2), (3)(e)    Criminal conspiracy

(Ord. 696 § 1, 2019; Ord. 72 § 1, 1993)


9.03.015 Statutory provisions – Amendments included.

The amendment of any State statute adopted by reference in this title shall be deemed to amend the corresponding section of this title and it shall not be necessary for the City Council to take any action with respect to such amendment.

(Ord. 696 § 2, 2019)


9.03.020 Alcoholic beverages.

The following State statutes, including all future amendments, additions or deletions are adopted by reference:

RCW 

66.04.010    Definitions

66.20.200    Unlawful acts relating to card of identification and certification card

66.20.210    Licensee’s immunity to prosecution or suit – Certification card

66.28.080    Permit for music and dancing upon licensed premises

66.28.090    Licensed premises open to inspection – Failure to allow

66.44.010    Local officers to enforce law –     Authority of board – Liquor enforcement officers

66.44.040    Sufficiency of description of offenses in complaints, information, process, etc.

66.44.050    Description of offense in words of statutes – Proof required

66.44.060    Proof of unlawful sale establishes prima facie intent

66.44.070    Certified analysis is prima facie evidence of alcoholic content

66.44.080    Service of process on corporation

66.44.090    Acting without license

66.44.100    Opening or consuming liquor in public place – Penalty

66.44.120    Unlawful use of seal

66.44.130    Sale of liquor by drink or bottle

66.44.140    Unlawful sale, transportation of spirituous liquor without stamp or seal – Unlawful operation, possession of still or mash

66.44.150    Buying liquor illegally

66.44.160    Illegal possession, transportation of alcoholic beverages

66.44.170    Illegal possession of liquor with intent to sell – Prima facie evidence

66.44.175    Violations of law

66.44.180    General penalties – Jurisdiction for violation

66.44.200    Sales to persons apparently under the influence of liquor

66.44.210    Obtaining liquor for ineligible person

66.44.240    Drinking in public conveyance – Penalty against carrier

66.44.250    Same – Penalty against individual

66.44.270    Furnishing liquor to persons underage

66.44.280    Minor applying for permit

66.44.290    Minor purchasing or attempting to purchase liquor – Penalty

66.44.300    Treating minor, etc., in public place where liquor sold

66.44.310    Minor frequenting tavern or cocktail lounge, misrepresentation of age

66.44.325    Unlawful transfer to a minor of an identification card

66.44.328    Unlawful to transfer to a minor of a forged, altered, etc., identification card

66.44.340    Employees 18 years and over allowed to sell and carry beer and wine for Class E and/or Class F employees

66.44.350    Employees 18 years and over allowed to serve and carry liquor, clean up, etc., for Class A, C, D and/or H licensed employees

66.44.365    Driving privileges revoked

66.44.370    Resisting or opposing officers in enforcement of title

(Ord. 696 § 3, 2019; Ord. 72 § 2, 1993)


9.03.030 Crimes relating to children and minors.

The following State statutes, including all future amendments, additions, or deletions are adopted by reference:

RCW 

9.68A.090    Communicating with a minor for immoral purposes

9.91.060    Leaving children unattended in parked automobile

9A.44.096    Sexual misconduct with a child, second degree

9A.44.130    Sex offender registration

9A.44.140    Duty to register, when terminate

9A.44.150    Testimony of a child by closed circuit television

(Ord. 72 § 3, 1993)


9.03.040 Contributing to the delinquency of a minor.

In all cases when any child is dependent or delinquent as defined in RCW 13.34.030, any person who, by act or omission, encourages, causes or contributes to the dependency or delinquency of such child, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 72 § 4, 1993)


9.03.050 Leaving unattended children in parked or standing vehicles.

No person, while operating or in charge of a motor vehicle, shall park or willfully allow such vehicle to stand upon a public street, public way, or in a public place open to the public, leaving any child or children under the age of eight years unattended therein. For the purposes of this section, “unattended” means where no responsible person over 12 years of age is physically present in such a vehicle and has immediate control over such a child or children, or the person operating or in charge of such vehicle is not in the immediate vicinity where such child or children can be seen or heard by such person. Violations shall be punished by a misdemeanor. (Ord. 72 § 5, 1993)


9.03.060 Controlled substances, paraphernalia, poisons and toxic fumes.

The following State statutes, including all future amendments, additions, or deletions are adopted by reference:

RCW 

9.47A.050    Penalty – Toxic substances

69.50.101    Definitions

69.50.204 (c)(22)    Schedule I – Marijuana

69.50.309    Containers

69.50.4013    Possession of controlled substance – Penalty

69.50.4014    Possession of forty grams or less of marijuana – Penalty

69.50.412    Prohibited acts: E – Penalties

69.50.420    Juvenile driving privileges suspended

69.50.435    Additional penalty – School/bus stops

69.50.505    Seizure and forfeiture

69.50.506    Burden of proof

69.50.509    Search and seizure of controlled substances

9.47A.010    Definitions – Inhaling toxic fumes

9.47A.020    Unlawful inhalation – Exception

9.47A.030    Possession of certain substances prohibited, when

9.47A.040    Sale of certain substances prohibited, when

9.47A.050    Penalty

69.38.010    Poison defined

69.38.020    Exceptions

69.38.030    Poison register

69.38.040    Poison register – Penalty for violations

69.38.050    False representations

69.38.060    License required

(Ord. 696 § 4, 2019; Ord. 72 § 6, 1993)


9.03.070 Drug paraphernalia definitions.

(1) As used in this section, “drug paraphernalia” means all equipment, products, and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, smoking, or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance. It includes, but is not limited to:

(a) Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived;

(b) Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing controlled substances;

(c) Isomerization devices used, intended for use or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance;

(d) Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use, in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled substances;

(e) Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances;

(f) Diluents and adulterants (such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose, and lactose) used, intended for use, or designed for use in cutting controlled substances;

(g) Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining, marijuana;

(h) Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining, marijuana;

(i) Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances;

(j) Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances;

(k) Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into the human body;

(l) A device “designed primarily for” such smoking or ingestion set forth in subsection (i) of this section is a device which has been fabricated, constructed, altered, adjusted, or marked especially for use in the smoking, ingestion, or consumption of marijuana, hashish, hashish oil, cocaine, or any other “controlled substance,” and is peculiarly adapted to such purposes by virtue of a distinctive feature or combination of features associated with drug paraphernalia, notwithstanding the fact that it might also be possible to use such device for some other purpose. Paraphernalia includes, but is not limited to, the following items or devices:

(i) Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes, with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls;

(ii) Water pipes;

(iii) Carburetion tubes and devices; 

(iv) Smoking and carburetion masks;

(v) Roach clips (meaning objects used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand);

(vi) Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;

(vii) Chamber pipes;

(viii) Carburetor pipes;

(ix) A smokable pipe which contains a heating unit, whether the device is known as an “electric pipe” or otherwise; 

(x) Air-driven pipes;

(xi) Chillums;

(xii) A device constructed so as to prevent the escape of smoke into the air and to channel smoke into a chamber where it may be accumulated to permit inhalation or ingestion of larger quantities of smoke than would otherwise be possible, whether the device is known as a “bong” or otherwise; 

(xiii) A device constructed so as to permit the simultaneous mixing and ingestion of smoke and nitrous oxide or other compressed gas, whether the device is known as a “buzz bomb” or otherwise; 

(xiv) A canister, container, or other device with a tube, nozzle, or other similar arrangement attached thereto, so constructed as to permit the forcing of smoke accumulated therein into the user’s lungs under pressure, whether the device is known as a “power hitter” or otherwise; 

(xv) A device for holding a marijuana cigarette, whether the device is known as a “roach clip” or otherwise; 

(xvi) A spoon for ingestion of a controlled substance through the nose;

(xvii) A straw or tube for ingestion of a controlled substance through the nose or mouth; 

(xviii) A smokable pipe constructed with a receptacle or container in which water or other liquid may be placed into which smoke passes and is cooled in the process of being inhaled or ingested; 

(xix) Ice pipes or chillers.

(2) In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia under this section, a court or other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following:

(a) Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use;

(b) Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, under any State or Federal law relating to any controlled substance;

(c) The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of this section;

(d) The proximity of the object to controlled substances;

(e) The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object;

(f) Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he or she knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of this section. The innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of this section shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended or designed for use as drug paraphernalia;

(g) Instructions, oral or written; provided with the object concerning its use;

(h) Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use;

(i) National and local advertising concerning its use;

(j) The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;

(k) Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products;

(l) Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object to the total sales of the business enterprise;

(m) The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community; and

(n) Expert testimony concerning its use. (Ord. 72 § 7, 1993)


9.03.080 Possession of drug paraphernalia prohibited.

Any person who possesses any drug paraphernalia as defined in RCW 69.50.102 with the intent to use or employ the same for manufacturing and/or consuming controlled substances is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 696 § 5, 2019; Ord. 72 § 8, 1993)


9.03.090 Crimes relating to fire.

The following State statutes, including all future amendments, additions, or deletions are adopted by reference:

RCW 

9A.48.010    Definitions – Reckless burning

9A.48.050    Reckless burning in the second degree

9A.48.060    Reckless burning – Defenses

9.40.040    Operating engine or boiler without spark arrester

9.40.100    Injuring or tampering with fire alarm apparatus or equipment – False alarm 

(Ord. 72 § 9, 1993)


9.03.100 Firearms and dangerous weapons.

The following State statutes, including all future amendments, additions, or deletions are adopted by reference:

RCW 

9.41.010    Terms defined

9.41.050    Carrying firearms

9.41.060    Exception

9.41.070    Concealed weapons permit

9.41.080    Delivery to ineligible persons

9.41.090    Dealer deliveries regulated – Hold on delivery

9.41.098    Forfeiture of firearms – Disposition – Confiscation

9.41.100    Dealers to be licensed

9.41.110    License

9.41.120    Certain transfers forbidden

9.41.140    Alteration of identifying marks prohibited

9.41.185    Coyote getters

9.41.230    Aiming or discharging firearms

9.41.240    Use of firearms by minor

9.41.250    Dangerous weapons – Penalty

9.41.260    Dangerous exhibitions

9.41.270    Weapons apparently capable of producing bodily harm, carrying, exhibiting, displaying, or drawing unlawful – Penalty – Exceptions

9.41.280    Students carrying dangerous weapons on school property

9.41.300    Firearms prohibited in certain places

9.41.800    Surrender of weapons or licenses – Prohibition on future possession or licensing

9.41.810    Penalty.

(Ord. 696 § 6, 2019; Ord. 72 § 10, 1993)


9.03.110 Weapons prohibited on liquor sale premises.

(1) It is a misdemeanor for anyone, on or in any portion of an establishment classified by the State Liquor Control Board as off limits to persons under 21 years of age, to:

(a) Carry any rifle, shotgun or pistol, whether the person has a license or permit to carry the firearm or not, and whether the firearm is concealed or not;

(b) Carry any knife, sword, dagger, or other cutting or stabbing instrument with a blade of a length of three inches or more, or any razor with an unguarded blade, whether the weapon or instrument is concealed or not;

(c) Carry any instrument or weapon of the kind usually known as a slingshot, taser, throwing star, bow, sand club, blackjack, metal knuckles, or any stick, chain, metal pipe, bar, club, or combination thereof, including a device known as numchuck sticks, or any like device having the same or similar components or parts, whether or not connected by a rope, chain, or other device or any explosive or any poison or injurious gas or any other instrument or weapon apparently capable of producing bodily harm, whether the instrument or weapon is concealed or not.

(2) Exceptions. Subsection (1) of this section shall not apply to or affect the following:

(a) A person engaged in military activities sponsored by the Federal or State governments while engaged in official duties;

(b) Law enforcement personnel;

(c) Security personnel while engaged in official duties; or

(d) The proprietor of the premises or his or her employees while engaged in their employment.

(3)  Warning Signs Required. Signs, informing the public of the prohibitions contained herein, shall be conspicuously posted at all internal and external entrances to any area wherein the carrying of said weapons or instruments is prohibited. Said signs shall be in accordance with the design and language provided by the City.

(4)  Upon conviction said weapon or instrument involved may be confiscated by order of the presiding judge and shall thereafter be disposed of in accordance with statutes or ordinances governing the disposal of confiscated or found property. (Ord. 72 § 11, 1993)


9.03.120 Frauds, swindles, and false representations.

The following statutes, including all future amendments, additions or deletions are adopted by reference:

RCW 

9.04.010    False advertising

9.26A.110    Fraud in obtaining telecommunications service – Penalty

9.26A.120    Fraud in operating coin box telephone or other receptacle

9.26A.130    Penalty for manufacture or sale of slugs to be used for coin

9.26A.140    Unauthorized sale or procurement of telephone records – Penalties – Definitions

9.38.010    False representations concerning credit

9.38.015    False statement by deposit account applicant

9.38.020    False representation concerning title

9.44.080    Misconduct – Sign petition

9.45.060    Encumbered, leased, or rented personal property

9.45.070    Mock auctions

9.45.080    Fraudulent removal of property

9.45.090    Knowingly receiving fraudulent conveyance

9.45.100    Fraud in assignment for benefit of creditors

9.45.270    Fraudulent filing of vehicle report for sale

9A.60.045    Criminal impersonation in the second degree

9A.60.050    False certification

9A.60.070    False academic credentials – Unlawful issuance or use – Definitions – Penalties

(Ord. 696 § 7, 2019; Ord. 72 § 12, 1993)


9.03.130 Crimes relating to persons.

The following State statutes, including all future amendments, additions or deletions, are adopted by reference:

RCW 

9.61.230    Telephone calls to harass, intimidate, torment or embarrass

9.61.240    Same – Permitting telephone to be used

9.61.250    Same – Offenses, where deemed committed

9.61.260    Cyberstalking

9A.36.041    Assault in the fourth degree

9A.36.050    Reckless endangerment

9A.36.070    Coercion

9A.36.150    Interfering with the reporting of domestic violence

9A.36.160    Failing to summon assistance

9A.36.161    Failing to summon assistance – Penalty

9A.40.070    Custodial interference in the second degree

9A.40.080    Custodial interference – Assessment of costs – Defense – Consent defenses, restricted

9A.46.020    Definition – Penalties

9A.46.030    Place where committed

9A.46.040    Court-ordered requirements upon person charged with crime – Violation

9A.46.050    Arraignment – No-contact order

9A.46.060    Crimes included in harassment

9A.46.070    Enforcement of orders restricting contact

9A.46.080    Order restricting contact – Violation

9A.46.085    Stalking no-contact orders – Appearance before magistrate required

9A.46.090    Nonliability of peace officer

9A.46.100    “Convicted” – Time when

9A.46.110    Stalking

10.14.170    Violation of civil antiharassment order

10.99.020    Definitions

10.99.040    Restrictions upon and duties of the court

10.99.050    Restrictions or prohibition of contact with victim – Procedures

10.99.055    Enforcement of orders against defendants

26.09.300    Restraining orders – Violation – Penalty, etc.

26.50.010    Definitions

26.50.110    Violation of order – Penalties

(Ord. 696 § 8, 2019; Ord. 176 § 1, 1997; Ord. 72 § 13, 1993)


9.03.140 Placing a person in fear or apprehension by threat.

(1) Every person who shall intentionally place, or attempt to place, another person in reasonable fear or apprehension of bodily harm by means of a threat shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

(2) For purposes of this section, “threat” means to communicate, directly or indirectly, by act, word, or deed, whether written, spoken, or otherwise communicated, the intent to imminently:

(a) Cause bodily injury to the person threatened or any other person;

(b) Cause physical damage to the property of a person other than the person making the threat; or

(c) Subject the person threatened or any other person to physical confinement or restraint.

(3)  Any threat as defined in this section is deemed to have been committed at the place from which the threat or threats were made or at the place where the threat or threats were received. (Ord. 72 § 14, 1993)


9.03.150 Crimes relating to property.

The following State statutes, including all future amendments, additions or deletions are adopted by reference:

RCW 

9.54.130    Restoration of stolen property – Duty of officers

9A.48.090    Malicious mischief in the third degree

9A.48.100 (1)    Malicious mischief and physical damage defined

9A.52.010    Definitions

9A.52.060    Making or having burglary tools

9A.52.070    Criminal trespass in the first degree

9A.52.080    Criminal trespass in the second degree

9A.52.090    Criminal trespass – Defenses

9A.52.100    Vehicle prowling

9A.56.010    Definitions

9A.56.020    Theft – Definition, defense

9A.56.050    Theft in third degree

9A.56.060 (1, 2, 3, 5)    Unlawful issuance of checks or drafts

9A.56.063    Making or possessing motor vehicle theft tools

9A.56.096    Theft of rental, leased, lease-purchased, or loaned property

9A.56.140    Possessing stolen property – Definition – Presumption

9A.56.170    Possessing stolen property in the third degree

9A.56.180    Obscuring identity of a machine

9A.56.220    Theft of subscription television services

9A.56.240    Forfeiture and disposal of device used to commit violation

9A.56.260    Connection of channel converter

9A.56.270    Shopping cart theft

9A.56.330    Possession of another’s identification

9A.90.030    Definitions

9A.90.050    Computer trespass in the second degree

9A.90.070    Spoofing

9A.90.090    Electronic data tampering in the second degree

28A.635.020    Willfully disobeying order to leave school property

28A.635.030    Disturbing school/activities/ meetings at school

28A.635.090    Interfere with school administration by use of force or violence

28A.635.100    Intimidating administrator or student

28A.635.110    Disciplinary authority exception

(Ord. 696 § 9, 2019; Ord. 72 § 15, 1993)


9.03.160 Crimes relating to public morals.

The following State statutes, including all future amendments, additions or deletions are adopted by reference:

RCW 

9.68A.011    Definitions – Sexual exploitation of children and minor access to erotic materials

9.68A.080    Reporting of depictions of minor engaged in sexually explicit conduct – Civil immunity

9.68A.090 (1)    Communication with minor for immoral purposes – Penalties 

9.68A.103    Permitting commercial sexual abuse of a minor – Penalty – Consent of minor does not constitute defense

9.68A.110 (1), (2), (3), (5)    Certain defenses barred, permitted

9.68A.120    Seizure and forfeiture of property

9.68A.130    Recovery of costs of suit by minor

9.68A.150    Allowing minor on premises of live erotic performance – Definitions – Penalty

9.68A.170    Criminal proceedings – Depictions of minors engaged in sexually explicit conduct – Restrictions on access

9.68A.180    Criminal proceedings – Depictions of minors engaged in sexually explicit conduct – Sealing, storage, destruction of exhibits

9.68A.190    Criminal proceedings – Depictions of minors engaged in sexually explicit conduct – Depictions distributed to defense counsel or expert witnesses prior to June 7, 2012 – Distribution of depictions under color of law not a defense

9A.88.010    Indecent exposure

9A.88.030    Prostitution

9A.88.040    Prosecution for prostitution under RCW 9A.88.030 – Affirmative defense

9A.88.050    Prostitution – Sex of parties immaterial

9A.88.090    Permitting prostitution

9A.88.110    Patronizing a prostitute

9A.88.120    Additional fee assessments

9A.88.130    Additional requirements

(Ord. 696 § 10, 2019; Ord. 72 § 16, 1993)


9.03.162 Lewd conduct.

(1) Every person who intentionally performs any lewd act in a public place knowing that such conduct is likely to cause reasonable affront and alarm is guilty of a misdemeanor.

(2) “Lewd act” means public:

(a) Exposure of any portion of the human anus or genitals, including display of the male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; or

(b) Exposure of the female breast lower than the upper edge of the areola; provided, however, that nothing in the section shall prohibit the breastfeeding of an infant or child under the age of 36 months; or

(c) Touching, caressing, or fondling of the male or female genitals or female breasts, whether clothed or naked; or

(d) Sexual conduct as defined by subsection (4) of this section; or

(e) Stimulated acts of human sex, including intercourse, oral copulation, sodomy, or masturbation of oneself or of one person by another.

(3) “Public” or “public display” means easily visible from a public thoroughfare or from property of others in any portion of any public facility of park, or in any other public place in a manner so obtrusive as to make it difficult for an unwilling person to avoid exposure.

(4) “Sexual conduct” means sexual intercourse or sexual contact.

(5) “Sexual intercourse” means:

(a) Its ordinary meaning, occurring upon any penetration, however slight; or

(b) Any penetration of the vagina or anus, however slight, by an object, when committed by one person on another, whether such persons are of the same or opposite sex, except when such penetration is accomplished for medically recognized treatment or diagnostic purposes; or

(c) Any contact between persons involving the sex organs of one person in the mouth or anus of another, whether such persons are of the same or opposite sex.

(6) “Sexual contact” means:

(a) Any touching of the sexual or other intimate parts of a person done for the purpose of gratifying sexual desire of either party or a third party;

(b) Masturbation, manual or instrumental, of oneself in the presence of another, or one person by another. (Ord. 180 § 1, 1997)


9.03.170 Crimes relating to public officers.

The following State statutes, including all future amendments, additions or deletions are adopted by reference:

RCW 

9.31.090    Escaped prisoner recaptured

9.69.100    Withholding knowledge of felony involving violence – Penalty

9A.72.010    Definitions

9A.72.040    False swearing

9A.72.060    False swearing – Retraction

9A.72.070    False swearing – Irregularities no defense

9A.72.080    Statement of what one does not know to be true

9A.72.140    Jury tampering

9A.72.150    Tampering with physical evidence

9A.76.010    Definitions

9A.76.020    Obstructing a public servant

9A.76.030    Refusing to summon aid for a peace officer

9A.76.040    Resisting arrest

9A.76.050    Rendering criminal assistance – Definition of terms

9A.76.060    Relative defined

9A.76.070    Rendering criminal assistance in the first degree

9A.76.080    Rendering criminal assistance in the second degree

9A.76.090    Rendering criminal assistance in the third degree

9A.76.100    Compounding

9A.76.130    Escape in the third degree

9A.76.160    Introducing contraband in the third degree

9A.76.170 (1), (2), (3)(d)    Bail jumping

9A.76.175    Making a false or misleading statement to a public servant

9A.84.040    False reporting

(Ord. 696 § 11, 2019; Ord. 72 § 17, 1993)


9.03.180 Obstructing public officers.

Repealed by Ord. 696. (Ord. 72 § 18, 1993)


9.03.190 Public officer defined.

“Public officer,” as used in this title, comprises police officers, fire chief and his or her designees; health officers; and the public works director and his or her designees; City Clerk and his or her designee; code enforcement personnel; and other City personnel authorized for enforcement of City ordinances, statutes and codes. (Ord. 72 § 19, 1993)


9.03.200 Crimes relating to public peace.

The following State statutes, including all future amendments, additions or deletions are adopted by reference:

RCW

9.27.015    Interference or obstruction of any court building or residence – Violations

9.62.010    Malicious prosecution

9.62.020    Instituting suit in name of another

9.73.010    Divulging telegram

9.73.020    Opening sealed letter

9.73.030    Intercepting, recording or divulging private communication – Consent required – Exceptions

9.73.070    Same – Persons and activities excepted

9.73.080    Penalty

9.73.090    Police and fire personnel exempted from RCW 9.73.030 through 9.73.080 – Standards

9.73.100    Records available to defense counsel

9.73.110    Not unlawful for building owner

9.73.140    Availability, inventory

9.73.200    Conversations regarding controlled substances

9.73.210    Interception – Controlled substance

9.84.010 (1), (2)(b)    Riot

9A.84.020    Failure to disperse

(Ord. 696 § 13, 2019; Ord. 72 § 20, 1993)


9.03.210 Miscellaneous crimes.

The following State statutes, including all future amendments, additions or deletions are adopted by reference:

RCW 

9.03.010    Abandoning, discarding refrigeration equipment

9.03.020    Permitting unused equipment to remain on premises

9.03.030    Violation of RCW 9.03.010 or 9.03.020

9.03.040    Keeping or storing equipment for sale

9.91.010    Denial of civil rights – Terms defined

9.91.020    Operating railroad, steamboat, vehicle, etc., while intoxicated

9.91.025    Unlawful transit conduct

9.91.140    Food stamps – Unlawful sale

9.91.142    Food stamps – Trafficking

9.91.160 (1), (3), (4)    Personal protection spray devices

9.91.170    Interfering with dog guide or service animal

9.91.175    Interfering with search and rescue dog

70.54.010    Polluting water supply

70.93.060    Littering

(Ord. 696 § 14, 2019; Ord. 72 § 21, 1993)


9.03.220 Throwing objects at moving vehicles.

Any person who throws, pushes, rolls, drops, swings or otherwise propels or projects any object, thing or substance in such a manner as to strike or be likely to strike any moving vehicle on the public highways or streets is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 72 § 22, 1993)


9.03.230 Disorderly conduct.

Any person who engages in disorderly conduct is guilty of a misdemeanor. A person engages in disorderly conduct when that person:

(1) Uses abusive language and thereby intentionally creates a risk of assault;

(2) Intentionally disrupts any lawful assembly or meeting of persons without authority;

(3) Intentionally obstructs vehicular or pedestrian traffic without lawful authority;

(4) Fights by agreement, except as part of an organized athletic event; or

(5) Is intoxicated from the use of alcohol, marijuana, or illegal drugs in any public place in the city such that the person’s conduct tends to or does unreasonably disturb the public peace, provoke disorder, or endanger the safety of others. (Ord. 696 § 15, 2019)


9.03.240 Adoption of RCW sections not specifically set forth.

Notwithstanding the RCW sections that are specifically adopted by reference in this code, all RCW sections that constitute misdemeanors or gross misdemeanors and the RCW sections necessary for the investigation, arrest, prosecution, sentencing, confinement and enforcement of misdemeanors or gross misdemeanors are hereby adopted by reference as currently enacted or as they may hereafter be amended or recodified and shall be given the same force and effect as if fully set forth herein. (Ord. 696 § 16, 2019)


Chapter 9.06 VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT UPON ARREST OF DRIVER FOR DRIVING WHILE LICENSE SUSPENDED OR REVOKED

Sections:

9.06.010    Appointment of King County as agent for the City.

9.06.020    Impoundment authorized.

9.06.030    Administrative fee.

9.06.040    Owner of impounded vehicle to be notified.

9.06.050    Redemption of impounded vehicles.

9.06.060    Post-impoundment hearing procedure.

9.06.070    Contracts for towing and storage.

9.06.080    Severability.


9.06.010 Appointment of King County as agent for the City.

King County and the King County Sheriff’s Office and/or its designees are appointed and authorized to act as agent of the City in regard to all impoundments and actions permitted by this chapter. (Ord. 262 § 1, 2000)


9.06.020 Impoundment authorized.

(1) If the driver is arrested for a violation of Driving While License Suspended (“DWLS”) in the Third Degree, as defined in RCW 46.20.342, or if the driver is arrested for driving with a license suspended in another state, the vehicle shall be impounded.

(2) If the driver is arrested for a violation of DWLS Second Degree, as defined in RCW 46.20.342, the vehicle shall be impounded for 30 days.

(3) If the driver is arrested for a violation of DWLS First Degree, as defined in RCW 46.20.342, the vehicle shall be impounded for 30 days. (Ord. 262 § 1, 2000)


9.06.030 Administrative fee.

If a vehicle is impounded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, an administrative fee of $100.00 shall be paid to the City of Woodinville Finance Department, prior to redemption of the vehicle as provided by this chapter. The administrative fee shall be for the purpose of offsetting, to the extent practicable, the cost to the City of implementing, enforcing and administering this chapter and must be deposited in an appropriate account. (Ord. 262 § 1, 2000)


9.06.040 Owner of impounded vehicle to be notified.

(1) Not more than 24 hours after impoundment of any vehicle, the tow truck operator shall mail a notice by first class mail to the last known address of the legal and registered owner(s) of the vehicle, as may be disclosed by the vehicle identification number, and as provided by the Washington State Department of Licensing. The notice shall include the name of the impounding tow firm, its address, and telephone number. The notice shall include the location and time of the impound, and by whose authority the vehicle was impounded. The notice also shall include written notice of the right of redemption and opportunity for a hearing to contest the validity of the impound or the amount of towing and storage charges pursuant to this chapter, as set forth on a form provided by the King County Sheriff’s Office. The notice shall state the mandatory length of the impound. The notice shall state that a person who desires to redeem an impounded vehicle at the end of the mandatory period must within five days of the impound, at the request of the tow truck operator, pay a security deposit to the tow truck operator of not more than one-half of the applicable impound storage rate for each day of the proposed suspended license impound to ensure payment of the costs of the removal, towing, and storage of the vehicle pursuant to RCW 46.55.120(1)(b). The notification shall state that if the security deposit is not posted within five days of the impound, the vehicle will be processed and sold at auction as an abandoned vehicle pursuant to RCW 46.55.130. The notice shall set forth the requirements of WMC 9.06.050 regarding the payment of the costs of removal, towing, and storage as well as providing proof of payment of the administrative fee and proof of satisfaction of any penalties, fines, or forfeitures before redemption. The notice must also state that the registered owner is ineligible to purchase the vehicle at the abandoned vehicle auction, if held.

(2) Notwithstanding subsection (1) of this section, a rental car business may immediately redeem a rented vehicle it owns by payment of the costs of removal, towing, and storage, whereupon the vehicle will not be held for a suspended license impound. The officer directing the impound shall notify the rental car business as soon as practicable of the impound.

(3) If the date on which a notice required by subsection (1) of this section is to be mailed falls upon a Saturday, Sunday, or postal holiday, the notice may be mailed on the next day that is neither a Saturday, Sunday, nor a postal holiday.

(4) Similar notice shall be given to each person who seeks to redeem an impounded vehicle, except that if a vehicle is redeemed prior to the mailing of notice, then notice need not be mailed. The tow truck operator shall maintain a record evidenced by the redeeming person’s signature that the notification was provided. (Ord. 262 § 1, 2000)


9.06.050 Redemption of impounded vehicles.

Vehicles impounded pursuant to this chapter shall be redeemed only under the following circumstances, and pursuant to agreement between the City and the King County Sheriff’s Office:

(1) Only the registered owner, a person authorized by the registered owner, or one who has purchased the vehicle from the registered owner, who produces ownership or authorization and signs a receipt therefor, may redeem an impounded vehicle. A person redeeming a vehicle impounded pursuant to this chapter must, prior to redemption, establish that he or she has a valid driver’s license and insurance.

(2) Any person so redeeming a vehicle impounded under this chapter shall pay the tow truck operator for costs of impoundment (removal, towing, and storage) and the administrative fee prior to redeeming such vehicle. The tow truck operator shall accept payment as provided in RCW 46.55.120(1)(e), as now or hereafter amended. If the vehicle was impounded pursuant to this chapter and was being operated by the registered owner when it was impounded, it may not be released to any person until all penalties, fines, or forfeitures owed by the registered owner have been satisfied. A vehicle impounded pursuant to this chapter can be released only pursuant to written order from the King County Sheriff’s Office or a court.

(3) The King County Sheriff’s Office shall assign an administrative hearings officer(s) to conduct post-impoundment hearings pursuant to this chapter. Any person seeking to redeem a vehicle impounded pursuant to this chapter has a right to a hearing before an administrative hearings officer to contest the validity of an impoundment or the amount of removal, towing and storage charges or administrative fee. Any request for a hearing shall be made in writing, on a form provided by the King County Sheriff’s Office and signed by such person, and received by the King County Sheriff’s Office within 10 days (including Saturdays, Sundays and holidays) of the latter of the date the notice of right of redemption and opportunity for hearing was mailed to the person or the date the notice was given to the person by the tow truck operator. Such hearing shall be provided as follows:

(a) If all of the requirements to redeem the vehicle, including expiration of any period of impoundment under WMC 9.06.020 have been satisfied, then the impounded vehicle shall be released immediately and a hearing shall be held within 90 days of the written request for hearing.

(b) If all of the requirements to redeem the vehicle, including expiration of any period of impoundment under WMC 9.06.020, have not been satisfied, then the impounded vehicle shall not be released until after the hearing which shall be held within two business days (excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays) of the written request for hearing.

(c) Any person seeking a hearing who has failed to request such hearing within the time specified in this section may petition the King County Sheriff’s Office for an extension to file a request for hearing. Such extension shall only be granted upon the demonstration of good cause as to the reason(s) the request for hearing was not timely filed. For the purpose of this section, good cause shall be defined as circumstances beyond the control of the person seeking the hearing that prevented such person from filing a timely request for hearing. In the event such extension is granted, the person receiving such extension shall be granted a hearing in accordance with this chapter.

(d) If a person fails to file a timely request for hearing and no extension to file such a request has been granted, the right to a hearing is waived, the impoundment and the associated costs of impoundment are deemed to be proper, and neither the City or County shall be liable for removal, towing and storage charges arising from the impoundment.

(4) The Woodinville Police Chief, or designee, is authorized to release a vehicle impounded pursuant to this chapter prior to the expiration of any period of impoundment upon petition of the spouse or domestic partner of the registered owner of the vehicle, based on economic or personal hardship to such spouse or domestic partner resulting from the unavailability of the vehicle and after consideration of the threat to public safety that may result from the release of the vehicle, including, but not limited to, the driver’s criminal history, driving record, license status and access to the vehicle. If such release is authorized, the person redeeming the vehicle must satisfy the requirements of subsections (1) and (2) of this section, with the exception of payment of the penalties, fines, or forfeitures owed by the driver, and with the exception of the administrative fee.

(5) The Woodinville Police Chief, or designee, is authorized to release a vehicle impounded pursuant to this chapter prior to the expiration of any period of impoundment upon the petition of the registered owner of the vehicle based upon economic or personal hardship or equity, provided the registered owner was not the operator of the vehicle at the time of the impound. If such release is authorized, the registered owner must satisfy the requirements of subsections (1) and (2) of this section, with the exception of the administrative fee, in order to redeem the vehicle. (Ord. 262 § 1, 2000)


9.06.060 Post-impoundment hearing procedure.

Hearings requested pursuant to WMC 9.06.050 shall be held by an administrative hearings officer who shall determine whether the impoundment was proper and whether the associated towing and storage and administrative fees charged were proper.

(1) At the hearing, the King County Sheriff’s Office may produce any relevant evidence to show that either the impound or fees, or both, were proper. An abstract of the driver’s driving record is admissible without further evidentiary foundation and is prima facie evidence of the status of the driver’s license, permit or privilege to drive and that the driver was convicted of each offense shown on the abstract. In addition, a certified vehicle registration of the impounded vehicle is admissible without further evidentiary foundation and is prima facie evidence of the identity of the registered owner of the vehicle.

(2) At the hearing, the person who requested the hearing may produce any relevant evidence to show that either the impound or fees or both were not proper.

(3) If the impoundment is found to be proper, the administrative hearings officer shall enter an order so stating. In the event that the costs of impoundment (removal, towing, storage, and administrative fees) have not been paid or any other applicable requirements of WMC 9.06.050 (1) and (2) satisfied, or any period of impoundment has not expired, the administrative hearings officer’s order shall also provide that the impounded vehicle shall be released only after payment of any fines imposed on any underlying traffic violations.

(4) If the impoundment is found to be improper, the administrative hearings officer shall enter an order so stating and order the immediate release of the vehicle. If the costs of impoundment have already been paid, the administrative hearings officer shall enter judgment against the County and in favor of the person who has paid the costs of impoundment in the amount of the costs of the impoundment, which are removal, towing, storage and administrative fees, plus interest at the rate of 12 percent per year from the date that person paid the costs, and the County shall comply with the order. If the costs of impoundment, which are removal, towing and storage, have not been paid, the hearings officer shall enter an order directing the County to pay the costs to the tow truck operator, and the County shall comply with the order. The County and City are not liable for damages if the police officer who ordered the impound relied in good faith and without gross negligence, on the records of the Department of Licensing in ascertaining whether the operator of the vehicle had a suspended or revoked driver’s license.

(5) In the event that the administrative hearings officer finds that the impound was proper, but that the removal, towing or storage fees charged for the impoundment were improper, the administrative hearings officer shall determine the correct fees to be charged. If the costs of impoundment have been paid, the administrative hearings officer shall enter a judgment against the County and in favor of the person who has paid the costs of impoundment for the amount of the overpayment plus interest at the rate of 12 percent per year on the overpayment from the date that person paid the costs, and the County shall comply with the order. The tow truck operator is liable to the County for the amount of the overpayment and interest at the rate of 12 percent per year. The tow truck operator shall make the payment to the County no later than 60 days after the tow truck operator receives notice of the requirement to pay. The County may bring an action in the King County District Court against the tow truck operator to recover the overpayment plus interest at the rate of 12 percent per year.

(6) No determination of facts made at a hearing under this section shall have any collateral estoppel effect on a subsequent criminal prosecution and shall not preclude litigation of those same facts in a subsequent criminal prosecution.

(7) An appeal of the administrative hearings officer’s decision shall be conducted according to, and is subject to the procedures of this section. In accordance with RCW 46.55.240(1)(d), a decision made by an administrative hearings officer may be appealed to the King County District Court for final judgment. The hearing on the appeal under this subsection shall be de novo. A person appealing such a decision must file a request for an appeal in district court within 15 days after the decision of the administrative hearings officer and must pay a filing fee in the same amount required for the filing of a suit in district court. If a person fails to file a request for an appeal within the time specified by this section or does not pay the filing fee, the right to an appeal is waived and the administrative hearings officer’s decision is final. (Ord. 262 § 1, 2000)


9.06.070 Contracts for towing and storage.

The King County Sheriff’s Office, and the City Manager and/or designees are authorized and directed to enter into appropriate agreements and to promulgate rules and regulations to provide for the fair and efficient administration of any contract(s) awarded to registered tow truck operators pursuant to this chapter. Such contracts shall be at no cost to the County and the City and shall provide that the tow truck operator may recover the costs of towing and storage only from the person seeking to redeem the impounded vehicle, or from the proceeds of sale of an unclaimed vehicle pursuant to RCW 46.55.130, and that the County and City shall not be responsible for payment of such costs except upon order of the administrative hearings officer pursuant to WMC 9.06.060. (Ord. 262 § 1, 2000)


9.06.080 Severability.

If any portion of this chapter or its application to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter or the application of the provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. (Ord. 262 § 1, 2000)


Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC

Chapters:

10.03    Traffic Code

10.06    Speed Limits

10.09    Repealed

10.12    Fire Lanes – Vehicle Obstruction and Impoundment

10.16    Truck Routes

10.18    Roadside Memorials


Chapter 10.03 TRAFFIC CODE

Sections:

10.03.010    Model Traffic Ordinance adopted by reference.

10.03.020    Sections of Model Traffic Ordinance not adopted.

10.03.030    State statutes adopted by reference.

10.03.035    Bicycle helmets.

10.03.040    Repealed.

10.03.050    Repealed.

10.03.060    Repealed.

10.03.070    Penalty for violations of RCW 46.61.502 or 46.61.504.

10.03.080    Inattentive driving.

10.03.090    Impoundment and redemption of certain vehicles.

10.03.100    Road restrictions.

10.03.110    Parking.

10.03.120    Avoidance of intersection.

10.03.130    Driving or parking on private property prohibited.

10.03.135    Parking adjacent to residential mailboxes restricted.

10.03.140    Overnight parking prohibited in residential areas.

10.03.150    Repealed.

10.03.160    Repealed.

10.03.170    Disposition of traffic fines and forfeitures.

10.03.180    Adoption includes amendments to the law.

10.03.190    Copies of statutes adopted.

10.03.200    Filing.


10.03.010 Model Traffic Ordinance adopted by reference.

The Washington Model Traffic Ordinance, Chapter 308-330 WAC, referred to as the “Model Traffic Ordinance (MTO),” including any future additions, amendments and repeals thereof, and all other statutes adopted by reference therein, is hereby adopted by this reference as if set forth in full herein, except as provided in WMC 10.03.020, and shall be known as the “Woodinville Traffic Ordinance.” (Ord. 93 § 1, 1994)


10.03.020 Sections of Model Traffic Ordinance not adopted.

The following sections of the MTO are not adopted by reference and are expressly deleted:

(1) 308-330-142, Parking meter.

(2) 308-330-145, Parking meter space.

(3) 308-330-148, Parking meter zone.

(4) 308-330-172, Service parking.

(5) 308-330-250, Police department to administer bicycle license.

(6) 308-330-255, Police department to regulate parking meters.

(7) 308-330-500 through 308-330-540, Regulating bicycles.

(8) 308-330-555, Bicycles riding on sidewalks.

(9) 308-330-600 through 308-330-660, Regulating parking meters.

(10) That portion of WAC 308-330-406 which adopts by reference RCW 46.55.010(1) and (4).

(11) That portion of WAC 308-330-327 which adopts RCW 46.79.010(1) and (2).

(12) That portion of WAC 308-330-330 which adopts RCW 46.80.010(1). (Ord. 387 § 2, 2005; Ord. 93 § 2, 1994)


10.03.030 State statutes adopted by reference.

The following sections of the Revised Code of Washington (RCW), including any future additions to, amendments and repeals thereof, are hereby adopted by reference:

(1) RCW 46.01.230 and 46.12.160 and the Laws of 1994, Chapter 262, Sections 1, 5.

(2) RCW 46.20.710, 46.20.720, 46.20.730, 46.20.740, 46.55.113, 46.61.5151, 46.61.5152 and the Laws of 1994, Chapter 275, Sections 1, 14, 10, 21, 22, 23, 24, 32, 4 – 9, 39, 40.

(3) RCW 46.16.381 and the Laws of 1994, Chapter 194, Sections 1, 6.

(4) RCW 46.12.270 and the Laws of 1994, Chapter 139, Sections 2, 1.

(5) The Laws of 1994, Chapter 141, Section 1.

(6) RCW 46.04.071, defines bicycle.

(7) RCW 46.08.190, jurisdiction of judges of district, municipal and superior court.

(8) RCW 46.09.050, vehicles exempted from ORV user permits.

(9) RCW 46.09.070(4), application for ORV user permit.

(10) RCW 46.12.270, penalties for violation of RCW 46.12.250, 46.12.260 or 46.12.410.

(11) RCW 46.16.065, small trailer license fee.

(12) RCW 46.16.070, license fees on trucks, buses based on gross weight.

(13) RCW 46.16.080, fixed load machines.

(14) RCW 46.16.090, gross weight fees on farm vehicles – Penalty.

(15) RCW 46.16.160, vehicle trip permits.

(16) RCW 46.16.350, license plates for amateur radio operators.

(17) RCW 46.16.585, personalized license plate.

(18) RCW 46.20.055, instruction permits and temporary licenses.

(19) RCW 46.20.205, change of address or name – duty to notify department.

(20) RCW 46.20.720, ignition interlocks – Drivers convicted of alcohol offenses.

(21) RCW 46.20.730, ignition interlocks – definitions.

(22) RCW 46.29.610, surrender of license –penalty.

(23) RCW 46.32.050, motor vehicle prohibited practices – penalty.

(24) RCW 46.44.080, local regulations – state highway regulations.

(25) RCW 46.52.083, confidentiality of reports.

(26) RCW 46.61.165, reservation of portion of highway for use by public transportation vehicles.

(27) RCW 46.61.508, liability of medical person withdrawing blood.

(28) RCW 46.70.090, dealers and manufacturer license plates.

(29) RCW 46.70.140, handling “hot” vehicles – unreported motor “switches” – unauthorized use of dealer plates – penalty.

(30) RCW 46.70.170, dealer licenses – unfair practices – penalty for violation.

(31) RCW 46.80.020, license required – penalty.

(32) The Laws of 1995, Chapter 332, Section 2, codified at RCW 46.61.503.

(33) RCW 46.19.050(2), (3), (4), and (6), special parking privileges for persons with disabilities. (Ord. 663 § 2, 2018; Ord. 146 § 4, 1996; Ord. 93 § 3, 1994)


10.03.035 Bicycle helmets.

The following provisions of the King County Board of Health Code, including all future amendments, additions or deletions, are adopted by reference:

KBHC

Chapter 9.07, Definitions

Chapter 9.10, General Requirements Regarding Bicycle Helmets

Chapter 9.15, Enforcement

(Ord. 663 § 9, 2018)


10.03.040 Driving while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drug – What constitutes.

Repealed by Ord. 387. (Ord. 146 § 1, 1996; Ord. 93 § 4, 1994)


10.03.050 Actual physical control of motor vehicle while under influence of intoxicating liquor or drug – What constitutes – Defenses.

Repealed by Ord. 387. (Ord. 146 § 1, 1996; Ord. 93 § 5, 1994)


10.03.060 Persons under influence of intoxicating liquor or drug – Evidence – Tests – Information concerning tests.

Repealed by Ord. 387. (Ord. 146 § 2, 1996; Ord. 93 § 6, 1994)


10.03.070 Penalty for violations of RCW 46.61.502 or 46.61.504.

RCW 46.61.5055 and 46.61.5056, including any future additions, amendments and repeals thereof, are hereby specifically adopted as penalties for violating RCW 46.61.502 or 46.61.504, as adopted by WAC 308-330-425 and WMC 10.03.010. (Ord. 387 § 4, 2005; Ord. 146 § 3, 1996; Ord. 93 § 7, 1994)


10.03.080 Inattentive driving.

It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle within the City in an inattentive manner. For the purposes of this section, “inattentive manner” means the operation of a motor vehicle in a manner which evidences a lack of the degree of attentiveness required to safely operate the vehicle under the prevailing conditions, including but not limited to the nature and condition of the roadway, presence of other traffic, presence of other pedestrians, and weather conditions. The offense of operating a motor vehicle in an inattentive manner shall be considered an infraction, punishable by a fine of the amount set forth in IRLJ 6.2(b) as incorporated by reference herein, including any future amendments thereto, and a lesser offense than, but included in, the offense of operating a motor vehicle in a negligent manner. (Ord. 663 § 3, 2018; Ord. 93 § 8, 1994)


10.03.090 Impoundment and redemption of certain vehicles.

Chapter 46.08 KCC, including any future additions to, and amendments and repeals thereof, is hereby adopted by reference. (Ord. 93 § 11, 1994)


10.03.100 Road restrictions.

The Traffic Engineer can declare an emergency and thus invoke road restrictions, deemed necessary by road and/or weather conditions, which would or would be likely to damage streets, roads, alleys, or highways, if emergency road limits, speed limits, and/or vehicle restrictions were not immediately placed upon such roadway, streets, alleys, or highways. (Ord. 93 § 15, 1994)


10.03.110 Parking.

The Traffic Engineer shall have full authority to adopt administrative orders enacting parking restrictions on City streets which are in the best interests of the City and the public health, safety and welfare. Any and all such parking restrictions are hereby adopted by this reference and made a part hereof as if set forth fully herein. No such administrative orders shall become effective until posted as provided by Chapter 2.31 WMC, Amendment of Administrative Rules. Any violation of this section shall be an infraction punishable by a fine of $26.00.

On-street parking shall be prohibited at the following locations:

(1) NE 194th Street. Between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, except holidays; on the north and south sides: from 131st Avenue NE to 164 feet east of 131st Avenue NE;

(2) NE 195th Street.

(a) On the north side: from 1,240 feet west of 136th Avenue NE to 136th Avenue NE;

(b) On the south side: from 641 feet west of 136th Avenue NE to 136th Avenue NE;

(c) Between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, except holidays; on the south side: from 130th Place NE to 433 feet east of 131st Avenue NE;

(3) NE 196th Place. Between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, except holidays; on the north and south sides: from 130th Place NE to 131st Place NE;

(4) NE 197th Place.

(a) Between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m.;

(b) On the north and south sides: from 130th Avenue NE to 131st Place NE;

(5) NE 200th Street.

(a) Two-hour limit for vehicles and/or trailers in excess of five tons;

(b) On the north and south sides: from the Woodinville-Snohomish Road to 144th Avenue NE;

(6) 130th Place NE. Between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, except holidays; on the east and west sides: from NE 196th Place to NE 197th Place;

(7) 131st Avenue NE. Between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, except holidays; on the east and west sides: from NE 193rd Place to NE 195th Street;

(8) 131st Place NE. Between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, except holidays; on the east and west sides: from NE 196th Place to 245 feet north of NE 197th Place;

(9) Repealed by Ord. 460;

(10) 136th Avenue NE. 

(a) On the east side: from NE 195th Street to 1,500 feet north of NE 195th Street;

(b) On the west side: 155 feet north of and 130 feet south of the east driveway entrance to Woodinville High School;

(11) 144th Avenue NE. 

(a) On the east and west sides: from 350 feet south of NE 200th Street to NE 200th Street;

(b) On the east side: from 550 feet north to 600 feet north of NE North Woodinville Way;

(c) Two-hour limit for vehicles and/or trailers in excess of five tons;

(d) On the east and west sides: from NE North Woodinville Way to 350 feet south of NE 200th Street;

(12) 168th Avenue NE. On the west side: from 1,060 feet south of NE 195th Street to NE 195th Street;

(13) Woodinville-Snohomish Road (139th Avenue NE).

(a) On the east side: from NE 195th Street to NE 200th Street;

(b) On the west side: from 360 feet north of to 485 feet north of NE 195th Street;

(14) NE 198th Court (Cul-de-Sac). On the north, west, and south sides all lying west of 131st Place NE;

(15) 139th Avenue NE. On the east side from NE 175th Street to 438 feet south of NE 175th Street;

(16) Kingswood Division. All streets within the division shall have no parking allowed on one side of each street section that is less than 36 feet curb to curb road width;

(17) SR 202 (Woodinville-Redmond Road). Both sides, from SR 522 to the south City limits;

(18) NE 143rd Street/137th Avenue NE/NE 145th Street. Both sides, from 132nd Avenue NE to SR 202 (Woodinville-Redmond Road);

(19) 124th Avenue NE, both sides, from NE 171st Place to NE 173rd Place;

(20) NE 173rd Place, both sides, from 124th Avenue NE to 127th Place NE;

(21) 127th Place NE, both sides, from NE 173rd Place to SR 202 (Woodinville-Redmond Road);

(22) Little Bear Creek Place.

(a) On the south side: at all times;

(b) On the north side: between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. on weekdays on which Woodinville High School is in session; 

(23) NE 193rd Place, both sides, from 131st Avenue NE to 133rd Place NE. Between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, except holidays;

(24) 133rd Place NE, both sides, from NE 193rd Place to NE 192nd Street. Between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, except holidays. (Ord. 663 § 4, 2018; Ord. 667 § 1, 2018; Ord. 631 § 1, 2016; Ord. 627 § 1, 2016; Ord. 583 § 1, 2014; Ord. 460 § 1, 2008; Ord. 297 § 1, 2001; Ord. 162 § 1, 1996; Ord. 95 § 2, 1995; Ord. 93 § 17, 1994)


10.03.120 Avoidance of intersection.

It is unlawful for any person operating a motor vehicle on the highways of the City to turn such vehicle either to the right or to the left upon approaching or leaving intersections and to proceed across any private property for the purpose of avoiding the intersection or any traffic control device controlling the intersection, unless so directed by lawful authority. The offense of avoidance of an intersection shall be considered an infraction, punishable by a fine of the amount set forth in IRLJ 6.2(b) as incorporated by reference herein, including any future amendments thereto. (Ord. 663 § 5, 2018; Ord. 93 § 18, 1994)


10.03.130 Driving or parking on private property prohibited.

No person shall drive, park or leave any vehicle upon the private property of another without his written consent and the owner and/or operator of any vehicle including two-wheeled vehicles, shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor in the event of violation of this section and inability to produce written verification thereof. This provision shall not apply to owners and/or operators of any vehicle who may utilize the driveway portion of another person’s property for convenience purposes such as turning said motor vehicle around. Where business premises provide off-street parking for its patrons or customers the owners or operator of said premises shall be deemed to have consented to the temporary parking of motor vehicles upon said premises in areas designated for said parking. (Ord. 93 § 19, 1994)


10.03.135 Parking adjacent to residential mailboxes restricted.

(1) It is unlawful to park directly adjacent to a curbside and within six feet of a clearly visible residential mailbox between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on any day scheduled for mail delivery by the United States Postal Service.

(2) Any violation of this section shall be an infraction punishable by a fine of not more than $50.00. (Ord. 388 § 1, 2005)


10.03.140 Overnight parking prohibited in residential areas.

(1) It is unlawful to park, or otherwise leave, overnight, between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., on any street or highway in the City of Woodinville within or abutting an area classified as residential (R-1 through R-48 zoning codes) by the official zoning ordinance, the following types of trailers and/or vehicles:

(a) All types of trailers exceeding 80 inches in width designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle except recreation trailers;

(b) Buses and trucks used for business purposes in whole or in part, excluding pickup or panel trucks of less than one-ton rated capacity.

(2) It is not necessary that restricted parking or other traffic signs be erected for the purpose of enforcing this section.

(3) Any violation of this section shall be an infraction with a fine of $36.00. (Ord. 663 § 6, 2018; Ord. 93 § 20, 1994)


10.03.150 Prohibition of trucks exceeding 26,000 pounds gross vehicle weight rated. 

Repealed by Ord. 443. (Ord. 130 § 1, 1995; Ord. 95 § 3, 1995; Ord. 93 § 21, 1994)


10.03.160 Penalties and procedure on arrest – General penalty.

Repealed by Ord. 663. (Ord. 95 § 3, 1995; Ord. 93 § 22, 1994)


10.03.170 Disposition of traffic fines and forfeitures.

The City’s portion of any fines and forfeitures collected upon conviction or upon the forfeiture of any bail of any person charged with a violation of any provisions of this title shall be paid into the general fund of the City. (Ord. 95 § 3, 1995; Ord. 93 § 23, 1994)


10.03.180 Adoption includes amendments to the law.

Whenever a reference is made in this code to any statute or section of the Washington Administrative Code and the Revised Code of Washington, or any portion thereof, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, or hereafter made. (Ord. 95 § 3, 1995; Ord. 93 § 24, 1994)


10.03.190 Copies of statutes adopted.

All State statutes comprising the Model Traffic Ordinance, Chapter 308-330 WAC, as adopted and modified by this chapter is adopted by this chapter, and all State statutes incorporated in the City’s traffic ordinance and by this chapter are attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter as Exhibit A and incorporated herein by this reference as if set forth in full. The statutes so attached are in the form in which they were adopted by this chapter. (Ord. 95 § 3, 1995; Ord. 93 § 27, 1994)


10.03.200 Filing.

Incident to the adoption of the MTO by reference, by this chapter, one copy of the text of the adopted MTO and of other adopted statutes shall be filed as required by RCW 35A.12.140 for use and examination by the public. The City Clerk shall authenticate the statutes adopted by reference herein by signing the adopting ordinance and recording the adopting ordinance and statutes adopted by reference in full in the official ordinance book of the City of Woodinville. (Ord. 95 § 3, 1995; Ord. 93 § 28, 1994)


Chapter 10.06 SPEED LIMITS

Sections:

10.06.010    State speed laws – Exceptions.

10.06.020    Increasing State speed limit.

10.06.030    Decreasing State speed limit.

10.06.040    Schedule.

10.06.050    Speed limit 35 MPH.

10.06.060    Speed limit 40 MPH.

10.06.070    Repealed.

10.06.080    Entry terminus.


10.06.010 State speed laws – Exceptions.

The State traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles at 25 MPH shall be applicable upon all streets within the City, except that the legislative authority of the City, as authorized by State law, may declare and determine by order, rule or regulation, properly adopted, that certain increased or decreased speed regulations shall be applicable upon specified streets or in certain areas, in which event it is unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle at a speed in excess of the speed so established when proper signs are in place giving notice thereof. (Ord. 93 § 10, 1994; Ord. 21 § 1, 1993)


10.06.020 Increasing State speed limit.

Whenever conditions are found to exist upon an arterial street or highway which warrant an increase in the speed permitted by State law, the legislative authority of this City, subject to the approval of the State Highway Commission in cases involving State highways, shall determine and declare a reasonable and safe maximum speed limit for such arterial street or highway, or portion thereof, not to exceed 55 miles per hour. (Ord. 93 § 10(A), 1994; Ord. 21 § 2, 1993)


10.06.030 Decreasing State speed limit.

Whenever it is deemed inadvisable for vehicles to operate at the maximum speed allowed by State law at 25 MPH on any portion of a street or public highway on account of a sharp curvation, highway construction or repairs, excessive traffic, any dangerous condition, or other temporary or permanent cause, the legislative authority of the City, subject to the approval of the State Highway Commission in cases involving State highways, shall determine and fix a lower maximum speed or otherwise regulate a lesser speed; provided, that in no case shall the maximum speed be reduced to less than 20 miles per hour. (Ord. 93 § 10(B), 1994; Ord. 21 § 3, 1993)


10.06.040 Schedule.

The maximum speed limits set forth in the following schedule of speed limits are hereby established at the reasonable and safe maximum speed limits to be effective at all times upon the streets and highways designated in the schedule.

The City Manager or the Manager’s designee shall cause appropriate signs to be erected on such streets and highways, giving notice of the speed limits, as provided in the previous section. (Ord. 21 § 4, 1993)


10.06.050 Speed limit 35 MPH.

A speed limit of 35 miles per hour is hereby established for motor vehicle traffic on the following streets, roadways, or highways and no person shall operate a motor vehicle upon said streets, roads, or highways in excess of 35 miles per hour: 

(1) NE Woodinville-Duvall Rd. between 350 feet north of NE 179th Street and the east City limits. 

(2) 156th Ave. NE between 900 feet north of NE Woodinville-Duvall Rd. and the north City limits. 

(3) Woodinville-Snohomish Rd. between 140th Ave. NE and the north City limits. 

(4) 130th Ave. NE, 130th Pl. NE, and 132nd Ave. NE between SR 522 and the north City limits. 

(5) NE 171st Street, 146th Pl. NE, and NE 173rd Street between 140th Ave. NE and NE 172nd Street (150th Ave. NE). 

(6) Woodinville Dr. between 127th Pl. NE and the west City limits. 

(7) 124th Ave. NE between the south City limits and 730 feet north of NE 169th Street. 

(8) NE 143rd Pl., 137th Pl. NE and NE 145th Street between 132nd Ave. NE and SR 202. 

(9) NE 190th Street between Woodinville-Snohomish Road and NE North Woodinville Way. 

(10) NE 145th Street between 148th Ave. NE (SR 202) and the east City limits. 

(11) 131st Ave. NE and NE 171st Street between NE 175th Street (SR 202) and 140th Ave. NE. 

(12) Woodinville-Redmond Road (SR 202) from Milepost 0.70 (375 +/- feet south of 128th Pl. NE) to SR 522.

(13) NE 177th Pl. and 139th Ave. NE between 131st Ave. NE (SR 202) and the Woodinville-Snohomish Rd.

(14) Woodinville-Redmond Road (SR 202) between the south City limits (MP 2.94/NE 143rd Street) and Milepost 2.07 (600 feet +/- north of 145th/SR 202 intersection). (Ord. 691 § 1, 2020; Ord. 461 § 1, 2008; Ord. 95 § 1, 1995; Ord. 93 § 16(A), 1994)


10.06.060 Speed limit 40 MPH.

A speed limit of 40 miles per hour is hereby established for motor vehicle traffic upon the following streets, roadways, and highways and no person shall operate a motor vehicle upon said streets, roads, or highways in excess of 40 miles per hour: 

(1) NE 195th Street and NE North Woodinville Way between SR 522 and NE Woodinville-Duvall Rd.

(2) 148th Ave. NE between NE 145th Street (SR 202) and NE 147th Pl.

(3) Woodinville-Redmond Road (SR 202) between Milepost 2.07 (600 +/- feet north of 145th/SR 202 intersection) and Milepost 0.70 (375 +/- feet south of 128th Pl. NE). (Ord. 691 § 2, 2020; Ord. 95 § 1, 1995; Ord. 93 § 16(B), 1994)


10.06.070 Speed limit 45 MPH.

Repealed by Ord. 691. (Ord. 95 § 1, 1995; Ord. 93 § 16(C), 1994)


10.06.080 Entry terminus.

The entry terminus of each street, roadway, or highway with a speed limit in excess of 25 miles per hour shall be posted with a sign clearly indicating the established legal speed limit. Advisory signs, indicating a reduced speed zone ahead, near the exit terminus of said street, roadway, or highway shall suffice as regulatory signs. Intersecting streets may be posted, where deemed advisable by the Traffic Engineer, with a sign indicating the legal speed limit on the intersecting streets, roadways, and highways. Intersections and curves may be posted with reduced speed limits where deemed advisable by the Traffic Engineer. 

Except as provided above, no other signs or markings relating to speed shall be required on the affected streets, roadways, and highways, for the purposes of conformance and enforcement. (Ord. 95 § 1, 1995; Ord. 93 § 16(D), 1994)


Chapter 10.09 ABANDONED VEHICLES

(Repealed by Ord. 367)


Chapter 10.12 FIRE LANES – VEHICLE OBSTRUCTION AND IMPOUNDMENT

Sections:

10.12.010    Establishment of fire lanes.

10.12.020    Definition of fire lanes.

10.12.030    Marking of fire lanes.

10.12.040    Obstruction of fire lanes prohibited.

10.12.050    Alternate materials and methods.

10.12.060    Exemption to sign requirements/ existing fire lane signs and markings.

10.12.070    Maintenance.

10.12.080    Repealed.

10.12.090    Property owner responsibility.

10.12.100    Violation – Infraction – Penalty.

10.12.110    Impoundment.


10.12.010 Establishment of fire lanes.

Fire lanes in conformance with this code shall be established by the Building Official for the City, or his or her duly authorized representative, and in conjunction with the Fire Code Official. These lanes shall be referred to as “designated fire lanes” in this title. (Ord. 665 § 1, 2018; Ord. 93 § 14, 1994)


10.12.020 Definition of fire lanes.

The area within any public right-of-way, easement or private property designated for fire trucks and other fire fighting or emergency equipment to use, travel upon and/or park. (Ord. 93 § 14(A), 1994)


10.12.030 Marking of fire lanes.

(1) All designated fire lanes to be marked from this date forward shall be clearly marked in one of the following manners described in subsection (1)(a) of this section and one of the manners described in subsection (1)(b) of this section:

(a) Painted Curb or Road Surface.

(i) Vertical curbs six inches in height shall be painted yellow on the top and side, extending the length of the designated fire lane; or

(ii) Rolled curbs or surfaces without curbs shall have a yellow six-inch-wide stripe painted, extending the length of the designated fire lane.

(b) Marking Adjacent to Painted Curb or Road Surface, or Signage.

(i) The pavement adjacent to the painted curb or road surface required by subsection (1)(a) of this section shall be marked with block lettering a minimum of 18 inches in height and with a three-inch brush stroke reading: “NO PARKING – FIRE LANE.” Lettering shall be yellow and spaced at no more than 50-foot intervals; or

(ii) Fire lane signs which shall be as follows:

(A) Comply with Section D103.6, Signs, of Appendix D of the International Fire Code, as adopted at WMC 15.15.010;

(B) Spaced no more than 50 feet apart, or up to 75 feet apart upon individual approval by the Fire Code Official, and posted on or immediately next to the curb or side of the road;

(C) Placed at a height that conforms with the City of Woodinville’s Transportation and Infrastructure Standards and Specifications, as they may be adopted or amended from time to time;

(D) Signs may be placed on a building when approved by the Fire Code Official;

(E) When posts are required for signs, they shall be a minimum of two-inch galvanized steel; and

(F) Signs are to be placed so they face the direction of vehicular travel. (Ord. 665 § 2, 2018; Ord. 468 § 1, 2008; Ord. 93 § 14(B), 1994)


10.12.040 Obstruction of fire lanes prohibited.

The obstruction of a designated fire lane by a parked vehicle or any other object is prohibited and shall constitute a traffic and fire hazard as defined in State law and the Uniform Fire Code and be an immediate hazard to life and property. (Ord. 93 § 14(C), 1994)


10.12.050 Alternate materials and methods.

The Building Official, in coordination with the Fire Code Official, may modify any of the provisions herein, where practical difficulties may exist. The particulars of a modification shall be decided by the Building Official and shall be entered into the records of the Fire Department, local Police Agency and the Building Department. (Ord. 665 § 3, 2018; Ord. 93 § 14(D), 1994)


10.12.060 Exemption to sign requirements/ existing fire lane signs and markings.

(1) Previously existing signs posted prior to this date, will be allowed to remain until there is a need for replacement. When replaced, the new sign must then meet the requirements as set forth in this chapter.

(2) Previously existing markings will be allowed to remain until there is a need for repainting. When repainted, the new markings must then meet the requirements as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 93 § 14(E), 1994)


10.12.070 Maintenance.

Fire lane markings shall be maintained at the expense of the property owner(s) as often as is deemed necessary to clearly identify the designated area as a fire lane. (Ord. 93 § 14(F), 1994)


10.12.080 Towing notification.

Repealed by Ord. 665. (Ord. 93 § 14(G), 1994)


10.12.090 Property owner responsibility.

The owner, manager, or person in charge of any property upon which designated fire lanes have been established, shall be responsible for, and not allow, vehicles or other objects to park in such fire lanes. (Ord. 93 § 14(H), 1994)


10.12.100 Violation – Infraction – Penalty.

(1) Any person who fails to mark or maintain the marking of a designated fire lane as prescribed in this title is guilty of an infraction, punishable by a fine of the amount set forth in IRLJ 6.2(b) as incorporated by reference herein, including any future amendments.

(2) Any person who parks a vehicle in or obstructs a designated fire lane in violation of this chapter is guilty of an infraction, punishable by a fine of $213.00.

(3) Any owner, manager, or person in charge of any property upon which designated fire lanes have been established who allows vehicles or other objects to park in such fire lanes in violation of this chapter is guilty of an infraction, punishable by a fine of $213.00. (Ord. 663 § 8, 2018; Ord. 93 § 14(I), 1994)


10.12.110 Impoundment.

Any vehicle or object obstructing a designated fire lane is hereby declared a traffic and fire hazard and may be immediately impounded pursuant to the applicable State law, and Uniform Fire Code, without prior notification to its owner. Also, pursuant to State law, the owner may be held responsible for all impound fees. (Ord. 93 § 14(J), 1994)


Chapter 10.16 TRUCK ROUTES

Sections:

10.16.010    Purpose.

10.16.020    Definitions.

10.16.030    Operation limited to designated truck routes.

10.16.040    Operation within residential areas prohibited.

10.16.050    Designated truck routes.

10.16.060    Truck route map.

10.16.070    Exceptions.

10.16.080    Enforcement – Penalty.


10.16.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and restrict by classification vehicular traffic upon certain City streets in order to prevent infrastructure damage, promote safe and efficient traffic flows, and preserve the integrity and safety of the City’s residential neighborhoods. (Ord. 443 § 2, 2007)


10.16.020 Definitions.

The terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings unless otherwise specifically provided:

(1) “City” means the City of Woodinville.

(2) “Arterial” means that term as now or hereafter designated by the City’s arterial functional classification system.

(3) “Designated truck route” means those public roadways within the City limits that have been designated for usage by motor trucks and other heavy or large vehicles pursuant to this chapter.

(4) “Destination point” means the fixed location that the operator of a vehicle must directly access in order to load or unload goods, passengers or other cargo, or to perform services.

(5) “Parking” means that term as defined in RCW 46.04.381, as now or hereafter amended.

(6) “Hazardous cargo” means “hazardous materials,” as defined in RCW 70.136.020(1), as now or hereafter amended.

(7) “Residential area” means those areas of the City which constitute “residential districts” as defined in RCW 46.04.470, as now or hereafter amended.

(8) “Semitrailer” means that term as defined in RCW 46.04.530, as now or hereafter amended.

(9) “Trailer” means that term as defined in RCW 46.04.620, as now or hereafter amended.

(10) “Motor truck” means that term as defined in RCW 46.04.310, as now or hereafter amended.

(11) “Tractor” means that term as defined in RCW 46.04.650, as now or hereafter amended.

(12) “Truck tractor” means that term as defined in RCW 46.04.655, as now or hereafter amended.

(13) “Vehicle” means that term as defined in RCW 46.04.670, as now or hereafter amended. (Ord. 443 § 2, 2007)


10.16.030 Operation limited to designated truck routes.

Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, the operation of the following vehicles shall only occur upon and within (1) the designated truck routes established pursuant to this chapter, and (2) the State highway system within which such operation is unrestricted:

(1) Vehicles Restricted by Weight, Width and/or Length. Any motor truck, truck tractor, motor truck and trailer combination, or truck tractor and semitrailer combination, which exceeds eight feet in width, 26 feet in total length, or 26,000 pounds gross weight, including load.

(2) Vehicles Restricted by Cargo or Contents.

(a) Any vehicle transporting radioactive material; or

(b) Any vehicle transporting hazardous cargo. (Ord. 443 § 2, 2007)


10.16.040 Operation within residential areas prohibited.

Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, it is unlawful to operate any vehicle listed in WMC 10.16.030 within any residential area of the City. (Ord. 443 § 2, 2007)


10.16.050 Designated truck routes.

Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, the operation within the City limits of any vehicle listed in WMC 10.16.030 shall be restricted to the confines of (1) the State highway system, and (2) the following designated truck routes:

Route 1. Woodinville-Snohomish Road between 140th Avenue and north City limit.

Route 2. 140th Avenue NE between south City limits and Woodinville-Snohomish Road.

Route 3. NE 195th Street/NE North Woodinville Way between NE Woodinville-Duvall Road and SR 522.

Route 4. Woodinville-Duvall Road between the east City limits and NE Woodinville-Duvall Road.

Route 5. NE 190th Street between NE North Woodinville Way and Woodinville-Snohomish Road.

Route 6. NE Woodinville-Duvall Road between NE North Woodinville Way and 140th Avenue NE.

Route 7. Little Bear Creek Parkway between NE 190th Street and SR 202.

Route 8. SR 202 between SR 522 and south City limit.

Route 9. NE 171st Street/131st Avenue NE between 140th Avenue NE and NE 175th Street.

Route 10. Woodinville Drive (aka Brickyard Road) between SR 202 and westerly City limit.

Route 11. 124th Avenue NE between south City limit to NE 160th Street. (Ord. 443 § 2, 2007)


10.16.060 Truck route map.

A map of the City’s designated truck routes is attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter as Exhibit A and is hereby incorporated herein by this reference as if set forth in full. (Ord. 443 § 2, 2007)


10.16.070 Exceptions.

The prohibitions set forth in this chapter shall not apply to the following:

(1) The operation of a vehicle upon any street where directly and unavoidably necessary in order to access or depart from a destination point. When a destination point is not located immediately adjacent to a State highway route or a designated truck route, the vehicle operator shall access and/or depart from the destination point using the shortest and most direct City arterial route to and from the nearest State highway route or designated truck route.

(2) The operation of emergency and law enforcement vehicles.

(3) The operation of any vehicle owned or operated by the City, a public utility or any contractor or materialman, while directly engaged in the repair, maintenance or construction of streets, street improvements, or street utilities within the City.

(4) The operation of any vehicle within and pursuant to any officially established temporary detour route.

(5) The operation of any vehicle directly engaged in the disposal, collection and/or transport of waste, including but not limited to recyclable material, as a part of a regularly scheduled curbside or on-site disposal or collection service within the Woodinville City limits; provided, that this exception shall not apply to hazardous cargo or radioactive materials.

(6) The operation of passenger buses, including but not limited to mass transit vehicles and school buses.

(7) The operation of vehicles directly engaged in transporting perishable commodities or commodities necessary for the health and welfare of local residents. (Ord. 454 § 2, 2008; Ord. 443 § 2, 2007)


10.16.080 Enforcement – Penalty.

Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be found to have committed a traffic infraction and shall be subject to monetary penalties pursuant to the penalty schedule set forth in Chapter 46.44 RCW and Section 6.2 of Infraction Rules for Courts of Limited Jurisdiction, including any future amendments thereto. In addition to any penalty for violating the provisions of this chapter, violators shall also be liable in a civil action instituted in the name of the City for any damage caused to City streets, infrastructure or other public property resulting from such violation. (Ord. 443 § 2, 2007)


Chapter 10.18 ROADSIDE MEMORIALS

Sections:

10.18.010    Purpose.

10.18.020    Definitions.

10.18.030    Long-term memorial application procedure.

10.18.040    City review of long-term memorial sign application.

10.18.050    Location, placement, and ownership of long-term memorial signs.

10.18.060    Informal short-term memorials and anniversary memorials.

10.18.070    Wording on long-term memorial signs.

10.18.080    Name plaque limit on a single memorial sign installation.

10.18.090    Time allowed for memorial signs in City rights-of-way.

10.18.100    Application filing deadlines.

10.18.110    Multiple memorial sign applications.


10.18.010 Purpose.

The purpose of the memorial sign program is to:

(1) Provide friends and relatives of persons fatally injured in accidents with the opportunity to memorialize them by sponsoring a memorial sign to be erected near the scene of the accident in a safe and consistent manner; and

(2) Combat impaired driving and increase the public’s awareness of the need to drive safely and responsibly. (Ord. 500 § 1, 2010)


10.18.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter:

The “deceased” is any person who was fatally injured in an accident involving a vehicle, regardless of fault or intoxication, and for whom an applicant seeks the erection of a memorial sign.

An “immediate family member” means a spouse, child, stepchild, brother, stepbrother, sister, stepsister, mother, stepmother, father, stepfather, grandparent or stepgrandparent of the deceased.

An “intoxicated driver” is a driver who, while under the influence of drugs or alcohol, caused the death of the deceased, including his or her own death. (Ord. 500 § 1, 2010)


10.18.030 Long-term memorial application procedure.

(1) An immediate family member, or another person who submits with written consent of an immediate family member, may apply to sponsor a sign memorializing the deceased.

(2) The applicant must complete and return a memorial sign application on forms furnished by the City. The application must include the following attachments:

(a) A copy of the accident report.

(b) For an accident involving an intoxicated driver:

(i) Court records showing that the intoxicated driver was convicted of second degree murder, gross vehicular manslaughter, vehicular manslaughter under RCW 46.61.520(1)(a), or that the driver could not be prosecuted because of mental incompetence; or

(ii) If the intoxicated driver could not be prosecuted due to his or her death, proof of intoxication from coroner’s records.

(c) In the absence of the documents set forth in subsections (2)(a) and (b) of this section, the City may consider other documents presented by the applicant that the City deems to be equally reliable sources of information in evaluating the application. (Ord. 500 § 1, 2010)


10.18.040 City review of long-term memorial sign application.

Within 30 days after the City receives a correctly completed application submitted pursuant to this chapter, the City shall inspect the proposed site for the memorial sign and shall send a written decision to the applicant as to whether the proposed sign installation is approved at the proposed location or, if the sign cannot be located at the proposed location, the City’s proposed alternative location. Sign applications will only be accepted for right-of-way that is under the City of Woodinville operational authority. (Ord. 500 § 1, 2010)


10.18.050 Location, placement, and ownership of long-term memorial signs.

(1) Once an application has been approved, the applicant must pay the fee set forth in the City of Woodinville fee schedule to cover the cost of administration, fabrication, installation and maintenance of the memorial sign and any name plaque that may be requested.

(2) The City will select, purchase, install, remove, and retain ownership of memorial signs.

(3) Signs will be installed in accordance with applicable City policies and standards for signs. This includes posts, hardware, materials, vertical, longitudinal, and lateral positioning.

(4) The City of Woodinville will not install or maintain a name plaque if there is written opposition from any immediate family member. If written opposition is received from any immediate family member after the name plaque has been installed, the City will remove the name plaque. The application fee for a name plaque that is removed or not installed due to such opposition shall not be refunded to the applicant.

(5) Memorial signs shall be placed only in a City right-of-way, on the right side of the roadway, facing oncoming traffic. Signs will not be installed in the median of any City roadway.

(6) Memorial signs shall be placed in close proximity to where the accident occurred at a location where the City determines it is safe and practical to do so.

(7) Only one sign will be installed per intersection or per 1,000 feet of roadway for each direction of traffic. However, a memorial sign will not be placed in a location where the memorial sign obstructs the visibility of an existing traffic sign, or traffic signal or impairs sight distance below adopted City standards.

(8) The City will not replace the sign should it be vandalized, damaged, or found missing; however, the applicant may apply for a new sign under the requirements of this chapter, including payment of the fee set forth in the City of Woodinville fee schedule. (Ord. 500 § 1, 2010)


10.18.060 Informal short-term memorials and anniversary memorials.

(1) The placement of informal memorials up to three feet in height and up to nine square feet in surface area shall be allowed in the unpaved portion of the right-of-way for up to 30 days after an accident as long as: (a) the memorial does not cause unsafe conditions for passing motorists or for people who are maintaining or visiting the memorial; and (b) the memorial and those visiting and/or maintaining the memorial comply with all other applicable laws.

(2) Within 45 days of the accident, the City Police Department shall make reasonable efforts to contact one or more immediate family members of the deceased to determine whether any particular person is responsible for maintaining the informal memorial and to inform the family about the existence of this chapter, including the requirement that the informal memorial be removed at the end of the 30-day period.

(3) The City may remove memorials prior to the expiration of the 30-day period for failure to comply with applicable laws. If the City determines that a memorial is out of compliance with applicable law, the City Police Department shall make reasonable efforts to contact those responsible for maintaining the memorial to request that the noncompliant aspects of the memorial be corrected.

(4) At the end of the 30-day period, or after seven days of noncompliance, whichever comes first, the City shall remove any remaining items from the memorial site, except for unwrapped biodegradable flowers, and shall keep the items for 30 days to allow the person placing the memorial to retrieve the items. This provision shall not prevent the City from removing a memorial immediately in response to a serious threat to public safety.

(5) The placement of an anniversary memorial shall be allowed in the unpaved portion of the right-of-way for up to seven days after each anniversary of the accident. At the end of the seven-day period, the City shall remove any remaining items from the memorial site, except for unwrapped biodegradable flowers, and shall keep the items for 30 days to allow the person placing the memorial to retrieve the items. This provision shall not prevent the City from removing a memorial immediately in response to a serious threat to public safety.

(6) Items not retrieved during the 30-day holding period shall become the property of the City and may be disposed.

(7) Unattended candles shall not be allowed at memorial sites and may be immediately removed by the City. (Ord. 500 § 1, 2010)


10.18.070 Wording on long-term memorial signs.

(1) A memorial sign for a deceased whose death was caused by an intoxicated driver, including a sign memorializing the intoxicated driver, shall read “PLEASE DON’T DRIVE IMPAIRED.” At the request of an immediate family member, a separate name plaque may be added that reads “IN MEMORY OF (the deceased’s name).”

(2) A memorial sign for a deceased whose death was not caused by an intoxicated driver shall read “PLEASE DRIVE SAFELY.” At the request of an immediate family member, a separate name plaque may be added that reads “IN MEMORY OF (the deceased’s name).” (Ord. 500 § 1, 2010)


10.18.080 Name plaque limit on a single memorial sign installation.

No more than three name plaques may appear below the memorial cautionary sign on a single memorial sign installation. (Ord. 500 § 1, 2010)


10.18.090 Time allowed for memorial signs in City rights-of-way.

Unless it determines that public safety requires removal, the City of Woodinville will allow the sign to remain in the right-of-way for seven years after the accident or until the City determines that the condition of the sign has deteriorated to a point where it is no longer serviceable, whichever occurs first. The City will remove and maintain ownership of the sign unless the sign sponsor requests, in writing, to have ownership of the sign after its removal. (Ord. 500 § 1, 2010)


10.18.100 Application filing deadlines.

A person may file an application under this chapter to memorialize a death in an accident that occurred not more than seven years prior to the application date. (Ord. 500 § 1, 2010)


10.18.110 Multiple memorial sign applications.

(1) Only one sign will be installed per location. Should a sign already exist, an additional name plaque may be added to an existing sign upon City approval. Multiple deceased names may appear on one sign.

(2) If more than one sponsor applies for a memorial sign for a single accident site, the City will consider the multiple applications in the order in which they are received.

(3) The City may approve applications for an additional memorial sign at an existing accident site under the following circumstances:

(a) Additional name plaques can be attached to the existing sign installation; or

(b) A second memorial sign can be installed across the roadway from the first sign installation so that the second sign installation faces the traffic approaching from the opposite direction.

(4) For purposes of this section, “single accident site” means the site of all accidents that occur within 1,000 feet from each other, regardless of when they occur. (Ord. 500 § 1, 2010)


Title 11 (Reserved)


Title 12 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES

Chapters:

12.03    Official Street Map

12.06    Sidewalks

12.09    Street and Construction Standards

12.12    Street Classifications

12.15    Procedure for Assigning Names and Numbers to City Streets

12.18    Street Vacations

12.21    State Highway Access Management Classification System

12.24    Road Standards, Subdivisions, Land Use and Health and Safety Regulations During Transition

12.27    Dedication of Private Streets

12.30    Public Utility and Telecommunications Right-of-Way Use

12.40    Street Debris Removal

12.50    Public Facilities Rules and Regulations


Chapter 12.03 OFFICIAL STREET MAP

Sections:

12.03.010    Official street map adopted.

12.03.020    Effect of official street map.

12.03.030    Changes to official street map.

12.03.050    Repealed.


12.03.010 Official street map adopted.

(1) The official street map dated January 5, 2010, is adopted as shown in Attachment A to the ordinance codified in this section. The Mayor shall sign and the City Clerk attest to the official street map within 10 business days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section. The official street map shall be posted within City Hall.

(2) Changes to the official street map shall be by ordinance, attested to by the Mayor and the City Clerk on the affected map. Dedications may be entered on the map without an ordinance after the City Council has accepted the dedication. In the event a prior map or plan is in conflict with the one adopted subsequent in time, the most recent shall prevail.

(3) The following future streets shall be shown on the official street map:

(a) 135th Avenue Northeast/136th Avenue Northeast; 

(b) Northeast 173rd Street;

(c) Northeast 178th Street/Mill Place.

The exact alignments of these future streets are not established by the adoption of the official street map and will need to be established in the future either by City Council approval of an engineering study, or the City approval of a binding site plan, plat or short plat.

(4) The City still desires to establish a street connecting Northeast 175th Street and the Woodinville-Snohomish Road in the general location of 135th or 136th Avenues Northeast, with a strong preference for completing the intersection of 135th Avenue Northeast and Northeast 175th Street. The City does not establish a specific alignment for 135th or 136th Avenues Northeast on the official street map. However, prior to any building or other development permit being issued to an owner of property within the special study area, as depicted on the official street map, the City shall consider the need for a street in the 135th Avenue or 136th Avenue corridor. The City may require building setbacks to accommodate such street and may require dedications and/or street improvements for such street. At such time as such a street is established, any reciprocal easement, inconsistent or in conflict with such street, may be extinguished or modified.

(5) The alignment of the future grid road, 138th Avenue Northeast (Garden Way) between Northeast 171st Street and Northeast 175th Street, shall be as adopted by the King County Council in Ordinance No. 8144. The right-of-way width of 138th Avenue Northeast shall be 72 feet wide when established as a public street. (Ord. 564 § 1, 2013; Ord. 483 § 1, 2010; Ord. 147 §§ 2 – 5, 1996; Ord. 33 § 1, 1993)


12.03.020 Effect of official street map.

(1) Property Fronting on Street. No permit for a building or other structure requiring a building permit in accordance with the Uniform Building Code, or any underground fuel storage facility shall be issued or allowed to be built within an existing or proposed right-of-way shown on the official street map. Required setbacks in yard or other open space requirement shall be measured from the existing or proposed right-of-way as shown on the official street map.

No site development permit shall be issued or development approved within an existing or proposed right-of-way without the property owner obtaining a right-of-way use permit or entering into an agreement with the City. The agreement may provide for temporary private improvements to the existing or proposed rights-of-way by the property owner. Within terms of said agreement, or when determined by the City for a right-of-way use permit, any improvements that have been installed as permitted by the City, within the existing or proposed rights-of-way, shall be removed by the property owner at their expense. At such time when it has been determined by the City that the existing or proposed right-of-way is needed, said property owner shall, at their expense, modify their access to the right-of-way to conform to the City’s then current standards.

(2) Property Not on Street. No building or other development permit shall be issued to owners of property not fronting on an improved street shown on the official street map unless the property fronts on an access easement approved by the City through the subdivision process.

(3) Dedication and Construction of Improvements. Applicants for a subdivision, a building permit, or other form of development which may generate transportation system impacts shall perform a Transportation Impact Analysis in accordance with the City’s adopted Transportation Impact Analysis Guidelines. Impacts identified by the Transportation Impact Analysis shall be mitigated by the dedication of rights-of-way to the City, and/or construction of required street/highway and/or pedestrian/bicycle path improvements including mitigation for impacted State highways. Such dedication of rights-of-way and construction of improvements shall be required if the City determines that the dedication and improvements are related to the proposed development. The Transportation Impact Analysis identified impacts shall be in addition to other mitigation measures which may be required as a result of the SEPA process, or other City review procedures. Nothing herewith prohibits or excludes other properties or the City from participating, by means determined appropriate by the City, with the applicant in the expense of rights-of-way dedication or construction of improvements. (Ord. 147 §§ 6, 7, 1996; Ord. 33 § 2, 1993)


12.03.030 Changes to official street map.

(1) The City Manager or designee is authorized to make adjustments to the Official Street Map to reflect minor roadway alignments or to allow substitution of sidewalks and landscaping on private property. Such adjustments shall be reflected on the Official Street Map.

(2) Other than as set forth above, changes to the official street map shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission and approved by the City Council. (Ord. 33 § 3, 1993)


12.03.050 Flexibility in Downtown Street and Pathway Design Standards.

Repealed by Ord. 564. (Ord. 147 § 8, 1996)


Chapter 12.06 SIDEWALKS

Sections:

12.06.010    Definitions.

12.06.020    Abutting property owner to maintain sidewalk in safe condition.

12.06.030    Expense of maintenance and repair to be borne by abutting property and owner thereof.

12.06.040    Procedure to order construction or repair.


12.06.010 Definitions.

Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the words used in this chapter shall have the meaning given in this section:

(1) “Abutting property” includes all property having a frontage upon the margin of any street or other public place.

(2) “Sidewalk” includes any structure or form of street improvement in the space between the street margin and the roadway, known as the sidewalk area. (Ord. 39 § 1, 1993)


12.06.020 Abutting property owner to maintain sidewalk in safe condition.

It shall be the responsibility of the owner of property abutting upon a public sidewalk to maintain the sidewalk at all times in a safe condition, free of any and all obstructions or defects, including but not limited to ice and snow. (Ord. 39 § 2, 1993)


12.06.030 Expense of maintenance and repair to be borne by abutting property and owner thereof.

The burden and expense of constructing, maintaining and repairing sidewalks along the side of any street or other public place shall devolve upon and be borne by the property directly abutting thereon. In case any injury or damage to any person shall be caused by the defective condition of any sidewalk, or ice or snow thereon, or by the lack of proper guards or railings on or along the property abutting on any public way, the abutting property where the injury or damage occurs and the owner or owners thereof shall be liable to the City for all damage, injuries, costs and disbursements which it may be required to pay to the person injured or damaged. (Ord. 39 § 3, 1993)


12.06.040 Procedure to order construction or repair.

(1) If the judgment of the City Manager, public convenience or safety requires that a sidewalk be constructed or repaired along either side of any street, such fact shall be reported to the City Council.

(2) If upon receiving a report from the proper officer, the City Council deems the construction of the proposed sidewalk or repair of such sidewalk necessary or convenient for the public health, safety or welfare, the City Council may then order such work to be done pursuant to the procedures established therefor in Chapter 35.68 or 35.70 RCW relating to local improvement districts for sidewalks, curbs and gutters. The cost of such proposed sidewalk construction or sidewalk repair shall be borne by the abutting property or the owners thereof, to the extent deemed reasonable and appropriate by the City Council in accordance with the procedure then to be followed pursuant to Chapter 35.68 or 35.70 RCW. (Ord. 39 § 4, 1993)


Chapter 12.09 STREET AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS

Sections:

12.09.010    Standards adopted.

12.09.020    Repealed.


12.09.010 Standards adopted.

The City of Woodinville hereby adopts the “City of Woodinville Transportation Infrastructure Standards and Specifications, 1999 Edition, 2016 Amendment,” which shall establish the basic requirements for the construction and/or alteration of public rights-of-way. (Ord. 634 § 1, 2016; Ord. 564 § 4, 2013; Ord. 232 § 1, 1999; Ord. 49 § 1, 1993)


12.09.020 Modifications.

Repealed by Ord. 232. (Ord. 49 § 2, 1993)


Chapter 12.12 STREET CLASSIFICATIONS

Sections:

12.12.010    Principal arterial streets.

12.12.020    Minor arterial streets.

12.12.030    Collector arterial streets.

12.12.040    Local access streets.


12.12.010 Principal arterial streets.

The following streets of the City are designated principal arterial streets:

(1) NE 173rd Place: From Woodinville-Redmond Road (SR 202) to 131st Avenue NE.

(2) NE 175th Street: From 131st Avenue NE to 140th Avenue NE.

(3) Woodinville-Duvall Road: From 140th Avenue NE to the east City limits.

(4) NE 195th Street: From Woodinville-Snohomish Road to NE 190th Street.

(5) NE 190th Street: From NE 195th Street to Woodinville-Duvall Road.

(6) Woodinville-Redmond Road SR 202): From the south City limits to NE 173rd Place.

(7) 131st Avenue NE: From NE 175th Street to SR 522. (Ord. 50 § 1, 1993)


12.12.020 Minor arterial streets.

The following streets of the City are designated minor arterial streets:

(1) NE 195th Street: From 130th Avenue NE to the Woodinville-Snohomish Road.

(2) 148th Ave. NE: From the Woodinville-Redmond Road (SR 202) to 140th Place NE.

(3) 140th Place NE: From 148th Avenue NE to 140th Avenue NE.

(4) 140th Avenue NE: From 140th Place NE to the Woodinville-Snohomish Road.

(5) Woodinville-Snohomish Road: From 140th Avenue NE to the north City limits.

(6) 124th Avenue NE: From the south City limits to NE 173rd Place.

(7) NE 173rd Place: From 124th Avenue NE to the Woodinville-Redmond Road (SR 202).

(8) 131st Avenue NE: From NE 175th Street to NE 171st Street.

(9) NE 171st Street: From 131st Avenue NE to 140th Avenue NE. (Ord. 50 § 2, 1993)


12.12.030 Collector arterial streets.

The following streets of the City are designated collector arterial streets:

(1) 132nd Avenue NE: From SR 522 to 130th Place NE.

(2) 130th Place NE: From 132nd Avenue NE to NE 195th Street.

(3) 130th Avenue NE: From NE 195th Street to the north City limits.

(4) 156th Avenue NE: From the Woodinville-Duvall Road (NE 185th Street) to the north City limits.

(5) 168th Avenue NE: From the Woodinville-Duvall Road (NE 185th Street) to NE 195th Street.

(6) NE 171st Street: From 140th Avenue NE to 146th Place NE.

(7) 146th Place NE: From NE 171st Street to NE 172nd Street.

(8) NE 172nd Street: From 146th Place NE to NE 173rd Street.

(9) NE 173rd Street: From NE 172nd Street to 155th Place NE.

(10) 155th Place NE: From NE 173rd Street to NE 175th Street.

(11) NE 175th Street: From NE 155th Place to NE 172nd Place.

(12) NE 172nd Place: From NE 175th Street to the east City limits.

(13) NE 145th Street: From 148th Avenue NE to the east City limits.

(14) NE 143rd Street: From the west City limits to 137th Place NE.

(15) 137th Place NE: From NE 143rd Street to NE 145th Street.

(16) NE 145th Street: From 137th Place NE to the Woodinville-Redmond Road (SR 202). (Ord. 633 § 1, 2016; Ord. 50 § 3, 1993)


12.12.040 Local access streets.

All streets and other public rights-of-way not otherwise classified in this chapter shall be deemed to be local access streets. (Ord. 50 § 4, 1993)


Chapter 12.15 PROCEDURE FOR ASSIGNING NAMES AND NUMBERS TO CITY STREETS

Sections:

12.15.010    Purpose.

12.15.020    Road designations.

12.15.030    Building addresses.

12.15.040    Uncertainty of road designations or addresses.

12.15.050    Maintenance.

12.15.060    Council redesignation of streets.

12.15.070    Repealed.


12.15.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to delegate to the Building Division of the Department of Public Services, hereafter called the Division, the authority to assign road names and numbers, and address the principal entrances of all buildings or other uses in conformance with the grid system established by King County. (Ord. 64 § 1, 1993)


12.15.020 Road designations.

(1) Public or private roads shall be designated within the guidelines of the grid system as determined by the Division. Named roads can only be assigned when the numbered grid is determined infeasible by the Division or by resolution of the City Council. The Division may redesignate existing private roads if such roads are determined to be inconsistent with the surrounding road designation system.

(2) All roads shall carry a geographic suffix or prefix. Roads designated as avenues shall carry a geographic suffix and shall extend in a north-south direction, and roads designated as streets shall carry a geographic prefix and shall extend in an east-west direction. Diagonal roads are treated as being either north-south or east-west roads. Names such as place, way, court, and drive may be used on a road extending in either direction.

(3) Appeals of designations shall first be heard by the City Manager. Subsequent appeal may be made to the City Council. (Ord. 64 § 2, 1993)


12.15.030 Building addresses.

(1) The assignment of addresses for new buildings will occur in conjunction with the issuance of a building permit.

(2) The assignment of addresses shall be based on the following criteria: even numbers shall be used on the northerly side of roads named as east-west and on the easterly side of roads named as north-south. Odd numbers shall be used on the southerly side of roads named as east-west and on the westerly side of roads named as north-south. Addresses shall be assigned whole numbers only.

(3) Should the Division find that any building, structure or premises is not provided with an address, is not correctly addressed, or is not using the assigned address, it shall notify the owner, agent or renter of the correct address. The address number shall be properly placed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter by the effective date shown upon the notice. It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent, or renter to display, advertise or use the wrong address after notification by the Division. (Ord. 64 § 3, 1993)


12.15.040 Uncertainty of road designations or addresses.

Whenever there is doubt or difference of opinion as to the correct road designation or correct address, the road designation or address shall be determined by the Division in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 64 § 4, 1993)


12.15.050 Maintenance.

(1) The owner, occupant or renter of an addressed building or other structure shall maintain the address in a conspicuous place over or near the principal entrance(s) or in such other conspicuous place as is necessary for visually locating such address.

(2) The address numbers shall be easily legible figures, not less than three inches high if a residential use or individual multi-family unit, nor less than five inches high if a commercial use. Numbers shall contrast with the color of the building or structure upon which they are placed and shall either be illuminated during periods of darkness, or be reflective, so they are easily seen at night. (Ord. 64 § 5, 1993)


12.15.060 Council redesignation of streets.

(1) Notwithstanding provisions in this chapter, the City Council reserves the option of changing street names or changing numbered streets to named streets. Applications to the Council for street renaming shall contain the signatures of the majority of persons having ownership in properties addressed on the street to be renamed. Notice of proposed name changes shall be mailed to all property owners whose addresses would be changed at least 20 days prior to Council action. A change of street names shall be accomplished by the adoption of an ordinance directing such change.

(2) The Council shall consider technical input from the Division, locational and development characteristics relative to the street, and the impact of the change on existing businesses and residences, as well as on emergency vehicle responsiveness, in determining whether the change should be granted. Only entire street lengths or distinct major portions of streets shall be separately renamed by the City. For purposes of this chapter, “distinct major portions” shall mean a separate portion of a street identifiable by either a directional shift of at least 45 degrees or an interrupted interval of at least one quarter mile. (Ord. 64 § 6, 1993)


12.15.070 Enforcement.

Repealed by Ord. 230. (Ord. 64 § 7, 1993)


Chapter 12.18 STREET VACATIONS

Sections:

12.18.010    Definition.

12.18.020    Owners of private property – Sufficient signature determination.

12.18.030    Petition – Right to make.

12.18.040    Petition – Contents – Signature.

12.18.050    Petition – Filing fee.

12.18.060    Petitioner – Hearing – Time fixed.

12.18.070    Petition – Withdrawal prohibited.

12.18.080    Hearing – Posting notice.

12.18.090    Hearing – Decision.

12.18.100    Petitions – Supplemental – Conditions.

12.18.110    Granting – Conditions.

12.18.120    Granting – Portion of petitioned area.


12.18.010 Definition.

The term “owner of an interest in real estate” means the owners of fee title, mortgagors and contract vendees. (Ord. 59 § 1, 1993)


12.18.020 Owners of private property – Sufficient signature determination.

For the purposes of determining the sufficiency of signatures of owners of private property on the petition or consent to vacate, the following rules shall govern:

(1) The signature of an owner, as determined by the records of the County Auditor, shall be sufficient without the signature of his or her spouse.

(2) In the case of mortgaged property, the signature of the mortgagor shall be sufficient.

(3) In the case of property subject to a contract of purchase, the signatures of the contract vendor and vendee shall be required.

(4) In the case of ownership by corporation, the signature of any officer authorized by the bylaws or resolution of the board of directors shall be sufficient when evidenced by an excerpt of the bylaws of the resolution, certified by the secretary of the corporation, granting such authority.

(5) In the case of property owned by the estate of a decedent or incompetent, the signature of the duly qualified administrator or executor or guardian shall be equivalent to the signature of the owner of the property. (Ord. 59 § 2, 1993)


12.18.030 Petition – Right to make.

The owners of an interest in any real estate abutting upon any street or alley may petition the City Council to vacate the street or alley, or any portion thereof, or the City Council may itself initiate such vacation procedures by resolution. (Ord. 59 § 3, 1993)


12.18.040 Petition – Contents – Signature.

The petition shall describe the street or alley or a portion thereof desired to be vacated and shall be signed by owners of more than two-thirds of the private property abutting upon the part of the street or alley sought to be vacated. (Ord. 59 § 4, 1993)


12.18.050 Petition – Filing fee.

(1) The petition properly signed shall be filed with the City Clerk upon payment of a filing and appraisal fee, which shall be paid into the general fund of the City to aid in defraying of expenses incurred by the City in appraising the property, checking the sufficiency of such petition and investigating or reporting the facts and shall not be returned to the petitioners, regardless of the City Council’s action on such petition. The amount of the fee shall be determined as follows:

(a) One to five separate ownership abutting the proposed vacation, a minimum fee of $500.00;

(b) An additional sum of $25.00 for each additional ownership over five.

(2)     The minimum appraisal fee shall be $500.00.

(3) In the event that the filing and appraisal fee, computed on petitioner’s estimate, proves to be insufficient, as evidenced by the City investigation, the balance of the fee shall be paid by the petitioner before notices of hearing are mailed. (Ord. 59 § 5, 1993)


12.18.060 Petitioner – Hearing – Time fixed.

(1) Petition Method. If signed by the owners of more than two-thirds of the property abutting the portion of the street or alley to be vacated, at a regular Council meeting following the filing of such petition, the Council, by resolution, shall fix a time when the petition will be heard and determined, which time shall not be more than 60 days nor less than 20 days after the date of passage of such resolution.

(2) Resolution Method. In cases where vacation is initiated by City Council resolution, the resolution shall include the date for a hearing on the vacation. (Ord. 59 § 6, 1993)


12.18.070 Petition – Withdrawal prohibited.

No petitioner may withdraw the petition or consent after the Council has set a time for hearing, although the petitioners may be heard at the public hearing, to present any information which bears upon the public advantage to be served or harmed by the proposed vacation. (Ord. 59 § 7, 1993)


12.18.080 Hearing – Posting notice.

(1) Petition Method. At least 20 days prior to the hearing, the City Clerk shall issue a written notice, which shall be posted as follows:

(a) In three public places in the City; and

(b) On a conspicuous place on a portion of the street or alley to be vacated.

The notice shall contain a statement that a petition requesting vacation has been filed or a resolution passed to vacate the portion described in the notice, along with a statement of the time and place set for the hearing on the matter.

(2) Resolution Method – Additional Notice. In all cases where the proceeding is initiated by City Council resolution, in addition to the above required notice, a similar notice shall be sent by mail at least 15 days before the hearing to each owner of any property abutting upon any part of the portion of the street or alley sought to be vacated. Ownership shall be determined as shown on the rolls of the County Treasurer and directed to the address shown thereon.

(3) Resolution Method – Divestiture of Jurisdiction to Proceed. If 50 percent of more of the abutting property owners file written objections to the proposed vacation with the Clerk, prior to the time of hearing, the City shall not proceed with the resolution. (Ord. 59 § 8, 1993)


12.18.090 Hearing – Decision.

At the time of the hearing on the vacation, or at such time as the same may be continued by the City Council, the matter shall be considered, and those desiring to speak on the vacation shall be heard. Following the hearing, the Council shall determine whether to grant the petition and/or proceed with the vacation. Such determination shall include, but not be limited to, consideration of the following criteria:

(1) Whether a change of use or vacation of the described portion will better serve the public good;

(2) Whether the street, alley or portion thereof is no longer required for public use;

(3) Whether the substitution of a new and different way would be more useful to the public; or

(4) Whether conditions may so change in the future as to provide a greater use or need than presently exists; and

(5) Whether objections to the proposed vacation are made by owners of private property (exclusive of petitioners) abutting the same. (Ord. 59 § 9, 1993)


12.18.100 Petitions – Supplemental – Conditions.

Supplemental petitions, or objections, containing signatures of additional persons or owners of abutting property petitioning for and consenting to such vacation may be filed as a part of, and considered with, the initial petition; provided, that such supplemental petitions shall not extend the description of the area sought to be vacated or add a new or different condition to such vacation. (Ord. 59 § 10, 1993)


12.18.110 Granting – Conditions.

If the City Council determines to grant the vacation, such action shall be made by ordinance with such conditions or limitations as the Council deems necessary and proper to preserve any desired public use or benefit.

(1) Easements. If the City Council deems that to grant the vacation shall be to the public’s interest and advantage, the Council may, by ordinance, vacate such street, alley or part thereof, reserving to the City an easement or the right to exercise the grant easements in respect to the vacated land for the construction, repair and maintenance of public utilities and services and may impose such other conditions or limitations as it deems necessary and proper to preserve any desired public use or benefit.

(2) Rededication. If the Council finds that future development of undeveloped land abutting such street or alley may alter or increase need or public use in such strip, such vacation may be granted only upon execution of a covenant running with such abutting land to rededicate such a portion upon a declaration of public use and necessity by the Council.

(3) Waterfront. The City shall not be authorized or have authority to vacate such street, or alley, or any parts thereof if any portion thereof abuts on any body of water unless such vacation be sought to enable the City to acquire the property for port purposes, boat moorage or launching sites, park, viewpoint, recreational or educational purposes, or other public uses. This proviso shall not apply to Industrial zoned property.

(4) Compensation. Any ordinance granting a street vacation may provide that it shall not become effective until the owners of property abutting upon each side of the street or alley, or part thereof so vacated, shall compensate the City in an amount which does not exceed 1/2 the appraised value of the area vacated, except, in the event the subject property or portions thereof were acquired at public expense, compensation may be required in an amount equal to the full appraised value of the vacation.

(5) Recording. Upon its effective date, a certified copy of the ordinance granting vacation shall be recorded by the City Clerk in the office of the King County Department of Records and Elections. (Ord. 59 § 11, 1993)


12.18.120 Granting – Portion of petitioned area.

If, after a hearing, the Council determines that the petition cannot be granted in whole, but that a portion of the area described in the original petition may be vacated, the Council may, by ordinance, vacate such portion in accord with the provisions of WMC 12.18.110. (Ord. 59 § 12, 1993)


Chapter 12.21 STATE HIGHWAY  ACCESS MANAGEMENT CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM

Sections:

12.21.010    Standards for access permitting.

12.21.020    Highway classification system.


12.21.010 Standards for access permitting.

Chapter 468-51 WAC, including any future additions to, and amendments and repeals thereof, is hereby adopted by reference. (Ord. 69 § 1, 1993)


12.21.020 Highway classification system.

Chapter 468-52 WAC, including any future additions to, and amendments and repeals thereof, is hereby adopted by reference. (Ord. 69 § 2, 1993)


Chapter 12.24 ROAD STANDARDS, SUBDIVISIONS, LAND USE AND HEALTH AND SAFETY REGULATIONS DURING TRANSITION

Sections:

12.24.010    County codes adopted.

12.24.020    Transition.


12.24.010 County codes adopted.

The following portions of the King County Code are hereby adopted by this reference as if set forth in full, except as modified in this chapter:

KCC 

    8.04.010 through 8.04.110

    8.08.010 through 8.08.180

    8.12.010 through 8.12.040

    8.16.010 and 8.16.020

    8.20.010 through 8.20.030

    8.24.010

    8.36.010

    8.38.010 and 8.38.020

    8.40.010 through 8.40.310

    8.44.010 through 8.44.800

    8.48.010 through 8.48.060

    8.52.010 through 8.52.100

    8.56.010 through 8.56.160

    8.60.010 through 8.60.030

    14.12.010 and 14.12.020

    14.24.010

    14.28.010 through 14.28.100

    14.30.010 through 14.30.090

    14.32.010 through 14.32.240

    14.40.010 through 14.40.060

    14.42.010 through 14.42.080

    14.44.010 through 14.44.120

    14.46.010 through 14.46.180

    14.48.010 through 14.48.040

    14.52.010 through 14.52.080

    16.04, except 16.04.020

    16.08

    16.32

    16.70

    16.82

    16.86

    19.04

    27.04.010 through 27.04.040

    27.08.010 through 27.08.090

    27.12.010 through 27.12.040

    27.16.010 and 27.16.020

    27.20.010 and 27.20.020

    27.24.010 and 27.24.020

    27.28.010 through 27.28.060

    27.32.010 and 27.32.020

    27.36.010 and 27.36.020

(Ord. 52 § 1, 1993)


12.24.020 Transition.

The portions of the King County Code adopted herein by this reference shall apply to those permits which have been filed with the County prior to March 31, 1993, and which are being processed by the County pursuant to the interlocal agreement between the City and King County as authorized by Resolution No. 93-21. The provisions of the King County Code adopted herein shall have no effect with respect to permits that are filed with the City subsequent to March 31, 1993. (Ord. 52 § 2, 1993)


Chapter 12.27 DEDICATION OF PRIVATE STREETS

Sections:

12.27.010    Intent.

12.27.020    Criteria.

12.27.025    Variances process.

12.27.030    Process.

12.27.040    New sidewalk improvements.


12.27.010 Intent.

The City will accept dedication of private streets that do not meet current City standards, under the criteria established in this chapter. The City Engineer shall make the determination and recommendation to the City Council for consideration on all petitions where 100 percent of all the vested owners of the private street have signed. (Ord. 236 § 1, 1999)


12.27.020 Criteria.

For a private street to be considered to be accepted into the City as a public street, and receive all the services provided by the city on a public street, all the following criteria must be met:

(1) Pavement Surface. Asphalt concrete pavement with curbing or 24-inch gravel edges. On noncurbed streets, asphalt driveway aprons must extend a minimum of 24 inches past the edge of the aligned road edge.

(2) Street Width. Twenty-two feet at the narrowest point. On nonthrough streets, a paved cul-de-sac or “hammer head” turnaround must be provided sufficient for emergency vehicle turnaround as determined by the fire district.

(3) Pavement Condition. The pavement surface must not show signs of failure such as alligatoring, longitudinal or transverse cracking, wash boarding, severe spawling, or road base failure.

(4) Surface Drainage. Drainage must be provided for road surface runoff either by an open ditch, gutter, or enclosed pipe system.

(5) Right-of-Way. A minimum right-of-way of 30 feet shall be provided and a minimum of an additional five feet of public easement must be provided along both sides of the right-of-way. The total width with easements and right-of-way shall be 40 feet.

A variance to this right-of-way criteria will be considered only if all other criteria as defined in this chapter can be met.

(6) Future Development. The potential for future development gaining access to the street cannot be more than a total of three additional single residential lots.

(7) Petition. One hundred percent of all vested property owners must sign a petition to the City requesting to dedicate their private road to the City.

(8) Life Safety. The Fire District and Police Department have reviewed and provided approval that emergency services on the road can be provided. This would include width, slope, and hydrant access.

(9) Construction Date. The private street shall have been constructed prior to May 1, 1999.

(10) Underground Utilities. All underground water lines, sewer lines and other utilities have been located in the proposed right-of-way. Such utilities shall either be relocated out of the right-of-way, or necessary permits shall be obtained for use of the public right-of-way. (Ord. 309 § 3, 2001; Ord. 236 § 2, 1999)


12.27.025 Variances process.

A right-of-way variance will be considered only after the applicant has made reasonable efforts to meet the right-of-way criteria as described in this chapter. The following defined procedures shall be followed when processing a request for a right-of-way variance:

(1) Determination of Reasonable Efforts. A reasonable effort will be considered when:

(a) One hundred percent of all the vested property owners have been contacted and support dedicating/granting right-of-way.

(b) Dedicating/granting of additional right-of-way is under the control of another interest outside of the vested property owners. 

(c) The applicant provides documentation supporting the efforts for subsections (1)(a) and (b) of this section.

(2) Future Development. The potential for future development gaining access to the street cannot be more than a total of three additional single residential lots.

(3) Petition. One hundred percent of all vested property owners must sign a petition to the City requesting to dedicate their private road to the City.

(4) Life Safety. The Fire District and Police Department have reviewed and provided approval that emergency services on the road can be provided. This would include width, slope and hydrant access.

(5) Construction Date. The private street shall have been constructed prior to May 1, 1999.

(6) Underground Utilities. All underground water lines, sewer lines and other utilities have been located in the proposed right-of-way. Such utilities shall either be relocated out of the right-of-way, or necessary permits shall be obtained for use of the public right-of-way. (Ord. 309 § 4, 2001)


12.27.030 Process.

The following is the process for a private street to be considered for acceptance by the City as a public street:

(1) A petition prepared by petitioners, with signatures of 100 percent of all vested property owners in the said private road, must be submitted to the City Engineer. The petition must include the name, property identification, and mailing address of each property owner, and must provide a single designated contact person for the City.

(2) The City Engineer will evaluate the private road to determine if the minimum variance standards are met. Notification of the results will be provided to the petition’s designated contact person.

(3) If the private road does not meet the minimum standards, the petitioners may correct the deficiencies and resubmit the petition or have their petition rejected.

(4) If the private road meets the minimum standards, staff will take the petition to the City Council for a public hearing and consideration of conditions and action.

(5) At the public hearing, conditions may be included that could consist of parking restrictions, traffic control modifications, local improvement district agreement, and future usage of the street.

(6) The petitioners shall be notified of the outcome of the public hearing with inclusion of any conditions.

(7) The Council may approve the petition, reject the petition or approve the petition with conditions. If the council approves the petition, the petitioners shall execute all necessary legal documents and comply with all conditions within 90 days, or such other time as established by the Council.

(8) Upon execution and recording of all necessary legal documents and compliance with all conditions, the City Council shall accept the dedication of the private road as a public street. (Ord. 309 § 5, 2001; Ord. 236 § 3, 1999)


12.27.040 New sidewalk improvements.

This section defines the responsible body to bear all costs for construction of a new sidewalk adjacent to a private road that has been accepted under this chapter into the public street system.

(1) All Costs. All costs shall be defined as 100 percent of the costs associated with the study, design, permits, land, and construction to install a sidewalk and associated improvement in accordance with acceptable City standards and City administrative costs. Associated improvements can include curb and gutter, storm drainage, street lighting, and landscaping.

(2) Adjacent Property Owner’s Request for Sidewalk. In the event that the property owners adjacent to an accepted public road desires the construction of a new sidewalk, all costs as defined in subsection (1) of this section shall be borne by the requesting property owner. 

(3) City Request for Sidewalk. In the event that the City requires the construction of a new sidewalk, all costs as defined subsection (1) of this section shall be borne by the City.

(4) Mutual Agreement for Sidewalk. In the event that both the City and adjacent property owner agree that it is mutually beneficial for a public sidewalk to be constructed, all costs as defined in subsection (1) of this section shall be shared at an agreed pro rata share. (Ord. 309 § 6, 2001)


Chapter 12.30 PUBLIC UTILITY AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS RIGHT-OF-WAY USE*

Sections:

12.30.010    Purpose.

12.30.020    Definitions.

12.30.030    Authorization and permit required.

12.30.040    Application – Right-of-way authorization.

12.30.050    Approval of right-of-way use authorization.

12.30.060    Application – Construction permit.

12.30.070    Performance bond.

12.30.080    Approval of construction permit.

12.30.090    Terms of use and occupancy.

12.30.100    Reimbursement of City costs and expenses.

12.30.110    Deferment of construction.

12.30.120    Specifications.

12.30.130    Exceptions.

12.30.140    Revocation of right-of-way use authorizations and construction permits.

12.30.150    Security fund.

12.30.160    Insurance.

12.30.170    Hold harmless/indemnity.

12.30.180    Inspections.

12.30.190    Correction and discontinuance of unsafe, nonconforming, or unauthorized conditions.

12.30.200    Displacement for public use.

12.30.210    Additional ducts or conduits.

12.30.220    Joint use of poles.

12.30.230    City use for noncommercial government communication.

12.30.240    Appearance.

12.30.250    Accommodating moving of building(s) and/or equipment.

12.30.260    Removal.

12.30.270    Billings and collections.

12.30.280    Appeals.

12.30.290    Liability.

12.30.300    Tree trimming.

12.30.310    Underground electric power and telecommunication facilities.

12.30.320    Joint trenching.

12.30.330    Notice of tariff changes affecting permitted facilities.

12.30.340    One-call locator.

12.30.350    Violation – Penalties.

*Code reviser’s note: Ordinance 231 adds these provisions as Chapter 12.27. The chapter has been editorially renumbered to prevent duplication of numbering.


12.30.010 Purpose.

(1) Applicability. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the regulation of the use of public right-of-way by any business, service, or person which is engaged in supplying the public with some commodity or service which is of public consequence and need, such as electricity, gas, water, sanitary sewer, telecommunications or transportation service. To the extent the provision of any current franchise or other written agreement with a public utility or telecommunications carrier conflicts with any provision of this chapter, the applicable provision of the franchise or other written agreement shall prevail.

(2) The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all public utility and telecommunications carriers which occupy, use, construct, or maintain utility or telecommunications facilities within public right-of-way of the City. (Ord. 231 § 1, 1999)


12.30.020 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, and words shall have the meanings set forth below unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number.

(1) “Applicant” means any person or entity that applies for permit pursuant to this chapter;

(2) “City” means the City of Woodinville, Washington;

(3) “Council” means the City Council of the City of Woodinville, Washington acting in its official capacity;

(4) “Department” means the Public Works Department of the City of Woodinville, Washington;

(5) “Director” as used herein means the Public Works Director for the City of Woodinville or his/her designee;

(6) “Emergency” means a condition of imminent danger to the health, safety, and welfare of property or persons located within the City, including, but not limited to, damage to persons or property from natural consequences, such as storms, earthquakes, riots or wars;

(7) “Overhead facilities” means utility poles, utility facilities and telecommunications facilities located above the surface of the ground, including the underground supports and foundations for such facilities;

(8) “Person” means and includes corporations, companies, associations, joint stock companies or associations, firms, partnerships, limited liability companies and individuals and includes their lessors, trustees and receivers;

(9) “Public improvement” as used herein, means all work, construction, alterations, repair or improvements within public right-of-way, executed at the cost or under contract of the City, or caused to be performed by any person or entity as a condition or requirement of an approval or permit for zoning, land use, construction, or development if dedicated or required to be dedicated to the public use, benefit or enjoyment;

(10) “Public right-of-way” means any highway, street, alley, other public right-of-way, or easement for motor vehicle under the jurisdiction and control of the City which has been acquired, established, dedicated or devoted to such purposes, but only to the extent of the City’s right, title, interest or authority to grant a permit to occupy and use such streets and easements for telecommunications and utility facilities;

(11) “Public utility” as used herein, means a company or entity engaged in any business or service regularly supplying the public with some commodity or service which is a public need and consequence, such as natural gas, electricity, water or sanitary sewer, including any business subject to regulation as to rates and service by the Utilities and Transportation Commission under the provisions of RCW Title 81;

(12) “State” means the State of Washington;

(13) “Surplus space” means that portion of the usable space on a utility pole which has the necessary clearance from other pole users, as required by Federal or State orders and regulations, to allow its use by a public utility or telecommunications carrier for a pole attachment. “Surplus space” shall also include usable space within underground conduits and ducts when the necessary clearance from other users, as required by Federal or State orders and regulations, can be achieved;

(14) “Telecommunications carrier” means and includes every corporation, company, association, joint stock association, partnership and person, their lessees, trustees or receivers appointed by any court whatsoever, and every city or town owning, operating, or managing any facilities used to provide telecommunications for hire, resale to the general public within this State;

(15) “Telecommunications facilities” means lines, conduits, ducts, poles, wires, cables, cross-arms, receivers, transmitters, instruments, machines, appliances, instrumentalities, and all devices, real estate, easements, apparatus, property and routes used, operated, owned or controlled by any telecommunications company to facilitate the provision of telecommunications service;

(16) “Telecommunications service” means the providing or offering for rent, sale or lease, or in exchange for other value received, of the transmittal of voice, data, image, graphic and video programming information between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar facilities, with or without benefit of any closed transmission medium;

(17) “Underground facilities” means utility and telecommunications facilities located under the surface of the ground, excluding the underground foundations or supports for overhead facilities;

(18) “Usable space” means the total distance between the top of a utility pole and the lowest possible attachment point that provides the minimum allowable vertical clearance as specified in any Federal or State orders and regulations;

(19) “Utility easement” means any easement owned by the City and acquired, established, dedicated or devoted for public utility purposes; and

(20) “Utility facilities” as used herein means all conduit, wires, lines, poles, pipes, cables, communication and signal lines, braces, guys, anchors, vaults, pedestals, antennas, and all other structures, equipment and appurtenances thereto owned, operated or maintained by a public utility and used to furnish utility services. (Ord. 231 § 1, 1999)


12.30.030 Authorization and permit required.

(1) It is unlawful for any person to maintain, operate on, under, or over public right-of-way, any railroad tracks, pipes, ducts, utility tunnels, vaults, maintenance holes, poles, fixtures, wires, utility facilities, telecommunications facilities, or any other appurtenances necessary for the purpose of providing telecommunications service, conducting any public utility business, either public or private, without complying with all the provisions of ordinances in relation thereto and obtaining and having a right-of-way use authorization from the Director for such purpose.   

(2) It is unlawful for any person to construct, repair, or maintain on, under, or over public right-of-way, any railroad tracks, utility facilities, telecommunications facilities or any other appurtenances necessary for the purpose of providing telecommunications service, conducting any public utility business, either public or private, or to go upon any such public right-of-way to perform any work therein which will obstruct the free flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or disturb the surface of public rights-of way, alley, planting strip or sidewalk, or to occupy area upon the surface or beneath the surface of public right-of-way, planting strips or sidewalks, without obtaining a construction permit from the Director for such purpose. The Director may exempt certain activities from the requirements of this section that do not materially affect the public right-of-way; provided, however, that should the Director deny an applicant’s request for such an exemption, there shall be no appeal. (Ord. 231 § 1, 1999)


12.30.040 Application – Right-of-way authorization.

(1) To obtain a right-of-way use authorization, the applicant shall file an application with the Permit Center Director.

(2) The Director shall examine each complete application submitted for review and approval to determine if it complies with the applicable provisions of this chapter and criteria for approval set forth in WMC 12.30.050(2). Other departments that have authority over the proposed use or activity may be required to review and approve or disapprove the application based on site-specific criteria. The Director may inspect the public right(s)-of-way proposed for use to determine any facts which may aid in determining whether a right-of-way use authorization should be approved. Right-of-way use authorizations shall be approved or denied within 120 days of submission of a complete application.

(3) A complete application shall include the following information and materials:

(a) The identity of the applicant, including all affiliates of the applicant who will be authorized to work in the right-of-way under the agreement;

(b) A brief description of nonconfidential, nonproprietary utility or telecommunications services that are or will be offered or provided by the applicant over its facilities;

(c) A brief description of nonconfidential, nonproprietary transmission medium that will be used to offer or provide such services;

(d) If installation of overhead facilities is proposed, evidence that surplus space is available for locating the facilities on existing utility poles along the proposed route;

(e) Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the facilities, and to offer or provide the services, including, but not limited to, evidence that the applicant has registered with the Washington Utilities and Transportation Commission;

(f) An application fee which shall be set by the City Council by resolution which allows the City to recover its actual administrative expenses that are directly related to receiving and approving a permit and license, to inspecting plans and construction, or to the preparation of a detailed statement. (Ord. 231 § 1, 1999)


12.30.050 Approval of right-of-way use authorization. 

(1) In the event the Director finds that the right-of-way use authorization application conforms to the requirements of this chapter and the criteria for approval set forth in subsection (2) of this section, the Director shall approve the right-of-way use authorization, and may impose such conditions thereon as are reasonably necessary to protect the public health, welfare, and safety and to mitigate any impacts resulting from the use. In the event that the Director denies an application for a right-of-way use authorization, the Director’s decision shall be in writing and set forth the reasons for said denial. Following approval by the Director, the right-of-way use authorization shall be issued by the Permit Center.

(2) In evaluating a right-of-way use authorization application under this chapter, the Director shall, consistent with Federal and State law, apply the following criteria:

(a) Whether all requisite licenses, certificates, and authorizations from applicable Federal, State, and local agencies have been obtained by the applicant;

(b) The capacity of the public right-of-way to accommodate additional utility and telecommunications facilities if the right-of-way use authorization is granted;

(c) The effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare if the right-of-way use authorization is granted;

(d) The availability of reasonable alternate routes and/or locations in the right-of-way for the proposed facilities;

(e) Applicable Federal, State, and local statutes, regulations, ordinances, and policies related to utility, telecommunications, and other facilities, including City construction standards;

(f) Such other factors as may demonstrate that the grant to use the public right-of-way will serve the community interest.

(3) The duration of a right-of-way use authorization shall be five years unless revoked or modified under the provisions of this chapter.

(4) A grantee that desires to renew a right-of-way use authorization issued pursuant to this section for an additional term shall, not more than 180 days nor less than 90 days before expiration of the current authorization, file a completed right-of-way use authorization renewal application with the Public Works Department. Said application shall be deemed to be complete when it meets the submittal requirements specified by the Public Works Director.

(5) Within 90 days after receiving a complete application for renewal, the Public Works Director or the designee shall issue a written determination granting or denying the renewal application in whole or in part. If the renewal application is denied, the written determination shall include the reason(s) for denial. The decision to grant or deny an application for the renewal of a right-of-way use authorization shall, in addition to the standards set forth in subsection (2) of this section, be based upon the following standard: the applicant’s compliance with the requirements and the authorization of this section. 

(6) The right-of-way use authorization shall incorporate the relevant terms and conditions of this chapter by reference. (Ord. 231 § 1, 1999)


12.30.060 Application – Construction permit.

(1) To obtain a construction permit, the applicant shall file an application with the Permit Center Director.

(2) All applications for construction permits will be submitted at least 30 days prior to the planned need for the permit, except that the Director may waive the 30-day requirement upon the applicant’s showing an unforeseeable, emergent need. Applicants shall be approved within a reasonable time thereafter, generally not to exceed 15 days, taking into consideration the nature and complexity of the proposed use of City streets. Application for complex projects, as determined by the Director, should be submitted at least 120 days prior to the planned need for the permit. If unforeseen conditions require expedited processing time, the City will attempt to cooperate, but reasonable expedited processing fees to cover additional costs to the City shall be charged.

(3) A complete application shall include the following information and materials:

(a) A complete application on a form specified by the Director.

(b) In addition to the general plans and specifications described in WMC 12.30.040(3)(d), the applicant shall provide detailed construction plans demonstrating compliance with all applicable City codes and construction specifications.

(c) The location of the applicant’s overhead and underground facilities in the public right-of-way along the proposed route.

(d) Preliminary engineering plans, specifications, and maps of the facilities to be located within the public right-of-way, all in sufficient detail to identify:

(i) The location and route requested for the proposed facilities including the lineal distance run of the facilities within public right-of-way;

(ii) The location of the applicant’s existing and proposed facilities in the public right-of-way along the proposed route;

(iii) The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and obstructions, if any, the applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove or relocate.

(e) If underground installation in existing ducts or conduits within the public right-of-way is proposed, information in sufficient detail to identify:

(i) The excess capacity currently available in such ducts or conduits before installation of the facilities; and

(ii) The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of the facilities.

(f) If underground installation within new ducts or conduits to be constructed within the public right-of-way is proposed:

(i) The location proposed for the new ducts or conduits; and

(ii) The excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of the facilities.

(g) A preliminary construction schedule and completion date.

(h) An application fee which shall be set by the City Council by resolution which allows the City to recover its actual administrative expenses that are directly related to receiving and approving a permit, license, and franchise, to inspecting plans and construction, or to the preparation of a detailed statement. (Ord. 231 § 1, 1999)


12.30.070 Performance bond.

A performance bond written by a corporate surety acceptable to the City equal to at least 150 percent of the estimated cost of removing the permittee’s facilities and restoring the public right-of-way to their pre-construction condition shall be deposited before the construction permit is issued. Said bond shall be required to remain in full force until 60 days after completion of the construction and/or improvements within the public right-of-way, and shall warrant all such restoration work for a period of two years. Those applicants performing annual work within the rights-of-way may provide an annual performance bond, in an amount approved by the Director, at the beginning of each year to cover all excavations. The purpose of this bond is to guarantee removal of partially completed and/or nonconforming facilities and to fully restore the public right-of-way to the preconstruction condition. (Ord. 231 § 1, 1999)


12.30.080 Approval of construction permit.

(1) In the event that the Director finds that the construction permit application conforms to the requirements of this chapter and applicable construction standards adopted by the City, the Director shall approve the construction permit, and may impose such conditions thereon as are reasonably necessary to protect the public health, welfare and safety, to mitigate any impacts resulting from the use, and to facilitate the orderly management of other utility and telecommunications facilities within the public right-of-way. In the event that the Director denies an application for a construction permit, the Director’s decision shall be in writing and set forth the reasons for said denial. Following approval by the Director, construction permits shall be issued by the Permit Center.

(2) The Director has the discretion to approve a blanket construction permit for a period of up to one year, when the applicant seeks approval to perform construction or maintenance that is of a repetitive or similar nature.

(3) In evaluating a construction permit application under this chapter, the Director shall, in addition to the criteria set forth in WMC 12.30.050(2), determine whether the proposed construction is consistent with all construction standards adopted by the City.

(4) The duration for a construction permit shall be for one year unless revoked or modified under the provisions of this chapter. The Director shall approve a construction schedule specifying the dates, times, and duration during which construction activity shall be permitted within the public right-of-way.

(5) The construction permit shall incorporate the relevant terms and conditions of this chapter by reference.

(6) The Director shall have the power to regulate the construction and enforce construction permit conditions and the requirements of this chapter. The Director shall keep a record of the construction permit and the work done thereunder. (Ord. 231 § 1, 1999)


12.30.090 Terms of use and occupancy.

(1) The use and occupancy of public right-of-way in the City by any person constructing, maintaining or operating telecommunications, utility, or other facilities shall conform to the terms and conditions of this chapter.

(2) Existing facilities installed or maintained by a telecommunications carrier, public utility or other entity over, under or across public right-of-way within the City in accordance with an expired franchise agreement or other City-issued permit may be operated by the telecommunications carrier or public utility at the locations at which such facilities exist; provided, however, that maintenance, repair, relocation, and/or expansion of such facilities shall not be permitted unless and until the public utility or telecommunications carrier, or other entity obtains all permits and approvals required by this chapter.

(3) All work by a telecommunications carrier, public utility, or other entity in the public right-of-way shall be in accordance with all construction standards and specifications adopted by the City as now exist or are hereafter amended, including but not limited to Chapter 12.09 WMC. (Ord. 231 § 1, 1999)


12.30.100 Reimbursement of City costs and expenses.

All public utilities, telecommunications carriers, and other entities shall, within 60 days after written demand, reimburse the City for all reasonable costs and expenses incurred by the City in connection with said party’s occupation and use of the public right-of-way for which a permit fee is not otherwise provided. (Ord. 231 § 1, 1999)


12.30.110 Deferment of construction.

The Director has the discretion to defer construction, or other activity under any construction permit, until such time as the Director deems proper in all cases, where the public right-of-way on which the work is desired to be done is occupied or about to be occupied in any work by the City or by some other person having a right to use the same in such manner as to render it seriously inconvenient to the public to allow any further obstruction thereof at such time. In granting such construction permit, the Director may so regulate the manner of doing such work in order to cause the least inconvenience to the public in the use of such public right-of-way. In all cases, any work of the City or its contractors or employees for municipal purposes shall have precedence over all work of every other kind. (Ord. 231 § 1, 1999)


12.30.120 Specifications.

(1) All work to be performed under a construction permit issued under this chapter shall conform to all applicable City codes, ordinances, and standards adopted by the City. In case of any conflict, the most stringent provision shall apply.

(2) No telecommunications, utility, other facilities, or work related thereto shall protrude into or over any portion of a public right-of-way opened to vehicle or pedestrian travel in such a manner as to create a substantial likelihood of endangering the use of such place by vehicles or pedestrian travel. In addition, in the event the requested construction permit involves encroachment or partial obstruction of a sidewalk or other walkway open to the public, a minimum of five feet of unobstructed sidewalk or other walkway shall be maintained at all times.

(3) During any period of any relocation, construction or maintenance of its facilities within the public right-of-way, a telecommunications carrier, public utility or other person shall conduct their activities so as not to unreasonably interfere with the free passage of traffic or the use of adjoining property. Such person shall, at all times, post and maintain proper barricades and comply with all applicable safety regulations during such period of construction as required by the ordinances of the City and the laws of the State of Washington, including RCW 39.04.180, for the construction of trench safety systems.

(4) Upon request by the City, a permittee, utility, carrier, or other person shall, within 10 business days, submit, at no cost to the City, current and accurate as-built drawings showing the location of any facilities installed or constructed within the public right-of-way under a permit issued pursuant to this chapter or otherwise. As-builts shall show all of the applicant’s facilities in the right-of-way including but not limited to telecommunications facilities, utility facilities, power poles, guy poles and anchors, overhead transformers, pad-mounted transformers, submersible transformers, conduit, substation (with its name) pedestals, pad-mounted junction boxes, vaults, switch cabinets, and meter boxes. (Ord. 231 § 1, 1999)


12.30.130 Exceptions.

(1) A construction permit shall not be required when public utilities, telecommunications carriers, or City contractors are responding to emergencies that require work in the public right-of-way, such as water or sewer main breaks, gas leaks, downed power lines, or similar emergencies; provided, however, that the Public Works Department shall be notified by the responding utility, carrier, or contractor verbally or in writing, on the next business day following onset of the emergency. Nothing in this section shall relieve a responding utility, carrier, or contractor from the requirement of obtaining a construction permit after beginning emergency work in a public right-of-way.

(2) A construction permit fee shall not be required for City-sponsored capital improvement projects for water, sewer, drainage, or road construction maintenance, including associated work required by a public utility. (Ord. 231 § 1, 1999)


12.30.140 Revocation of right-of-way use authorizations and construction permits.

(1) Following a notice of violation and opportunity to cure, the Director may revoke or suspend any approval issued under this chapter, in accordance with existing tariff or applicable State law whenever:

(a) The work does not proceed in accordance with the plans as approved or the conditions of approval, is not in compliance with the requirements of this chapter, other City ordinances, resolutions, or State law;

(b) The City has been denied reasonable access to investigate and inspect the activity approved within the public right-of-way;

(c) The permittee or its agents has made a misrepresentation of a material fact in applying for such approval;

(d) The Director determines that inadequate measures are being taken to protect the public, adjoining property, public right-of-way, or telecommunications, utility or other facilities in such public right-of-way, or that any excavation or fill endangers or will endanger the public, adjoining property, public right-of-way, or telecommunications or utility facilities in such public right-of-way.

(2) Upon suspension or revocation of an approval under this chapter, all permit-related activities of the public right-of-way shall cease, except as authorized or directed by the Director. (Ord. 231 § 1, 1999)


12.30.150 Security fund.

(1) Prior to commencement of any activities approved under a right-of-way use authorization, the grantee shall establish a permanent security fund with the City by depositing the amount of $50,000, or such greater amount as deemed necessary by the Public Works Director, with the City in cash, an unconditional letter of credit, or other instrument acceptable to the City, which fund shall be maintained at the sole expense of the grantee so long as any of the grantee’s utility or telecommunications facilities are located within the public right-of-way of the City. 

(2) The fund shall serve as security for the full and complete performance of the terms and conditions of this chapter and right-of-way use authorization, including any costs, expenses, damages, or loss the City pays or incurs, including civil penalties, because of any failure attributable to the grantee to comply with the codes, ordinances, rules, regulations, or permits of the City.

(3) Before any sums are withdrawn from the security fund, the City shall give written notice to the grantee:

(a) Describing the act, default or failure to be remedied, or the damages, costs or expenses which the City has incurred by reason of grantee’s act or default;

(b) Providing a reasonable opportunity for the grantee to first remedy the existing or ongoing default or failure, if applicable;

(c) Providing a reasonable opportunity for the grantee to pay any monies due the City before the City withdraws the amount thereof from the security fund, if applicable; and

(d) That the grantee will be given an opportunity to review the act, default or failure described in the notice with the City or his or her designee.

(4) Grantees shall replenish the security fund within 14 days after written notice from the City that there is a deficiency in the amount of the fund. (Ord. 231 § 1, 1999)


12.30.160 Insurance.

Unless otherwise provided in a right-of-way use authorization or permit, each grantee shall, as a condition of the right-of-way use authorization or permit, secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring both the grantee and the City, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents, employees, representatives, engineers, consultants, and volunteers as co-insureds against claims for injuries to persons or damages to property which may arise from or in connection with the exercise of the rights, privileges, and authority granted to the grantee:

(1) Comprehensive general liability insurance, written on an occurrence basis, with limits not less than:

(a) $2,000,000 for bodily injury or death to each person;

(b) $2,000,000 for property damage resulting from any one accident; and

(c) $2,000,000 for all other types of liability;

(2) Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a limit of $2,000,000 for each person and $2,000,000 for each accident;

(3) Worker’s compensation within statutory limits and employer’s liability insurance with limits of not less than $1,000,000;

(4) Comprehensive form premises-operations, explosions and collapse hazard, underground hazard and products completed hazard with limits of not less than $2,000,000;

(5) The liability insurance policies required by this section shall be maintained by the grantee throughout the term of the right-of-way use authorization or permit, and such other period of time during which the grantee is operating without a right-of-way use authorization or permit hereunder, or is engaged in the removal of its facilities. Any deductibles or self-insured retentions must be declared to and approved by the City. Payment of deductibles and self-insured retentions shall be the sole responsibility of the grantee. The insurance certificate required by this section shall contain a clause stating that coverage shall apply separately to each insured against whom claim is made or suit is brought, except with respect to the limits of the insurer’s liability. The grantee’s insurance shall be primary insurance as respects the City, its officers, officials, employees, agents, consultants, and volunteers. Any insurance maintained by the City, its officers, officials, employees, consultants, agents, and volunteers shall be in excess of the grantee insurance and shall not contribute with it. The provisions of this section may be satisfied by the grantee furnishing evidence of self-insurance with a scope of coverage and limits comparable hereto and in a form satisfactory to the City Attorney;

(6) In addition, each such insurance policy shall contain an endorsement which provides that the policy may not be cancelled, reduced in coverage, nor the intention not to renew be stated until 60 days after receipt by the City of a written notice to that effect. Within 30 days after receipt of such notice by the City, and in no event later than 15 days prior to the cancellation or nonrenewal, the grantee shall obtain and furnish to the City replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this section. (Ord. 231 § 1, 1999)


12.30.170 Hold harmless/indemnity.

(1) Any person, public utility, or telecommunications carrier accepting approvals under the terms of this chapter shall agree to release, covenant not to bring suit, and agree to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City, its officers, employees, agents, and representatives from any and all claims, costs, judgments, awards or liability to any person, including claims by the grantee’s own employees, or the employees of the grantee’s contractors and subcontractors, for which the grantee might otherwise be immune under RCW Title 51 for injury or death of any person or damage to property caused by or arising out of the acts or omissions of the grantee, its agents, servants, officers, or employees in the performance of activities allowed under any right-of-way use authorization or permit granted under this chapter, and any rights granted hereunder. Inspection or acceptance by the City of any work performed by a grantee during or at the time of completion of construction shall not be grounds for avoidance by the grantee of any of its obligations under this indemnity. Such indemnification obligation shall extend to claims which are not reduced to a suit and any claims which may be compromised prior to the culmination of any litigation or the institution of any litigation. Such indemnity agreement is required until the utility, telecommunications, or other facilities or any other appurtenances are removed from the public right-of-way, or, until the City furnishes a written release of the requirement to the public utility or telecommunications carrier.

(2) In addition, the City may require that any person, public utility, or telecommunications carrier accepting such a right-of-way use authorization or permit provide the City with additional indemnification, such as an indemnification from a parent company.

(3) The indemnification provided for herein shall not apply to injuries to persons or damage to property caused by or resulting from the sole negligence of the City, its agents or employees. (Ord. 231 § 1, 1999)


12.30.180 Inspections.

All work performed within public right-of-way shall be subject to periodic inspection by the Director to assure compliance with any conditions attached to the permit, the requirements of this chapter, and the requirements of any applicable City code or standard. (Ord. 231 § 1, 1999)


12.30.190 Correction and discontinuance of unsafe, nonconforming, or unauthorized conditions.

(1) Whenever the Director determines that any condition on any public right-of-way is in violation of, or any public right-of-way is being used contrary to, any provision of this chapter or procedures adopted under this chapter or other applicable codes or standards, or without a permit, the Director may order the correction or discontinuance of such condition or any activity causing such condition.

(2) The Director shall also have all powers and remedies available under State law and this chapter, to secure the correction or discontinuance of any condition specified in this section.

(3) The Director or his or her designee is authorized to use any or all of the following methods in ordering correction or discontinuance of any such conditions or activities as the Director determines appropriate:

(a) Serving of oral or written directives to the grantee or other responsible person requesting immediate correction or discontinuance of the specified condition;

(b) Service of a written notice of violation, ordering correction or discontinuance of a specific condition or activity within such reasonable period as the Director may determine, taking into consideration the nature of the condition;

(c) Revocation of previously granted right-of-way use authorizations or construction permits where the grantee or other responsible person has failed or refused to comply with requirements imposed by the City related to such permits; or

(d) Issuance of an order to immediately stop work until authorization is received from the City to proceed with such work.

(4) Any utility or telecommunications facility, or any other object or thing which shall occupy any public right-of-way without a right-of-way use authorization or permit or in violation of right-of-way use authorization or permit conditions or this chapter is a nuisance both public and private. The Department may attach a notice to any such object or thing stating that if it is not removed from the public right-of-way within 24 hours of the date and time stated on the notice, the object or thing may be taken into custody and stored at the owner’s expense. The notice shall provide an address and phone number where additional information may be obtained. If the object or thing is a hazard to public safety, it may be removed summarily by the City. Notice of such removal shall be thereafter given to the owner, if known. This section shall not apply to motor vehicles.

(5) All expenses incurred by the City, including attorney’s fees and legal expenses, in abating the condition or any portion thereof shall constitute a civil debt owing to the City jointly and severally by such persons who have been given notice or who own the object or thing or placed it in the public right-of-way, which debt shall be collectible in the same manner as any other civil debt.

(6) The City shall also have all powers and remedies which may be available under law, this chapter, and procedures adopted under this chapter for securing the correction or discontinuance of any conditions specified by the City. (Ord. 231 § 1, 1999)


12.30.200 Displacement for public use.

(1) A telecommunications carrier, public utility, or other person under order of the Director shall, upon a minimum 60 days’ written notice at its own cost, subject to law and existing tariffs, and expense, move or adjust its underground or overhead facilities located within the public right-of-way which interfere with any public improvement authorized or ordered by the City. The actual number of days shall be specified by the Director in the Director’s order.

(2) When a public improvement is required to accommodate or allow development or other activity by a party other than the City, then a telecommunications carrier, public utility or other person which moves or adjusts its facilities shall be entitled to recover its associated costs and expenses from such other party.

(3) Such persons shall indemnify, hold harmless, and pay the costs of defending the City against claims or liabilities for delays on public improvement projects caused by their failure to relocate their facilities in a timely manner unless caused by circumstances beyond their control. (Ord. 231 § 1, 1999)


12.30.210 Additional ducts or conduits.

Any person constructing underground ducts or conduits pursuant to this chapter shall, upon request, provide the City with additional ducts for its use. Such additional ducts or conduits shall be of a size and configuration specified by the City and shall be dedicated to the City. The City shall have the right to use the ducts and conduits for any purpose, including but not limited to leasing them to other entities. The incremental costs of adding the ducts and conduits under this section shall be borne by the City. (Ord. 231 § 1, 1999)


12.30.220 Joint use of poles.

(1) Subject to applicable State and Federal law, any telecommunications carrier or public utility erecting or maintaining any privately owned poles within public right-of-way shall permit joint use within available surplus space of such poles to another who is authorized to construct and maintain such poles or attachments thereto if directed to do so by the Director and shall obey any order issued by the Director relative to the joint use of such poles.

(2) Nothing contained within this chapter shall prevent the owner of such poles to charge a reasonable pole attachment fee to a person, other than the City, making joint use of such poles. (Ord. 231 § 1, 1999)


12.30.230 City use for noncommercial government communication.

Any person erecting or maintaining poles within public right-of-way shall allow the City the right, free of charge, to attach, maintain and operate traffic and traffic safety signals, as noncommercial governmental communication and signals, wires and/or fixtures within available surplus space on the poles erected and so maintained. (Ord. 231 § 1, 1999)


12.30.240 Appearance.

Any person erecting or maintaining poles under authority of this chapter shall ensure that its poles are maintained in a manner that does not significantly distract from the visual appearance of the pole. Such maintenance may include cleaning, replacement, painting or repainting of the pole. Wooden utility poles shall not be required to be painted. (Ord. 231 § 1, 1999)


12.30.250 Accommodating moving of building(s) and/or equipment.

Any person maintaining overhead telecommunication or utility facilities in public right-of-way shall, upon seven days’ notice from the Director, disconnect or move said facilities to allow for the moving of building(s) and/or equipment across or along any such public right-of-way; provided, however, that the advance notice may be reduced to 24 hours if the facilities are below the minimum clearance set by law or regulation or in the case of an emergency. The cost of moving such facilities shall be in accordance with existing tariffs or applicable State law, and borne as follows: (1) by the person owning said facilities if the wires, cables or appurtenances are below the minimum vertical clearance required by State law, City ordinance, or rules of the Director, above the surface of the public right-of-way, and no adjustment would be necessary if the minimum clearance had been maintained; and (2) by the person desiring to move the building(s) and/or equipment under all other circumstances. (Ord. 231 § 1, 1999)


12.30.260 Removal.

Any person accepting a right-of-way use authorization or construction permit pursuant to this chapter for the installation of any utility or telecommunications carriers shall remove such facilities when they are no longer required, or the right-of-way use authorization or permit has been revoked as provided in this chapter. Such removal shall occur within 90 days of receiving notice from the Director ordering such removal. Unless otherwise approved by the City in writing, no such person shall be permitted to abandon utility or telecommunication facilities within a public right-of-way, and then only under such conditions as may be prescribed by the Director. (Ord. 231 § 1, 1999)


12.30.270 Billings and collections.

The Director, jointly with the Finance Director, may establish procedures pertaining to the billing and collection of fees and charges adopted pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 231 § 1, 1999)


12.30.280 Appeals.

A decision of the Director made in accordance with this chapter may be appealed to the City Council as provided in Chapter 2.30 WMC. (Ord. 231 § 1, 1999)


12.30.290 Liability.

The Director and other employees charged with the enforcement and administration of this chapter, acting for the City in good faith and without malice in the discharge of their duties, shall not thereby render themselves liable personally for damages that may accrue to persons or property as a result of an act required or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of such duties. (Ord. 231 § 1, 1999)


12.30.300 Tree trimming.

Any telecommunications carrier or public utility required by State statute or regulation to trim or remove trees which may interfere with their facilities shall ensure that their tree trimming activities protect the appearance, integrity and health of the trees to the extent reasonably possible. The telecommunications carrier or public utility shall prepare and maintain a tree trimming schedule to ensure compliance with this provision and to avoid exigent circumstances where tree cutting, trimming or removal is necessary to protect the public safety or continuity of service without the regard for the appearance, integrity or health of the trees that planned maintenance would otherwise allow. The telecommunications carrier or public utility shall submit the schedule to the Director. Except where exigent circumstances do not permit, the telecommunications carrier or public utility shall give the owner the property on which the trees are located at least five days’ advance written notice of the tree trimming. All tree trimming shall be performed under the direction of an arborist certified by the International Society of Arboriculture and shall be in accordance with WMC 2.24.180. (Ord. 231 § 1, 1999)


12.30.310 Underground electric power and telecommunication facilities.

(1) The undergrounding requirements of this section shall apply where the telecommunications carrier, public utility, or other person’s facilities consist of cable or any other facilities which are capable of being placed underground. This section shall not apply to antennas or other facilities, which are required to remain above-ground, in order to be functional.

(2) In any area of the City in which there are no aerial facilities other than antennas or other facilities required to remain above-ground in order to be functional, or in any public right-of-way in which all telecommunications wires and cables, and electric power wires, cables, 15,000 volts and lower, and other aerial facilities capable of undergrounding have been placed underground, no person shall be permitted to erect poles or to run or suspend wires, cables or other facilities thereon, but shall lay such wires, cables or other facilities underground in the manner required by the City; provided, however, that if utility or street improvement projects are anticipated within the same public right-of-way within 12 months of the grantee’s proposed construction, the Director may permit interim installation of aerial facilities. In the event that the City does not require the undergrounding of such facilities at the time of initial installation, the City may, at any time in the future, require the conversion of such above-ground and/or aerial facilities to underground installation at the carrier, utility, or other person’s expense.

(3) The City shall allow new electric power lines and cables operating above 15,000 volts to be constructed above-ground when location within the City right-of-way is approved by the Director.

(4) Whenever the City undertakes an undergrounding project in any area of the City, the costs of which the City is not obligated to pay under any tariff, all carriers, utilities, and other persons shall underground their above-ground and/or aerial facilities in the manner specified by the City, concurrently with and in the area of all the other affected carriers, utilities, and other persons. The location of any such relocated and underground facilities shall be approved by the Director. Such persons shall underground their facilities at no cost to the City.

(5) In the event that the City undertakes any public improvement which would otherwise require, in the discretion of the Director, the relocation of carrier, utility, or other person’s above-ground facilities, the Director may, by written notice to such persons, direct that any such facilities be converted to underground facilities. Any such conversion shall be done subject to and in accordance with applicable schedules and tariffs on file with the WUTC or such other regulatory agency having jurisdiction. (Ord. 231 § 1, 1999)


12.30.320 Joint trenching.

Recognizing that trenching and excavation within public right-of-way can significantly degrade the quality and longevity of street surfacing and seriously inconvenience the public, all grantees shall afford other telecommunications carriers, public utilities, and the City an opportunity to share in the use of their excavations and trenches within public right-of-way. In the event that the City, a telecommunications carrier, or a public utility desires to share in a grantee’s excavation, it shall provide a written request to do so. Joint use of excavations shall be subject to the following conditions:

(1) Such joint use shall not unreasonably delay the work of the party causing the excavation to be made;

(2) Any party desiring to share in an excavation may be required to pay the fair and reasonable pro rata cost of said excavation. Such joint use shall be arranged and accomplished on terms and conditions satisfactory to both parties; and

(3) Either party may deny such request for safety reasons. (Ord. 231 § 1, 1999)


12.30.330 Notice of tariff changes affecting permitted facilities.

A grantee shall, when making application for any changes in tariffs affecting the provisions of this chapter or any approval issued hereunder, notify the City in writing of the application and provide the Director with a copy of the submitted application. The grantee shall further provide the Director with a copy of any actual approved tariff change affecting any approval issued pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 231 § 1, 1999)


12.30.340 One-call locator.

All carriers, utilities, grantees, and other persons shall, before commencing any construction within a public right-of-way, comply with all of the requirements set forth in Chapter 19.122 RCW, the one-call locator service. (Ord. 231 § 1, 1999)


12.30.350 Violation – Penalties.

(1) No person shall violate or fail to comply with this chapter.

(2) A violation of or failure to comply with any provision of this chapter shall constitute a civil infraction subject to the enforcement provisions of Chapter 1.03 WMC.

(3) A violation or failure to comply with any provision of this chapter, including any order of the Director authorized by this chapter, shall, in addition to any other remedies, constitute grounds for the Director to revoke the underlying permit issued to the grantee, if any, and grounds for the denial of any additional permits under this chapter until the grantee is in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.

(4) Violation of a stop-work order issued by the Director pursuant to WMC 12.30.190 shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable by not more than 90 days in jail and a fine not exceeding $1,000, or both. (Ord. 231 § 1, 1999)


Chapter 12.40 STREET DEBRIS REMOVAL

Sections:

12.40.010    Intent.

12.40.020    Definitions.

12.40.030    Violation – Process.

12.40.040    Reimbursement and penalty.

12.40.050    Continuation of development.

12.40.060    Debris removal fees.

12.40.070    Exceptions.


12.40.010 Intent.

The City desires to remove debris deposited within the public right-of-way as expeditiously as possible in order to protect the public, to prevent contamination of the surface water system, and to contain the debris in as small an area as possible. If the responsible party fails to remove the debris within the time frame defined by the City, the City may remove the debris and seek reimbursement of all expenses incurred therefor. (Ord. 363 § 1, 2004)


12.40.020 Definitions.

(1) “Debris” means any material left or otherwise deposited within a public right-of-way by means of spilling, tracking, or leaving spoils behind. “Debris” includes, but is not limited to, fluids, glass, and other material left in the right-of-way as a result of a vehicle accident and fluids or other materials spilling from vehicles using the right-of-way.

(2) “Normal work hours” means 8:00 to 5:00 Monday through Friday, excluding holidays recognized by the City.

(3) “Person” means any individual, corporation, partnership, association or other organization or entity. 

(4) “Public right-of-way” means any publicly owned right-of-way and structures or facilities located therein such as roads, trails, and sidewalks, regardless of whether the public’s ownership interest constitutes a fee or easement.

(5) “Repeat offender” means a responsible party who has been ordered by the City to remove debris from a public right-of-way more than (a) twice within a four-week period or (b) three times in a three-month period. 

(6) “Responsible party” means a person who leaves or otherwise deposits debris upon the public right-of-way.

(7) “Spilling” means to flow, run, or fall out, over, or off and become wasted, scattered, or lost, especially accidentally or unintentionally from a vehicle.

(8) “Spoils” means material, particularly earth or rock, deposited or otherwise left within a public right-of-way in conjunction with adjacent or nearby site work.

(9) “Storm drainage system” means storm inlets, catch basins, storm pipes, open ditches, and other storm-related conveyance and storage systems.

(10) “Temporary placement of debris” means debris placed within a public right-of-way pursuant to a valid right-of-way permit. 

(11) “Tracking” means to leave material, including but not limited to earth or soil material, behind or from the wheels, tracks, or “feet” of a vehicle or equipment.

(12) “Vehicle accident” means a collision involving one or more motor vehicles in the public right-of-way. (Ord. 363 § 1, 2004)


12.40.030 Violation – Process.

Except as otherwise provided herein, leaving or depositing debris on a public right-of-way through spilling, tracking, spoils and other means for any period of time constitutes a violation of this chapter. Each and every two-hour period during which debris remains in the public right-of-way shall constitute a separate violation. The City may enforce each violation by issuing a notice of violation pursuant to Chapter 1.06 WMC. In addition, or alternatively, the City may in its sole discretion utilize the following process to ensure that the debris is promptly removed:

(1) Initial Notification. The City may attempt to notify the responsible party by telephone or other communicative mechanism, if possible, identifying the location and the type of debris (if known), directing the responsible party to remove the debris, and stating the remedial deadline after which the City will dispatch its own resources to remove the debris at the responsible party’s expense. 

(2) Stop Work Order. If debris has been generated by adjacent or nearby development activity within the City’s permitting jurisdiction, the City may issue a stop work order effective until the debris has been removed from the right-of-way. Alternatively or additionally, the City may seek to revoke any permit or land use decision already issued pursuant to WMC 21.12.040.

(3) City Action. If the responsible party has not removed the debris within the designated response time, the City may, at the sole expense of the responsible party, dispatch a street sweeper or other appropriate equipment together with all personnel reasonably necessary to remove the debris from the public right-of-way. 

(4) Invoice. An invoice for the City’s debris removal services will either be posted at the responsible party’s job site, delivered directly to the responsible party, or mailed to the responsible party. 

(5) Reimbursement. The Finance Director will receive a copy of the invoice from the Public Works Director, City Engineer or Public Works Supervisor along with a memo detailing the occurrence, the approximate time and date thereof, the name and address of the responsible party, the approximate duration of remedial activity by the City or its agents, and the identity of the City employee or agent performing the necessary remedial work. In addition to any other legally available option, the City may in its discretion utilize a collection agency to collect funds that have not been timely paid. (Ord. 685 § 10, 2019; Ord. 363 § 1, 2004)


12.40.040 Reimbursement and penalty. 

The responsible party shall pay the invoice for City expenses incurred in debris removal within 15 days of the date of said invoice. Timely payment of an invoice shall be credited toward any penalty owed pursuant to a notice of violation resulting from such debris. Late payments may not be credited toward penalties owed. The penalty for violating any provision of this chapter shall be $250.00 per violation. (Ord. 685 § 11, 2019; Ord. 363 § 1, 2004)


12.40.050 Continuation of development. 

If the debris material resulted from development activity within the City’s permitting jurisdiction, no additional City permits shall issue with respect to that development until the debris removal invoice has been paid in full. In the event that the responsible party fails to timely pay in full any such invoice, the City may, in addition to any other available remedy, seek to revoke existing permits and land use decisions pursuant to WMC 21.12.040. (Ord. 363 § 1, 2004)


12.40.060 Debris removal fees. 

The following categories of sweeping fees shall apply when the City removes debris pursuant to this chapter: 

(1) The fees for street sweeping shall apply to each half-hour increment of street sweeping service time with a minimum charge of one half-hour. The duration of additional street sweeping and related activities shall be rounded up or down to the nearest half-hour.

(2) The fees for storm drainage system cleaning shall be for the performance of work to remove any debris that has infiltrated a publicly maintained storm water conveyance or storage system. This work may require the use of, and invoicing for, special vactoring equipment to remove material from catch basins and other parts of the storm water system.

(3) The fees for disposal of materials will be based on actual or estimated costs as determined by the City and shall be reflected by the type and volume of debris material.

(4) The City Council shall set said fees by resolution on the City’s fee schedule, and the same shall be provided and updated as deemed appropriate in the Council’s discretion. (Ord. 363 § 1, 2004)


12.40.070 Exceptions.

The Public Works Director or designee may, in his or her sole discretion, waive the penalty and reimbursement provisions of this chapter where a deposit of debris results from either of the following causes: 

(1) Natural Disasters. No reimbursement or penalties for debris removal may be required where a deposit of debris results solely from a natural disaster beyond the responsible party’s control, including but not limited to earthquake, fire or flood; provided, that the responsible party shall bear the exclusive burden of proof in establishing the existence of any such natural disaster and its causal relationship to a deposit of debris. 

(2) Vehicle Accidents. No penalties for debris removal may be required where a deposit of debris results solely from a vehicle accident; provided, that the responsible party shall bear the exclusive burden of proof in establishing the existence of any such vehicle accident and its causal relationship to a deposit of debris. (Ord. 363 § 1, 2004)


Chapter 12.50 PUBLIC FACILITIES RULES AND REGULATIONS

Sections:

12.50.010    Police power.

12.50.020    Definitions.

12.50.030    Rulemaking.

12.50.040    Applicability.

12.50.050    Trail use.

12.50.060    Practicing and playing games.

12.50.070    Overnight camping.

12.50.080    Fireworks.

12.50.090    Firearms and explosives.

12.50.100    Littering.

12.50.110    Game refuge, sanctuary or reserve – Disturbance of wildlife.

12.50.120    Capturing or striking wildlife – Prohibited.

12.50.130    Feeding of animals.

12.50.140    Trespassing.

12.50.150    Removal or destruction of property.

12.50.160    Dogs and pets – Prohibited areas.

12.50.170    Dogs and pets – Prohibited on shoreline.

12.50.180    Removal of pet feces.

12.50.190    Animals running at large – Prohibited.

12.50.200    Motor vehicles.

12.50.210    Speed limit.

12.50.220    Parking of motor vehicles.

12.50.230    Riding vehicles and animals.

12.50.240    Commercial watercraft – Prohibited.

12.50.250    Landing, launching, docking and use of watercraft – Prohibited.

12.50.260    Overnight moorage – Prohibited.

12.50.270    Aircraft – Prohibited.

12.50.280    Fires.

12.50.285    Tobacco products – Prohibited.

12.50.290    Alcoholic beverages and/or illegal drugs – Prohibited.

12.50.295    Intoxication.

12.50.300    Noise regulation.

12.50.310    Posting signs, posters and notices.

12.50.320    Sale of merchandise, food or services – Permit required.

12.50.330    Endangering persons or property – Prohibited.

12.50.340    Operation of motorized models – Prohibited.

12.50.350    Use of nonmotorized vehicles – Prohibited in certain areas.

12.50.360    Expulsion from parks and public facilities.

12.50.370    Aiding and abetting violations.

12.50.380    Closing times.

12.50.390    Trees and vegetation – City property.

12.50.400    Disorderly conduct and profanity – Prohibited.

12.50.410    Loitering.

12.50.420    Washing.

12.50.430    Groups or assemblies – Park reservations.

12.50.440    Violation – Penalty.

12.50.450    Conflicts with criminal code, traffic code, and other ordinances.


12.50.010 Police power.

This chapter is declared to be an exercise of the police power of the City and its provisions shall be liberally construed for the preservation and protection of the natural environment, public peace, health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 345 § 1, 2003; Ord. 181 § 1, 1997)


12.50.020 Definitions.

Unless clearly inconsistent with the context in which used, the following definitions shall apply under this chapter:

(1) “Department” means the Department of Parks and Recreation of the City.

(2) “Director” means the Director of the Department of Parks and Recreation and authorized agents of the Director.

(3) “Large group” means a group of more than 30 people.

(4) “Loitering” means to remain in a place or linger for no apparent reason.

(5) “Motorized watercraft” means those floating devices which are designed to be propelled by the use of internal combustion engines or electric motors. Inflatable, motorized watercraft may be included in this definition if they are propelled by the use of internal combustion engines or electric motors.

(6) “Nonmotorized cycle or similar device” means any wheeled, operator-propelled equipment which transports the operator on land, except wheelchairs. Nonmotorized cycle or similar device includes, but is not limited to, unicycles, skates, skateboards, bicycles, tricycles, quadcycles and scooters.

(7) “Nonmotorized watercraft” means those nonmotorized watercraft which may have inflatable chambers, may or may not be propelled by oars or paddles, can be carried by one or two people and/or supports a person or persons.

(8) “Park” means all parks and bodies of water contained therein, squares, plazas, trails, beaches, playgrounds, playfields, gardens, greenbelts and other park, recreation and open space areas, buildings and facilities comprising the parks and recreation system of the City under the management and control of the Director of Parks and Recreation or his or her designee.

(9) “Park component” means any furniture, handrail, stairway, wall, retaining wall, planter box, sculpture or any other item installed in, located in, or made a part of one of the City’s parks.

(10) “Public facility” means all properties and other facilities, including but not limited to parks, which are owned, controlled, or managed by the City of Woodinville, regardless of whether said property or facility is held for governmental or proprietary purposes.

(11) “Recreation program” means any program or activity conducted, sponsored or assisted by the Department, whether or not it occurs in a park.

(12) “Trail” means any nonmotorized multi-purpose trail owned, operated, or managed by the City of Woodinville; provided, however, that the term shall not include bike lanes or trails located within any public roadway, public highway, or arterial. (Ord. 345 § 1, 2003; Ord. 181 § 1, 1997)


12.50.030 Rulemaking.

The Director or his or her designee has the power to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The Director or his or her designee may adopt, amend and rescind rules and regulations consistent with this chapter in order to manage and control the parks and recreation system of the City and to manage other public facilities, including rules that:

(1) Clarify, interpret or apply this chapter;

(2) Designate restricted areas in parks and public facilities;

(3) Regulate and administer recreational programs;

(4) Establish times for opening and closing of particular parks, park facilities, and public facilities to public use and/or for entry or use by motor vehicles. (Ord. 345 § 1, 2003; Ord. 181 § 1, 1997)


12.50.040 Applicability.

The terms and provisions of this chapter shall apply to the conduct of all persons and the use of all parks and other public facilities of the City of Woodinville. (Ord. 345 § 1, 2003; Ord. 181 § 1, 1997)


12.50.050 Trail use.

(1) No person shall travel on a trail at a speed greater than is posted or than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual and potential hazards then existing. In every event, speed shall be so controlled as may be necessary to avoid colliding with others who are complying with the law and using reasonable care. Travel at speeds in excess of 15 miles per hour shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the person violated this section.

(2) No person shall travel on a trail in a negligent manner. For the purposes of this section, “travel in a negligent manner” shall be construed to mean any form of travel on a trail in such a manner as to endanger or be likely to endanger any persons or property.

(3) Every person traveling on a trail shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device placed in accordance with applicable laws unless otherwise directed by a police officer.

(4) It shall be unlawful for any person to place or deposit any structure, device, or natural or artificial thing that threatens or endangers any portion of a trail owned or maintained by the City of Woodinville, that tends to endanger persons traveling thereon, that obstructs or tends to obstruct a trail, or that constitutes a hazard to persons traveling thereon.

(5) Model Trail User Code of Conduct.

(a) Using a Trail. Every person using a trail shall stay at or near to the right side of the trail as is safe, excepting those movements necessary to prepare to make or to make turning movements, or while overtaking and passing another user moving in the same direction.

(b) Regard for Other Trail Users. Every user shall exercise due care and caution to avoid colliding with any other trail user. All users shall travel in a consistent and predictable manner.

(c) Groups on Trail. No group of trail users, including their animal(s), shall occupy more than one-half of the trail as measured from the right side, so as to impede the normal and reasonable movement of trail users.

(d) Audible Signal When Passing. Every user shall give an audible warning signal before passing another trail user. The signal must be produced in such a manner as to allow adequate time for response. The signal may be given by voice, bell, or horn.

(e) Overtaking Trail Users on the Left. Any trail user overtaking another trail user proceeding in the same direction shall pass to the left of such overtaken user at a safe distance, and shall stay to the left until safely clear of the overtaken user.

(f) Entering and Crossing Trail. Trail users entering or crossing the trail at uncontrolled points shall yield to traffic on the trail. (Ord. 345 § 1, 2003; Ord. 181 § 1, 1997)


12.50.060 Practicing and playing games.

No person shall practice or play golf, baseball, cricket, lacrosse, polo, archery, hockey, tennis, badminton, or other games of like character or hurl or propel any object or missile, except at places where such activities are not reasonably likely to imperil or endanger other users of a park or public facility, or at such places which are set apart and developed for such purposes by the Department and so designated by the Director. (Ord. 345 § 1, 2003; Ord. 181 § 1, 1997)


12.50.070 Overnight camping.

Unless authorized by a valid, written agreement executed by the City, it is unlawful to camp overnight in any park or park facility, except at places set aside and posted for such purposes by the Director or his or her designee, or by permit issued by the Director or his or her designee. (Ord. 370 § 6, 2004; Ord. 345 § 1, 2003; Ord. 181 § 1, 1997)


12.50.080 Fireworks.

It is unlawful to possess and/or use fireworks of any type in a park or public facility without having first obtained a lawfully issued permit. See Chapter 8.03 WMC. (Ord. 345 § 1, 2003; Ord. 181 § 1, 1997)


12.50.090 Firearms and explosives.

It is unlawful to shoot, fire or explode any firearms, torpedoes or explosive of any kind, or to shoot or fire any air gun, paint ball gun, bows and arrows, B.B. gun or use any slingshot or other propelling device wherein the applied human energy or force is artificially aided, directed or added to in any park or public facility, except in such designated recreational areas as may by the Department of Parks and Recreation be developed and provided for such activities. Violation of this section is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 345 § 1, 2003; Ord. 181 § 1, 1997)


12.50.100 Littering.

It is unlawful to throw or deposit any refuse or other material in any park or public facility, except in designated receptacles, or to take garbage or refuse to a park or public facility for disposal in said park or public facility, or to deposit garbage or refuse generated outside a park or public facility within said park or public facility. (Ord. 345 § 1, 2003; Ord. 181 § 1, 1997)


12.50.110 Game refuge, sanctuary or reserve – Disturbance of wildlife.

It is unlawful to enter any area in a park designated and posted by the Director or his or her designee as a game refuge, sanctuary or reserve; or to molest or disturb wildlife or the nest or breeding place of any wildlife located therein. Violation of this section is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 345 § 1, 2003; Ord. 181 § 1, 1997)


12.50.120 Capturing or striking wildlife – Prohibited.

It is unlawful in any park or public facility in any manner to capture, strike, kill or harass, or to attempt to capture, strike, kill or harass, any wildlife, with any stick, weapon or other device or thing or to throw or otherwise propel a missile or object at or in the vicinity of any such wildlife, except that the Director or his or her designee may approve the capture of wildlife for research or relocation purposes, or for public safety. Violation of this section is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 345 § 1, 2003; Ord. 181 § 1, 1997)


12.50.130 Feeding of animals.

It is unlawful for any person to leave, place or distribute foodstuffs of any kind or nature in any park or public facility with an intent to feed farm animals or wildlife; provided, this section shall not apply to the feeding of farm animals or wildlife by Department of Parks and Recreation personnel. (Ord. 345 § 1, 2003; Ord. 181 § 1, 1997)


12.50.140 Trespassing.

It is unlawful for any person except an authorized City employee in the performance of his or her duties, or other person duly authorized pursuant to law, to enter or go upon any area which has been designated and posted by the Director or his or her designee as a “No Admittance” or “No Trespassing” area, or at any time during which the park or public facility is posted as being closed to the public. Violation of this section is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 345 § 1, 2003; Ord. 181 § 1, 1997)


12.50.150 Removal or destruction of property.

No person shall unlawfully remove, destroy, mutilate or deface any property, structure, facility or station within a park or public facility. Violation of this section is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 345 § 1, 2003; Ord. 181 § 1, 1997)


12.50.160 Dogs and pets – Prohibited areas.

It is unlawful for any person to permit any dog or other pet in any area in a park or public facility designated and posted by the Director or his or her designee as a game refuge, sanctuary or reserve, or to permit such dog or other pet to molest or disturb wildlife therein or the nest or breeding place of any such wildlife, or to permit any dog or other pet to enter any other area which the Director or his or her designee has posted as a place prohibited to animals, except for dogs being used to assist the disabled or for official purposes such as search and rescue or law enforcement. (Ord. 345 § 1, 2003; Ord. 181 § 1, 1997)


12.50.170 Dogs and pets – Prohibited on shoreline.

It is unlawful for any person to permit any dog or pet to be in shoreline or beach recreation areas from June 1st through September 15th, except for dogs being used to assist the disabled or for official purposes such as search and rescue or law enforcement. (Ord. 345 § 1, 2003; Ord. 181 § 1, 1997)


12.50.180 Removal of pet feces.

Any person with a dog or pet in his or her possession in any park or public facility shall be responsible for the conduct of the animal, shall carry equipment for removing feces and shall collect and place any feces deposited by such dog or pet in an appropriate receptacle. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to so collect and place any feces deposited by a dog or pet in his or her possession. (Ord. 345 § 1, 2003; Ord. 181 § 1, 1997)


12.50.190 Animals running at large – Prohibited.

It is unlawful for any person to allow or permit any dog or other pet to run at large in any park or public facility, except dogs used by a public law enforcement officer; provided, that except in areas in which animals are prohibited, dogs or other pets are permitted in a park if on a leash not greater than six feet in length, or otherwise securely caged or securely restrained from running free. (Ord. 345 § 1, 2003; Ord. 181 § 1, 1997)


12.50.200 Motor vehicles.

It is unlawful to ride, propel, drive or direct any unauthorized motorized vehicle over or through any park or public facility, or upon any street, drive or parkway which is designated as being closed to vehicular traffic. No person shall drain or dump refuse or waste from any trailer, camper, automobile, or other vehicle, except in designated disposal areas or receptacles in any park or public facility. (Ord. 345 § 1, 2003; Ord. 181 § 1, 1997)


12.50.210 Speed limit.

It is unlawful to ride, propel, drive or direct any motorized vehicle over any street, drive or parkway in any park or public facility in excess of 10 miles per hour when no speed limit is posted, or in excess of any posted speed limit. (Ord. 345 § 1, 2003; Ord. 181 § 1, 1997)


12.50.220 Parking of motor vehicles.

It is unlawful to park or leave a vehicle unattended in any park, public facility, or parking lot through which access is controlled by a gate from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise. It shall also be unlawful to park or leave a vehicle unattended in any park, public facility, or parking lot through which access is not controlled through a gate between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., except in such areas as may be designated for such purpose by the Director and so posted by signs; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to persons attending events and activities scheduled at such park or facility or that have obtained a permit from the Director. Such unattended vehicles may be impounded by the City according to the applicable provisions of WMC Title 10. (Ord. 345 § 1, 2003; Ord. 181 § 1, 1997)


12.50.230 Riding vehicles and animals.

It is unlawful for any person to ride or drive any animal or vehicle over or through any park or public facility, except in areas designated for such purposes by the Director and so posted by signs. (Ord. 345 § 1, 2003; Ord. 181 § 1, 1997)


12.50.240 Commercial watercraft – Prohibited.

It is unlawful to use aquatic areas and aquatic facilities within a park for commercial purposes or for commercial watercraft to use such areas or facilities, except when done pursuant to a permit issued by the Director or his or her designee. For purposes of this section, “commercial watercraft” means watercraft used for any commercial purpose but shall not include a watercraft operated under a concession lease with the city. (Ord. 345 § 1, 2003; Ord. 181 § 1, 1997)


12.50.250 Landing, launching, docking and use of watercraft – Prohibited.

It is unlawful for any person to land, launch, dock or use any watercraft in or at any swimming area, float or shoreline within the limits of a park, except for such areas specifically designated for such use by watercraft; provided, watercraft may use the following areas: 

(1) Nonmotorized watercraft may be launched and landed at Wilmot Gateway Park all year. (Ord. 345 § 1, 2003; Ord. 181 § 1, 1997)


12.50.260 Overnight moorage – Prohibited.

It is unlawful for any person to moor a watercraft overnight in any park or public facility, except by permit of the Director or his or her designee. (Ord. 345 § 1, 2003; Ord. 181 § 1, 1997)


12.50.270 Aircraft – Prohibited.

Except in an emergency, any person desiring to utilize a park or public facility for launching, take-off, or landing of any aircraft shall obtain a permit from the Director. (Ord. 345 § 1, 2003; Ord. 181 § 1, 1997)


12.50.280 Fires.

It is unlawful for any person to set or maintain any fire in a park or public facility, except in facilities designed for such purposes and self-contained stoves. (Ord. 345 § 1, 2003; Ord. 181 § 1, 1997)


12.50.285 Tobacco products – Prohibited.

It is unlawful for any person to light cigars, cigarettes, tobacco or otherwise to use any tobacco products, including chewing tobacco in a City park or City parks and recreation area. Violation of this section shall be a civil infraction under WMC 1.03.010(2) subject to a penalty of $100.00 for each infraction. (Ord. 547 § 1, 2012)


12.50.290 Alcoholic beverages and/or illegal drugs – Prohibited.

It is unlawful for any person to use or possess any alcoholic beverages and/or illegal drugs in a park, including unopened alcoholic beverage containers within one’s immediate reach or control, which shall be considered to be possession of the container by said person; provided, this prohibition shall not apply to organized groups which have secured approval from the City Manager, a permit from the Director and appropriate licensing from the State of Washington. Violation of this section is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 345 § 1, 2003; Ord. 181 § 1, 1997)


12.50.295 Intoxication.

Being or remaining in any park or public facility while in a state of intoxication shall be prohibited. Any violation of this section is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 345 § 1, 2003)


12.50.300 Noise regulation.

It is unlawful for sound from audio equipment to be operated at a volume so as to be audible greater than 50 feet from the source at a decibel level prohibited by Chapter 8.08 WMC. (Ord. 345 § 1, 2003; Ord. 181 § 1, 1997)


12.50.310 Posting signs, posters and notices.

It is unlawful for any person to post or attach any sign, poster or notice or any other device of any kind for advertising in any park or public facility, except as authorized by the Director or his or her designee. (Ord. 345 § 1, 2003; Ord. 181 § 1, 1997)


12.50.320 Sale of merchandise, food or services – Permit required.

It is unlawful for any person to solicit, sell or peddle any goods, services, wares, merchandise, liquids or edibles for human consumption to the general public in any park or public facility, except pursuant to a permit issued by the Director or his or her designee. (Ord. 345 § 1, 2003; Ord. 181 § 1, 1997)


12.50.330 Endangering persons or property – Prohibited.

It is unlawful to knowingly hurl or propel any object or to take any physical action in any park or public facility which endangers or is likely to endanger any persons or property or interfere with the operations or purposes of a park or public facility. (Ord. 345 § 1, 2003; Ord. 181 § 1, 1997)


12.50.340 Operation of motorized models – Prohibited.

It is unlawful for any person to operate any motorized model car, aircraft, rocket or watercraft in any park, except as authorized by the Director or his or her designee. (Ord. 345 § 1, 2003; Ord. 181 § 1, 1997)


12.50.350 Use of nonmotorized vehicles – Prohibited in certain areas.

It is unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle or other similar device in any area which is posted as closed to such vehicles. (Ord. 345 § 1, 2003; Ord. 181 § 1, 1997)


12.50.360 Expulsion from parks and public facilities.

(1) The Director or his or her designee or his or her authorized agent may order the expulsion of any person from any park or public facility for a period of one to seven days if he or she observes such person:

(a) Using obscene language or engaging in obscene conduct;

(b) Directing racially offensive remarks or other hate speech at another person;

(c) Using tobacco products in an unauthorized area or facility;

(d) Causing injury or risk of injury to another person or persons;

(e) Causing damage or risk of damage to City property including plants, flowers or other landscaping;

(f) Skateboarding, roller-skating, or bicycling on anything other than a paved, concrete, or packed gravel surface;

(g) Skateboarding, roller-skating, or bicycling on any park component except those specifically designated for skateboarding, roller-skating, or bicycling and located in the Rotary Community Park;

(h) Launching flares, rockets, or other devices; 

(i) Using the climbing boulder in Rotary Community Park for anything other than climbing or bouldering;

(j) Violating any provision of this chapter.

(2) The Director or his or her designee or his or her authorized agent may order the expulsion of any persons from any park or public facility for a period of seven days to one year if such person:

(a) Has been expelled from a park or public facility two or more times in any 30-day period;

(b) Caused injury to another person;

(c) Sells, possesses or uses illegal drugs or alcohol;

(d) Unlawfully possesses or uses any weapon;

(e) Commits more than one violation of this chapter in any 30-day period.

(3) Any order of expulsion under this section shall be in writing and contain the following information: 

(a) A description of the reason(s) for the expulsion;

(b) A description of the premises from which the person is expelled;

(c) The duration of the expulsion;

(d) A statement advising the person that failure to comply with the order may result in arrest and prosecution for criminal trespass; and

(e) A statement that an order of expulsion with a duration greater than seven days may be appealed to the City Council within 10 calendar days of the date the order is issued. Expulsion orders shall be sent by certified mail to the person expelled at his or her last known address unless personally served upon the expelled person by the Director, his or her designee, or his or her authorized agent.

(4) Any person who enters a park or public facility during a period during which he or she has been expelled under subsection (1) or (2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 345 § 1, 2003; Ord. 181 § 1, 1997)


12.50.370 Aiding and abetting violations.

Any person participating in a violation of any provision of this chapter whether directly committing the act or omitting to do the thing constituting the offense or who aids or abets the same, and whether present or absent, and anyone who directly or indirectly counsels, encourages, hires, commands, induces, or otherwise procures another to commit such offense shall be proceeded against and prosecuted as such. (Ord. 345 § 1, 2003; Ord. 181 § 1, 1997)


12.50.380 Closing times.

It is unlawful to be in a park or public facility after closing time. Unless another closing time has been established for a particular park or public facility by the Director or his or her designee, parks shall close one-half hour after sunset and re-open one-half hour before sunrise. This section does not apply to scheduled Department of Parks and Recreation events or to dedicated roads and sidewalks used for transportation which are not designated as closed. (Ord. 345 § 1, 2003; Ord. 181 § 1, 1997)


12.50.390 Trees and vegetation – City property.

It shall be unlawful for any person to clear, cut, damage or remove any tree or vegetation located upon a public facility without the express written permission of the Director or his or her designee; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the maintenance and groundskeeping activities of City employees and such other persons that provide such services to the City under contract. (Ord. 345 § 1, 2003; Ord. 181 § 1, 1997)


12.50.400 Disorderly conduct and profanity – Prohibited.

It is unlawful to use profane or abusive language or to conduct oneself in a disorderly manner in any park or public facility. “Profane or abusive language” means obscenity or fighting words constituting unprotected speech. (Ord. 345 § 1, 2003; Ord. 181 § 1, 1997)


12.50.410 Loitering.

Loitering is prohibited in restrooms at any park or public facility. (Ord. 345 § 1, 2003; Ord. 181 § 1, 1997)


12.50.420 Washing.

Unless authorized by a valid, written agreement executed by the City, it is unlawful to clean oneself, wash any clothing or other articles for personal or household use, or any dog or other animal in any park or public facility except in a restroom facility designed for such purpose. (Ord. 370 § 8, 2004; Ord. 345 § 1, 2003)


12.50.430 Groups or assemblies – Park reservations.

It is unlawful for any person to hold, sponsor, or participate in any special event, as that term is defined in WMC 8.12.020, without first obtaining a special event permit in accordance with the City of Woodinville’s special events policies described in Chapter 8.12 WMC, which shall permit the fullest peaceful utilization of the parks by all of the general public (including such persons attending such assemblies and such other persons utilizing the park, but not in attendance at such assembly) as shall be reasonably possible and consistent with the health, safety, and general welfare. No City of Woodinville parks may be reserved for exclusive use without a special event permit or Woodinville Sports Field permit. Special events may only be held in Wilmot Gateway Park, Woodin Creek Park, Rotary Park, DeYoung Park, and the Woodinville Sports Fields. In this connection, and in addition to the conduct requirements of this chapter, such rules and regulations may require the deposit of “cleanup” undertakings, the furnishing of waste and sanitary conveniences and effective plans for traffic and crowd control and management. The City is not responsible for the actions of other park users not attending permitted assemblies at City parks that may affect a permitted assembly. (Ord. 616 § 2 (Att. B), 2016; Ord. 370 § 7, 2004; Ord. 345 § 1, 2003)


12.50.440 Violation – Penalty.

Violation of any of the rules or regulations in this chapter is a civil infraction, punishable by a fine unless otherwise noted. Any person violating any of the rules and regulations in this chapter identified as a misdemeanor shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000 and/or imprisonment for not more than 90 days upon conviction. (Ord. 345 § 1, 2003. Formerly 12.50.410)


12.50.450 Conflicts with criminal code, traffic code, and other ordinances.

In the event that any provision of this chapter should conflict with any provision of the Woodinville Criminal Code, Chapter 9.03 WMC, or the Woodinville Traffic Code, Chapter 10.03 WMC, the criminal code or traffic code provision, as the case may be, shall govern. In the event that any act, omission, behavior, or conduct is punishable under this chapter and the Woodinville Criminal Code, Chapter 9.03 WMC, or the Woodinville Traffic Code, Chapter 10.03 WMC, the provision with the more severe penalty shall apply, notwithstanding this chapter. (Ord. 345 § 1, 2003; Ord. 181 § 1, 1997. Formerly 12.50.420)


Title 13 PUBLIC SERVICES AND UTILITIES

Chapters:

13.03    Storm and Surface Water Utility

13.04    Illicit Discharge and/or Dumping Detection and Elimination

13.05    Stormwater Runoff and Surface Water and Erosion Control


Chapter 13.03 STORM AND SURFACE WATER UTILITY

Sections:

13.03.010    Surface water management program adopted.

13.03.020    Modifications to Chapter 9.08 King County Code.

13.03.030    Fees.


13.03.010 Surface water management program adopted.

Except as modified by the provisions of this chapter, Chapter 9.08 of the King County Code, one copy of which has been and is on file in the office of the City Clerk for use and examination by the public, is hereby adopted by this reference as if set forth in full. (Ord. 26 § 1, 1993)


13.03.020 Modifications to Chapter 9.08 King County Code.

The following modifications are hereby made to Chapter 9.08 of the King County Code adopted by reference in WMC 13.03.010, above:

(1) References to King County shall refer to the City of Woodinville.

(2) References to the King County Department of Public Works, Surface Water Management Division shall refer to the City of Woodinville City Manager or his/her designee.

(3) KCC 9.08.030 relating to the Surface Water Management Citizen’s Committee is deleted.

(4) References to the King County Zoning and Subdivision Examiner shall be to the Woodinville Hearing Examiner.

(5) KCC 9.08.080(B)(4), (5), (8), and (9), which provide certain exemptions and adjustments to storm and surface water charges, are hereby excepted from the City’s adoption of Chapter 9.08 of the King County Code. All exceptions and adjustments to the storm and surface water utility assessments established by the City shall be set forth in the fee resolution establishing the assessments and any provisions of Chapter 9.08 adopted by King County in conflict herewith are exempted from adoption by the City by this reference. (Ord. 538 § 1, 2011; Ord. 26 § 2, 1993)


13.03.030 Fees.

All fees charged by the City for the use of the storm and surface water utility will henceforth be established by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 313 § 1, 2002)


Chapter 13.04 ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND/OR DUMPING DETECTION AND ELIMINATION

Sections:

13.04.010    Purpose.

13.04.020    Definitions.

13.04.030    Prohibited discharges.

13.04.040    Allowable discharges.

13.04.050    Conditional discharges.

13.04.060    Prohibition of illicit connections.

13.04.065    Best management practices required.

13.04.070    Inspections and warrants.

13.04.080    Violations and remedies.

13.04.090    Administration – Rules and regulations.


13.04.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the City’s municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4 or stormwater drainage system) regarding the introduction of pollutants that would adversely impact surface and ground water quality of the State of Washington in order to comply with the requirements of the City’s National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit. The intent of this chapter is to:

(1) Control the introduction of pollutants to the stormwater drainage system by any person and/or entity.

(2) Prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the stormwater drainage system and receiving waters.

(3) Establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 509 § 1, 2010)


13.04.020 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall mean:

(1) “AKART” means all known, available, and reasonable methods of prevention, control, and treatment. See also the State Water Pollution Control Act, RCW 90.48.010 and 90.48.520.

(2) “Best management practices (BMPs)” means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and structural or managerial practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.

(3) “Clean Water Act” means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 USC Section 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.

(4) “Ground water” means water in a saturated zone or stratum beneath the surface of the land or below a surface water body.

(5) “Hazardous materials” means any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.

(6) “Hyperchlorinated” means water that contains more than 10 mg/liter chlorine.

(7) “Illicit discharge” means any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the City’s storm drain system, except as expressly allowed by this chapter.

(8) “Illicit connection” means any manmade connection to the City’s storm drain system without a permit, excluding roof drains and other similar type connections. Examples include sanitary sewer connections, floor drains, channels, pipelines, conduits, inlets, or outlets that are connected directly to the municipal separate stormwater system.

(9) “Municipal separate stormwater system (MS4)” means a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the City of Woodinville; designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater; which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW).

(10) “Publicly owned treatment works (POTW)” means any device or system used in treatment of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature which is publicly owned; and which is not a combined sewer.

(11) “Combined sewer” means a system that collects sanitary sewage and stormwater in a single sewer system.

(12) “National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) stormwater discharge permit” means a permit issued by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) (or by the Washington Department of Ecology under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC Section 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.

(13) “Nonstormwater discharge” means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.

(14) “Person” means any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law.

(15) “Pollutant” means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.

(16) “Premises” means any building, or portion of building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.

(17) “Storm drainage system” means facilities, including the City’s municipal separate stormwater system, by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures.

(18) “Stormwater” means runoff during and following precipitation and snowmelt events, including surface runoff and drainage.

(19) “Stormwater pollution prevention plan” means a document which describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented by a person to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a premises and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable. (Ord. 509 § 1, 2010)


13.04.030 Prohibited discharges.

(1) Illicit discharges are prohibited. No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause or allow others under its control to throw, drain or otherwise discharge into the City’s storm drainage system and/or surface and ground waters any materials, including hazardous materials and pollutants, other than stormwater.

(2) Examples of prohibited contaminants include but are not limited to the following:

(a) Trash or debris;

(b) Construction materials;

(c) Petroleum products including but not limited to oil, gasoline, grease, fuel oil and heating oil;

(d) Antifreeze and other automotive products;

(e) Metals in either particulate or dissolved form;

(f) Flammable or explosive materials;

(g) Radioactive material;

(h) Batteries;

(i) Acids, alkalis, or bases;

(j) Paints, stains, resins, lacquers, or varnishes;

(k) Degreasers and/or solvents;

(l) Drain cleaners;

(m) Pesticides, herbicides, or fertilizers;

(n) Steam cleaning wastes;

(o) Soaps, detergents, or ammonia;

(p) Swimming pool or spa filter backwash;

(q) Chlorine, bromine, or other disinfectants;

(r) Heated water;

(s) Domestic animal wastes;

(t) Sewage;

(u) Recreational vehicle waste;

(v) Animal carcasses;

(w) Food wastes and food processing waste;

(x) Bark and other fibrous materials; 

(y) Lawn clippings, leaves, or branches;

(z) Silt, sediment, concrete, cement or gravel;

(aa) Dyes;

(bb) Chemicals not normally found in uncontaminated water;

(cc) Prescription and nonprescription pharmaceuticals;

(dd) Any other process-associated discharge except as otherwise allowed in this section; and/or

(ee) Any other hazardous material or waste not listed above. (Ord. 509 § 1, 2010)


13.04.040 Allowable discharges.

The following types of discharges shall not be considered illicit discharges for the purposes of this chapter unless the City determines that the type of discharge, whether singly or in combination with others, is causing or is likely to cause pollution of surface water or ground water:

(1) Diverted stream flows;

(2) Rising ground waters;

(3) Uncontaminated ground water infiltration, as defined in 40 CFR 35.2005(20);

(4) Uncontaminated pumped ground water;

(5) Water from foundation drains;

(6) Air conditioning condensation;

(7) Irrigation water from agricultural sources that is commingled with urban stormwater;

(8) Springs;

(9) Uncontaminated water from crawl space pumps;

(10) Water from footing drains;

(11) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; and

(12) Discharge from emergency fire fighting activities. (Ord. 690 § 1, 2019; Ord. 509 § 1, 2010)


13.04.050 Conditional discharges.

The following types of discharges shall not be considered illicit discharges for the purposes of this chapter if they meet the stated conditions, or unless the City determines that the type of discharge, whether singly or in combination with others, is causing or is likely to cause pollution of surface water or ground water:

(1) Potable water, including water from water line flushing, hyperchlorinated water line flushing, fire hydrant system flushing, and pipeline hydrostatic test water. Planned discharges shall be dechlorinated to a concentration of 0.1 ppm or less, pH-adjusted if necessary, and in volumes and velocities controlled to prevent resuspension of sediments in the stormwater system; provided, that written approval has been granted by the Public Works Director;

(2) Lawn watering and other irrigation runoff are permitted but shall be minimized;

(3) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges. These discharges shall be dechlorinated to a concentration of 0.1 ppm or less, pH-adjusted if necessary, in volumes and velocities controlled to prevent resuspension of sediments in the stormwater system, and thermally controlled to prevent an increase in temperature of the receiving water; provided, that written approval has been granted by the Public Works Director; and provided, that swimming pool cleaning wastewater and filter backwash shall not be discharged to the stormwater system;

(4) Street and sidewalk wash water, water used to control dust, and routine external building wash down that does not use detergents are permitted if the amount of street wash and dust control water used is minimized. At active construction sites, street sweeping must be performed prior to washing the street;

(5) Nonstormwater discharges covered by another NPDES permit; provided, that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations; and provided, that written approval has been granted by the Public Works Director for any discharge to the storm drain system; and

(6) Other nonstormwater discharges. The discharges shall be in compliance with the requirements of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) reviewed and approved by the City, which addresses control of such discharges by applying AKART to prevent contaminants from entering surface or ground water; provided, that written approval has been granted by the Public Works Director. (Ord. 690 § 2, 2019; Ord. 509 § 1, 2010)


13.04.060 Prohibition of illicit connections.

(1) The construction, use, maintenance, or continued existence of illicit connections to the City’s storm drainage system is prohibited.

(2) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.

(3) A person is considered to be in violation of this chapter if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue. (Ord. 509 § 1, 2010)


13.04.065 Best management practices required.

(1) Compliance with this chapter shall be achieved through the use of BMPs described in the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Manual. 

(2) BMPs shall be applied to any business or residential activity that may result in prohibited discharges as specified in the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Manual. Activities that may result in prohibited discharges include but are not limited to:

(a) Potable water line flushing;

(b) Lawn watering with potable water;

(c) Dust control with potable water;

(d) Automobile and boat washing;

(e) Pavement and building washing;

(f) Swimming pool and hot tub maintenance;

(g) Auto repair and maintenance;

(h) Building repair and maintenance;

(i) Landscape maintenance;

(j) Hazardous waste handling;

(k) Solid and food waste handling;

(l) Application of pesticides.

(3) In applying the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Manual, the Director shall first require the implementation of source control BMPs. If these are not sufficient to prevent contaminants from entering surface water, stormwater, or groundwater, the Director may require implementation of treatment BMPs as set forth in AKART.

(4) In applying the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Manual to prohibited discharges from normal single-family residential activities, the Director shall use public education and warnings as the primary methods for gaining compliance with the chapter and shall not use citations, notice and orders, assessment of civil penalties and fines, or other compliance actions unless the Director determines that the discharge from a normal single-family residential activity, whether singly or in combination with other discharges, is causing a significant contribution of contaminants to surface water, stormwater, or groundwater or is causing a hazard. (Ord. 634 § 17, 2016)


13.04.070 Inspections and warrants.

(1) Authority. Whenever implementing the provisions of this chapter or whenever there is cause to believe that a violation of this chapter has been or is being committed, the City’s inspector is authorized to inspect during regular working hours and at other reasonable times all new development, redevelopment, and construction sites within Woodinville to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter.

(2) Inspection Procedures.

(a) Prior to making any inspections on private property, the inspector shall present identification credentials, state the reason for the inspection and request entry. Any private landowner engaging in new development, redevelopment, or construction activities requiring on-site stormwater collection or detention connected to the City’s storm drain system must, as a condition of the building permit required for such development/construction, consent to the creation of an easement for purposes of ingress and egress from time to time by the City for inspection of the on-site stormwater collection or detention facilities. The landowner shall cause the easement to be recorded.

(b) If the property or any building or structure on the property is unoccupied, the inspector shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person(s) having charge or control of the property or portions of the property and request entry.

(c) If after reasonable effort the inspector is unable to locate the owner or other person(s) having charge or control of the property, and has reason to believe the condition of the stormwater system creates an imminent hazard to persons or property, the inspector may enter.

(d) Unless entry is consented to by the owner or person(s) in control of the property or portion of the property or unless conditions are reasonably believed to exist which create imminent hazard, the inspector shall obtain a search warrant, prior to entry, as authorized by the laws of the State of Washington.

(e) The inspector may inspect the stormwater system without obtaining a search warrant provided for in subsection (2)(d) of this section, provided the inspection can be conducted while remaining on public property or other property on which permission to enter is obtained.

(3) Inspection Requirements. The Director is authorized to develop inspection procedures and requirements, including checklists, for all stormwater facilities in the City of Woodinville.

(4) Inspection Fees. Inspection fees shall be established by resolution. (Ord. 509 § 1, 2010)


13.04.080 Violations and remedies.

(1) The violation of or failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter is unlawful and constitutes a nuisance. The remedies and penalties provided in this section, whether civil or criminal, shall be cumulative and shall be in addition to any other remedy provided by law.

(2) If the City observes any violation of the provisions of this chapter, the City may notify the person of the violation in writing, and require the person to cure or correct the violation within a period of time as specified by the City. However, if a violation presents an imminent and material risk of danger to persons, property or the public health, safety or welfare, the City may take any action as may be necessary to protect the persons, property or public. The City may assess any cost incurred by the City against the person that is responsible for the violation.

(3) The City may pursue any civil remedy at law or in equity, pursuant to Chapter 1.06 WMC and/or nuisance abatement as provided by law.

(4) Criminal Violation. A violation of this chapter is a gross misdemeanor. Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of up to $5,000 or jail time not exceeding one year or both for each and every violation. Each day that the violation continues shall be a separate offense. (Ord. 509 § 1, 2010)


13.04.090 Administration – Rules and regulations.

The City Manager is authorized to implement this chapter. The City Manager is authorized to promulgate and adopt administrative rules and regulations under the procedures specified in Ordinance No. 159 (Chapter 2.31 WMC) for the purposes of implementing and enforcing this chapter. (Ord. 634 § 18, 2016)


Chapter 13.05 STORMWATER RUNOFF AND SURFACE WATER AND EROSION CONTROL

Sections:

13.05.010    Chapter 9.04 King County Code – Adopted.

13.05.020    Chapter 9.04 King County Code – Modified.


13.05.010 Chapter 9.04 King County Code – Adopted.

Except as modified in this chapter, Chapter 9.04 of the King County Code is hereby adopted by this reference as if set forth in full. A copy is on file with the office of the City Clerk for public inspection. (Ord. 634 § 19, 2016)


13.05.020 Chapter 9.04 King County Code – Modified.

Chapter 9.04 of the King County Code, adopted by reference in this chapter, is hereby modified as follows:

(1) References to King County shall refer to the City of Woodinville.

(2) References to the Director shall mean the Woodinville City Manager or his or her designee.

(3) References to department or division shall refer to the appropriate department or division of the City of Woodinville as established by the City Manager.

(4) References to KCC Title 21A shall mean and refer to WMC Title 21.

(5) References to KCC Title 27A shall mean and refer to such provisions of the Woodinville Municipal Code as pertain to financial guarantees.

(6) References to KCC Title 23 shall mean and refer to WMC Title 1.

(7) References to Chapter 2.98 KCC shall mean and refer to Chapter 2.31 WMC.

(8) KCC 9.04.194 is deleted.

(9) KCC 9.04.020, Definitions, Definition BBB, shall be modified to read as follows:

“Surface Water Design Manual” means the King County Surface Water Design Manual and supporting documentation referenced or incorporated in the manual, describing surface and stormwater design and analysis requirements, procedures, and guidance which has been approved by the City of Woodinville Public Services Department and which has been formally adopted by public rule under the procedures specified in Ordinance No. 159. A copy of the Surface Water Design Manual is on file with the office of the City Clerk for examination by the public.

(10) KCC 9.04.050, Drainage review – requirements, shall be amended by replacing Section C.1.6. as follows:

The applicant may appeal the City Manager’s decision by following the administrative appeal procedures of Chapter 2.30 WMC.

(11) KCC 9.04.105, Financial guarantees authorized, shall be modified to read as follows:

The City Manager or his or her designee is authorized to require all applicants issued permits or approvals under the provisions of this title to post financial guarantees.

(12) KCC 9.04.115, Drainage facilities accepted by King County for maintenance, shall be amended by inserting the following after the first paragraph:

1. Woodinville will assume maintenance and operation of the following drainage facilities except where an adjustment is granted allowing the facilities to be maintained by a different party:

a. Flow control and water quality facilities within a tract or right-of-way dedicated to City of Woodinville.

b. Flow control BMP devices within a tract dedicated to City of Woodinville.

c. The structural elements of any flow control facilities, any water quality facilities, and any flow control BMP devices within a tract owned by a homeowners’ association when an easement for inspection and maintenance has been granted to the City. Maintenance of vegetation, mulch, and landscaping elements shall remain the responsibility of the homeowners’ association.

d. The structural elements of vegetated flow control BMP devices within the right-of-way of the City of Woodinville. Maintenance of vegetation, mulch, and landscaping elements shall remain the responsibility of the adjacent property owner(s).

e. The flow control functionality of vegetated flow paths of flow control BMPs where they serve public improvements. All other maintenance shall remain the responsibility of the owner(s).

f. The conveyance system within improved public road right-of-way.

(13) KCC 9.04.120, Drainage facilities not accepted by King County for maintenance, shall be modified to read as follows:

A. The person or persons holding title to the property, or the homeowners’ association designated to maintain shared facilities in accordance with 9.04.130, and the applicant required to construct a drainage facility shall remain responsible for the facility’s continual performance, operation and maintenance in accordance with the standards and requirements of the department and remain responsible for any liability as a result of these duties. This responsibility includes maintenance of a drainage facility which is:

1. Under a maintenance guarantee or defect guarantee;

2. A private road conveyance system or private road constructed of permeable pavement;

3. Released from all required financial guarantees prior to July 7, 1980;

4. Located within and serving only one single family residential lot;

5. Located within and serving a multifamily or commercial site.

6. Previously terminated for assumption of maintenance responsibilities by the department in accordance with KCC 9.04.110; or

7. Not otherwise accepted by City of Woodinville for maintenance.

B. Prior to the issuance of any of the permits for any multifamily or commercial project required to have flow control or water quality treatment facility, the applicant shall record a declaration of covenant as specified in the Surface Water Design Manual. The covenant shall be recorded with the County as a deed restriction on the title to the subject property. The restrictions set forth in such covenant shall include, but not be limited to:

1. Provisions for maintenance inspection and right-of-entry by City of Woodinville;

2. Provisions for notice to the person or persons holding title should City of Woodinville determine that maintenance and/or repairs are necessary to the facility and a reasonable time limit in which such work is to be completed;

3. Provisions for notice to the person or persons holding title should City of Woodinville perform such required maintenance and/or repair work upon failure of titleholders to effect such work;

4. Provisions to require the titleholders to reimburse City of Woodinville for performing any such required maintenance and/or repairs; and

5. A reference to the restrictions set forth in the declaration of covenant provided in the Surface Water Design Manual, which shall apply.

C. Prior to the issuance of any of the permits and/or approvals for the project or the release of financial guarantees posted to guarantee satisfactory completion, the person or persons holding title to the subject property for which a drainage facility was required shall pay a fee established by the Director to reasonably compensate City of Woodinville for costs relating to inspection of the facility to ensure that it has been constructed according to plan and applicable specifications and standards.

D. The duties specified in this section with regard to payment of inspection fees and reimbursement of maintenance costs shall be enforced against the person or persons holding title to the property for which the drainage facility was required.

E. Where not specifically defined in this section, the responsibility for performance, operation, and maintenance of drainage facilities and conveyance systems, both natural and constructed, shall be determined on a case-by-case basis.

(14) Chapter 9.04 KCC shall be amended by inserting a new section as follows:

9.04.130 Residential Shared Maintenance Agreement, Homeowners’ Association, or Condo Association Required

A. Where residential drainage facilities serve more than one property, continued operation and maintenance of the shared drainage facilities shall be assured by the recording of a shared maintenance agreement on a form approved by the Director or by the formation of a Homeowners’ Association or Condo Association as follows:

1. A short subdivision shall record a shared maintenance agreement against each lot in the plat for operation and maintenance of shared drainage facilities located in common areas or in tracts;

2. A subdivision shall form a homeowners’ association which shall have responsibility for maintaining the vegetation, mulch, and landscaping elements of shared drainage facilities in any tract dedicated to the City of Woodinville and for maintaining all components of other shared drainage facilities;

3. A residential subdivision of land requiring a binding site plan shall form a condo association which shall have responsibility for maintaining all drainage facilities.

(Ord. 634 § 19, 2016)


Title 14 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS*

Chapters:

14.04    Repealed

14.06    Repealed

14.09    Repealed

14.12    Commute Trip Reduction

*Code reviser’s note: This title was formerly codified in WMC Title 16. It has been recodified in this title at the request of the City.


Chapter 14.04 ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION

(Repealed by Ord. 611)


Chapter 14.06 WATER QUALITY STANDARDS

(Repealed by Ord. 634)


Chapter 14.09 SURFACE WATER RUN-OFF POLICY

(Repealed by Ord. 634)


Chapter 14.12 COMMUTE TRIP REDUCTION

Sections:

14.12.010    Definitions.

14.12.020    CTR plan.

14.12.030    CTR goals.

14.12.040    Responsible agency.

14.12.050    Applicability.

14.12.060    Requirements for employers.

14.12.070    CTR program report and discussion.

14.12.080    Recordkeeping.

14.12.090    Schedule and process for CTR program description and report.

14.12.100    Exemptions.

14.12.110    Appeals of administrative decisions.

14.12.120    Enforcement.


14.12.010 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter:

(1) “Affected employee” means a full-time employee who begins his or her regular work day at a single worksite between 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. (inclusive) on two or more weekdays per week for at least 12 continuous months who is not an independent contractor. Seasonal agricultural employees, including seasonal employees of processors of agricultural products, are excluded from the count of affected employees.

(2) “Affected employer” means an employer that employs 100 or more full-time employees at a single worksite who are scheduled to begin their regular work day between 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. (inclusive) on two or more weekdays for at least 12 continuous months. Construction worksites, when the expected duration of the construction is less than two years, are excluded from this definition.

(3) “Alternative mode” means any means of commute transportation other than that in which the single-occupant motor vehicle is the dominant mode, including telecommuting and compressed work week schedules if they result in reducing commute trips.

(4) “Alternative work schedules” mean programs such as compressed work week schedules that eliminate work trips for affected employees.

(5) “Base year” means the 12-month period which commences when a major employer is determined by the jurisdiction to be participating within the CTR program. The City of Woodinville uses this 12-month period as the basis upon which it develops commute trip reduction goals. 

(6) “Base year survey” or “baseline measurement” means the survey, during the base year, of employees at a major employer worksite to determine the drive-alone rate and vehicle miles traveled per employee at the worksite. The jurisdiction uses this measurement to develop commute trip reduction goals for the major employer. The baseline measurement must be implemented in a manner that meets the requirements specified by the City of Woodinville.

(7) “Carpool” means a motor vehicle, including a motorcycle, occupied by two to six people of at least 16 years of age traveling together for their commute trip, resulting in the minimum reduction of one motor vehicle commute trip.

(8) “Commute trip vehicle miles traveled per employee” means the sum of the individual vehicle commute trip lengths in miles over a set period divided by the number of full-time employees during that period.

(9) “Commute trips” means trips made from a worker’s home to a worksite with a regularly scheduled arrival time of 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. (inclusive) on weekdays.

(10) “Compressed work week” means an alternative work schedule, in accordance with employer policy, that regularly allows a full-time employee to eliminate at least one work day every two weeks by working longer hours during the remaining days, resulting in fewer commute trips by the employee. This definition is primarily intended to include weekly and bi-weekly arrangements, the most typical being four 10-hour days or 80 hours in nine days, but may also include other arrangements.

(11) “CTR” is the abbreviation of commute trip reduction.

(12) “CTR program” means an employer’s strategies to reduce affected employees’ SOV use and VMT per employee.

(13) “Custom bus/buspool” means a commuter bus service arranged specifically to transport employees to work.

(14) “Dominant mode” means the mode of travel used for the greatest distance of a commute trip.

(15) “Drive alone” means the mode of travel used for the greatest distance of a commute trip.

(16) “Drive-alone trips” means commute trips made by employees in single-occupant vehicles.

(17) “Employee transportation coordinator (ETC)” means any person who is designated as responsible for the development, implementation and monitoring of any employer’s CTR program.

(18) “Employer” means a sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, unincorporated association, cooperative, joint venture, agency, department, district or other individual or entity, whether public, nonprofit, or private, that employs workers.

(19) “Exemption” means a waiver from any or all CTR program requirements granted to an employer by the City of Woodinville based on unique conditions that apply to the employer or employment site.

(20) “Flex-time” is an employer policy allowing individual employees some flexibility in choosing the time, but not the number, of their working hours to facilitate the use of alternative modes.

(21) “Full-time employee” means a person, other than an independent contractor, scheduled to be employed on a continuous basis for 52 weeks per year for an average of at least 35 hours per week.

(22) “Good faith effort” means that an employer has met the minimum requirements identified in RCW 70.94.531 and this chapter, and is working collaboratively with the City of Woodinville to continue its existing CTR program or is developing and implementing program modifications likely to result in improvements to its CTR program over an agreed-upon length of time.

(23) “Implementation” means active pursuit by an employer of the CTR goals of RCW 70.94.521 through 70.94.555 and this chapter as evidenced by appointment of a transportation coordinator (ETC), distribution of information to employees regarding alternatives to drive-alone commuting, and commencement of other measures according to their CTR program and schedule.

(24) A “major employer” means a private or public employer, including State agencies, that employs 100 or more full-time employees at a single worksite who are scheduled to begin their regular work day between 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on weekdays for at least 12 continuous months.

(25) “Major employer worksite” or “affected employer worksite” or “worksite” means the physical location occupied by a major employer, as determined by the local jurisdiction.

(26) “Major employment installation” means a military base or Federal reservation, excluding tribal reservations, or other location as designated by City of Woodinville, at which there are 100 or more affected employees.

(27) “Mode” means the type of transportation used by employees, such as single-occupant motor vehicle, rideshare vehicle (carpool, vanpool), transit, ferry, bicycle, and walking, compressed work schedule and telecommuting.

(28) “Notice” means written communication delivered via the United States Postal Service with receipt deemed accepted three days following the day on which the notice was deposited with the Postal Service, unless the third day falls on a weekend or legal holiday in which case the notice is deemed accepted the day after the weekend or legal holiday.

(29) “Peak period” means the hours from 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. (inclusive), Monday through Friday, except legal holidays.

(30) “Peak period trip” means any employee trip that delivers the employee to begin his or her regular workday between 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. (inclusive), Monday through Friday, except legal holidays.

(31) “Proportion of drive-alone trips” or “drive-alone rate” means the number of commute trips over a set period made by affected employees in single-occupancy vehicles divided by the number of potential trips taken by affected employees working during that period.

(32) “Teleworking” or “telecommuting” means the use of telephones, computers, or other similar technology to permit an employee to work from home, eliminating a commute trip, or to work from a work place closer to home, reducing the distance traveled in a commute trip by at least half.

(33) “Transit” means a multiple-occupant vehicle operated on a for-hire, shared-ride basis, including bus, ferry, rail, shared-ride taxi, shuttle, or vanpool. 

(34) “Transportation demand management (TDM)” means a broad range of strategies that are primarily intended to reduce and reshape demand on the transportation system.

(35) “Transportation management association (TMA)” means a group of employers or an association representing a group of employers in a defined geographic area. A TMA may represent employers within specific City limits, or may have a sphere of influence that extends beyond City limits.

(36) “Vanpool” means a vehicle occupied by from seven to 15 people traveling together for their commute trip that results in the reduction of a minimum of one motor vehicle trip. A vanpool counts as zero vehicle trips.

(37) “Vehicle miles traveled (VMT) per employee” means the sum of the individual vehicle commute trip lengths in miles made by affected employees over a set period divided by the number of affected employees during that period.

(38) “Week” means a seven-day calendar period, starting on Monday and through Sunday.

(39) “Weekday” means any day of the week except Saturday or Sunday.

(40) “Writing,” “written,” or “in writing” means original signed and dated documents. Facsimile (fax) transmissions are a temporary notice of action that must be followed by the original signed and dated document via mail or delivery. (Ord. 474 § 1, 2008; Ord. 195 § 1, 1998)


14.12.020 CTR plan.

The goals established for the City of Woodinville and affected employers in the City of Woodinville’s Commute Trip Reduction Plan set forth in Attachment A to the ordinance codified in this chapter are incorporated herein by reference. City of Woodinville staff is directed to make any corrections for typographical errors, include any graphical materials for information, and complete the commute trip reduction plan. (Ord. 474 § 1, 2008; Ord. 195 § 2, 1998)


14.12.030 CTR goals.

City of Woodinville goals for reductions in the proportions of drive-alone commute trips and vehicle miles traveled per employee by affected employers in the City of Woodinville’s jurisdiction, major employment installations, and other areas designated by the City of Woodinville are hereby established by the City of Woodinville’s CTR Plan incorporated by WMC 14.12.020. These goals establish the desired level of performance for the CTR program in its entirety in the City of Woodinville. (Ord. 474 § 1, 2008; Ord. 195 § 2, 1998. Formerly 14.12.020)


14.12.040 Responsible agency.

The City of Woodinville Public Works Department shall be responsible for implementing this chapter, the City’s CTR plan and the City’s CTR program, and should be identified together with any authority necessary to carry out such responsibilities such as rule-making or certain administrative decisions. (Ord. 474 § 1, 2008; Ord. 195 § 4, 1998)


14.12.050 Applicability.

The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any affected employer within the geographic limits of the CTR plan adopted in WMC 14.12.020.

(1) Notification of Applicability.

(a) In addition to the City of Woodinville’s established public notification for adoption of an ordinance, a notice of availability of a summary of this chapter and a notice of the requirements and criteria for affected employers to comply with this chapter and subsequent revisions shall be published at least once in the City’s official newspaper not more than 30 days after adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter or revisions.

(b) Affected employers located in Woodinville are to receive written notification that they are subject to this chapter. Such notice shall be addressed to the company’s chief executive officer, senior official, CTR program manager, or registered agent at the worksite. Such notification shall provide 90 days for the affected employer to perform a baseline measurement consistent with the measurement requirements specified by the City of Woodinville.

(c) Affected employers that, for whatever reason, do not receive notice within 30 days of passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter and are either notified or identify themselves to the City of Woodinville within 90 days of the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter will be granted an extension to assure up to 90 days within which to perform a baseline measurement consistent with the measurement specified by the City of Woodinville.

(d) Affected employers that have not been identified or do not identify themselves within 90 days of the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter and do not perform a baseline measurement consistent with measurement requirements specified by the City of Woodinville within 90 days from passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter are in violation of this chapter.

(e) If an affected employer has already performed a baseline measurement, or an alternative acceptable to the City of Woodinville, under previous iterations of this chapter, the employer is not required to perform another baseline measurement.

(2) New Affected Employers.

(a) Employers that meet the definition of “affected employer” must identify themselves to the City of Woodinville within 90 days of either moving into the boundaries outlined in the CTR plan adopted in WMC 14.12.020 or growing in employment at a worksite to 100 or more affected employees. Employers that do not identify themselves within 90 days are in violation of this chapter.

(b) Newly affected employers identified as such shall be given 90 days to perform a baseline measurement consistent with the measurement requirements specified by the City of Woodinville. Employers who do not perform a baseline measurement within 90 days of receiving written notification that they are subject to this chapter are in violation of this chapter.

(c) Newly appointed ETCs shall attend ETC training, as offered, within 90 days of appointment.

(d) Not more than 90 days after receiving written notification of the results of the baseline measurement, the newly affected employer shall develop and submit a CTR program to the City of Woodinville. The program will be developed in consultation with City of Woodinville staff (listed in WMC 14.12.040) to be consistent with the goals of the CTR plan adopted in WMC 14.12.020. Employers who do implement an approved CTR program according to this schedule are in violation of this chapter and subject to the penalties outlined in WMC 14.12.120(4).

(3) Change in Status as an Affected Employer. Any of the following changes in an employer’s status will change the employer’s CTR program requirements:

(a) If an employer initially designated as an affected employer no longer employs 100 or more affected employees and expects not to employ 100 or more affected employees for the next 12 months, that employer is no longer an affected employer. It is the responsibility of the employer to notify the City of Woodinville that it is no longer an affected employer. The burden of proof lies with the employer. 

(b) If the same employer returns to the level of 100 or more affected employees within the same 12 months, that employer will be considered an affected employer for the entire 12 months and will be subject to the same program requirements as other affected employers.

(c) If the same employer returns to the level of 100 or more affected employees 12 or more months after its change in status to an “unaffected” employer, that employer shall be treated as a new affected employer, and will be subject to the same CTR program requirements as other new affected employers. 

Optional:

(d) This section only applies when the CTR plan as approved in WMC 14.12.020 designates the employer as affected based on location within the geographic limits of the plan. If the CTR plan affects the employer based on a location within a growth and transportation efficiency center, and the employer meets the criteria laid out for that center, then the center’s requirements will apply. (Ord. 474 § 1, 2008; Ord. 195 § 5, 1998)


14.12.060 Requirements for employers.

An affected employer is required to make a good faith effort, as defined in RCW 70.94.534(2) and this chapter, to develop and implement a CTR program that will encourage its employees to reduce VMT per employee and drive-alone commute trips. The CTR program must include the mandatory elements as described below:

(1) Mandatory Program Elements. Each employer’s CTR program shall include the following mandatory elements:

(a) Employee Transportation Coordinator (ETC). The employer shall designate a transportation coordinator to administer the CTR program. The ETC and/or designee’s name, location, and telephone number must be displayed prominently at each affected worksite. The ETC shall oversee all elements of the employer’s CTR program and act as liaison between the employer and the City of Woodinville. The objective is to have an effective transportation coordinator presence at each worksite; an affected employer with multiple sites may have one ETC for all sites. New ETCs shall be required to attend ETC training within 90 days of appointment. 

(b) Information Distribution. Information about alternatives to drive-alone commuting shall be provided to employees at least once a year and to new employees at the time of hire. The summary of the employer’s CTR program shall also be submitted to the City of Woodinville with the employer’s program description and regular report.

(2) Additional Program Elements. In addition to the specific program elements described above, the employer’s CTR program shall include additional elements as needed to meet CTR goals. Elements may include, but are not limited to, one or more of the following:

(a) Promotional events;

(b) Transportation fairs;

(c) Commuter information center;

(d) Ridematching services;

(e) Bicycle training program;

(f) Provision of preferential parking for high occupancy vehicles;

(g) Guaranteed ride home program;

(h) Compressed work week;

(i) Alternative work schedules;

(j) Telecommuting programs;

(k) Secure bicycle parking facilities, lockers, changing areas, and showers;

(l) Pedestrian facilities or improvements;

(m) Signage for residential parking zone;

(n) Reduction of SOV parking supply;

(o) Discounted HOV parking price;

(p) Increase or institution of SOV parking price;

(q) Transportation allowance/voucher;

(r) Transportation subsidy or discount;

(s) Rideshare bonuses;

(t) Carpool subsidy;

(u) Carpool fuel incentives;

(v) Vanpool sponsorship and subsidies;

(w) Fleetpool;

(x) Vanpool program;

(y) On-site child care services;

(z) Shuttle services;

(aa) Alternative measures designed to facilitate the use of high-occupancy vehicles. (Ord. 474 § 1, 2008; Ord. 195 § 6, 1998)


14.12.070 CTR program report and discussion.

(1) Affected employers shall review their program and file a regular progress report with the City of Woodinville in accordance with the format provided by the City of Woodinville.

(2) The CTR program report and description outlines the strategies to be undertaken by an employer to achieve the commute trip reduction goals for the reporting period. Employers are encouraged to consider innovative strategies and combine program elements in a manner that will best suit their location, site characteristics, business type, and employees’ commuting needs. Employers are further encouraged to cooperate with each other to implement program elements.

(3) At a minimum, the employer’s CTR program report and description must include:

(a) A general description of the employment site location, transportation characteristics, employee parking availability, on-site amenities, and surrounding services;

(b) The number of employees affected by the CTR program and the total number of employees at the site;

(c) Documentation on compliance with the mandatory CTR program elements (as described in WMC 14.12.060(1));

(d) Description of any additional elements included in the employer’s CTR program (as described in WMC 14.12.060(2)); and

(e) A statement of organizational commitment to provide appropriate resources to the program to meet the employer’s established goals.

(4) Biennial Measure of Employee Commute Behavior. In addition to the baseline measurement, employers shall conduct a program evaluation as a means of determining worksite progress toward meeting CTR goals. As part of the program evaluation, the employer shall distribute and collect commute trip reduction program employee questionnaires (surveys) at least once every two years, and strive to achieve at least a 70 percent response rate from employees at the worksite. (Ord. 474 § 1, 2008)


14.12.080 Recordkeeping.

Affected employers shall maintain a copy of their approved CTR program description and report, their CTR employee questionnaire results, and all supporting documentation for the descriptions and assertions made in any CTR report to the City of Woodinville for a minimum of 48 months. The City of Woodinville and the employer shall agree on the recordkeeping requirements as part of the accepted CTR program. (Ord. 474 § 1, 2008; Ord. 195 § 7, 1998. Formerly 14.12.070)


14.12.090 Schedule and process for CTR program description and report.

(1) Document Review. The City of Woodinville shall provide the employer with written notification if a CTR program is deemed unacceptable. The notification must give cause for any rejection. If the employer receives no written notification of extension of the review period of its CTR program or comment on the CTR program or annual report within 90 days of submission, the employer’s program or annual report is deemed accepted. The City of Woodinville may extend the review period up to 90 days. The implementation date for the employer’s CTR program will be extended an equivalent number of days. 

(2) Schedule. Upon review of an employer’s initial CTR program, the City of Woodinville shall establish the employer’s regular reporting date. This report will be provided in a form provided by the City of Woodinville consistent with WMC 14.12.070.

(3) Modification of CTR Program Elements. Any affected employer may submit a request to the City of Woodinville for modification of CTR requirements. Such request may be granted if one of the following conditions exist:

(a) The employer can demonstrate it would be unable to comply with the CTR program elements for reasons beyond the control of the employer; or

(b) The employer can demonstrate that compliance with the program elements would constitute an undue hardship.

The City of Woodinville may ask the employer to substitute a program element of similar trip reduction potential rather than grant the employer’s request.

(4) Extensions. An employer may request additional time to submit a CTR program description and report, or to implement or modify a program. Such requests shall be via written notice at least 30 days before the due date for which the extension is being requested. Extensions not to exceed 90 days shall be considered for reasonable causes. The City of Woodinville shall grant or deny the employer’s extension request by written notice within 10 working days of its receipt of the extension request. If there is no response issued to the employer, an extension is automatically granted for 30 days. Extensions shall not exempt an employer from any responsibility in meeting program goals. Extensions granted due to delays or difficulties with any program element(s) shall not be cause for discontinuing or failing to implement other program elements. An employer’s regular reporting date shall not be adjusted permanently as a result of these extensions. An employer’s annual reporting date may be extended at the discretion of the City of Woodinville.

(5) Implementation of Employer’s CTR Program. Unless extensions are granted, the employer shall implement its approved CTR program not more than 90 days after receiving written notice from the City of Woodinville that the program has been approved, or with the expiration of the program review period without receiving notice from the City of Woodinville. (Ord. 474 § 1, 2008; Ord. 195 § 8, 1998. Formerly 14.12.080)


14.12.100 Exemptions.

(1) Worksite Exemptions. An affected employer may request the City of Woodinville to grant an exemption from all CTR program requirements or penalties for a particular worksite. The employer must demonstrate that it would experience undue hardship in complying with the requirements of this chapter as a result of the characteristics of its business, its work force, or its location(s). An exemption may be granted if and only if the affected employer demonstrates that it faces extraordinary circumstances, such as bankruptcy, and is unable to implement any measures that could reduce the proportion of SOV trips and VMT per employee. Exemptions may be granted by the City of Woodinville at any time based on written notice provided by the affected employer. The notice should clearly explain the conditions for which the affected employer is seeking an exemption from the requirements of the CTR program. The City of Woodinville shall grant or deny the request within 30 days of receipt of the request. The City of Woodinville shall review annually all employers receiving exemptions, and shall determine whether the exemption will be in effect during the following program year.

(2) Employee Exemptions. Specific employees or groups of employees who are required to drive alone to work as a condition of employment may be exempted from a worksite’s CTR program. Exemptions may also be granted for employees who work variable shifts throughout the year and who do not rotate as a group to identical shifts. The City of Woodinville will use the criteria identified in the CTR board administrative guidelines to assess the validity of employee exemption requests. The City of Woodinville shall review annually all employee exemption requests, and shall determine whether the exemption will be in effect during the following program year.

(3) Modification of CTR Program Goals.

(a) Any affected employer may request the City of Woodinville modify its program goals. Such request shall be filed in writing at least 60 days prior to the date on which the worksite is required to submit its program description or annual report. The goal modification request must clearly explain why the worksite is unable to achieve the applicable goal. The worksite must clearly demonstrate that it has implemented all of the elements contained in its approved CTR program.

(b) The City will review and deny or grant requests for goal modifications in accordance with procedures and criteria identified in the CTR board guidelines.

(c) An employer may not request a modification of the applicable goals until one year after the City of Woodinville’s approval of its initial program description or annual report.

(4) Extensions. An employer may request additional time to submit a CTR program or CTR annual progress report, or to implement or modify a program. Such requests shall be via written notice at least 30 days before the due date for which the extension is being requested. Requests for extensions must be made prior to the due date any time a program submission is going to be more than one week late. Extensions not to exceed 90 days shall be considered for reasonable causes. Employers will be limited to a total of 90 allowed extension days per year. Extensions shall not exempt an employer from any responsibility for meeting program goals. Extensions granted due to delays or difficulties with any program elements shall not be cause for discontinuing or failing to implement other program elements. An employer’s annual reporting date shall not be adjusted permanently as a result of these extensions. An employer’s annual reporting date may be extended at the discretion of the City Manager. (Ord. 474 § 1, 2008; Ord. 195 § 9, 1998. Formerly 14.12.090)


14.12.110 Appeals of administrative decisions.

(1) Appeal of Final Decisions. Employers may file a written appeal to the City’s Hearing Examiner of the City’s final decisions regarding the following actions:

(a) Rejection of an employer’s proposed program.

(b) Denial of an employer’s request for an exemption or modification of any of the requirements under this chapter or a modification of the employer’s program.

(2) Appeals Filed Under this Section. Appeals must be filed with the City within 20 days after the employer receives notice of a final decision. Timely appeals shall be heard by the City’s Hearing Examiner. Determinations on appeals shall be based on whether the decision being appealed was consistent with the State law. (Ord. 474 § 1, 2008; Ord. 195 § 12, 1998. Formerly 14.12.120)


14.12.120 Enforcement.

(1) Compliance. For purposes of this section, “compliance” shall mean:

(a) Fully implementing in good faith all mandatory program elements as well as provisions in the approved CTR program description and report;

(b) Providing a complete CTR program description and report on the regular reporting date; and

(c) Distributing and collecting the CTR employee questionnaire during the scheduled survey time period.

(2) Program Modification Criteria. The following criteria for achieving goals for VMT per employee and proportion of drive-alone trips shall be applied in determining requirements for employer CTR program modifications:

(a) If an employer meets either or both goals, the employer has satisfied the objectives of the CTR plan and will not be required to improve its CTR program.

(b) If an employer makes a good faith effort, as defined in RCW 70.94.534(2) and this chapter, but has not met the applicable drive-alone or VMT goal, no additional modifications are required.

(c) If an employer fails to make a good faith effort as defined in RCW 70.94.534(2) and this chapter, and fails to meet the applicable drive-alone or VMT reduction goal, the City of Woodinville shall direct the employer to revise its program within 30 days to come into compliance with the measures defined by RCW 70.94.534(2), including specific recommended program modifications. In response to the recommended modifications, the employer shall submit a revised CTR program description and report, including the requested modifications or equivalent measures, within 30 days of receiving written notice to revise its program. The City of Woodinville shall review the revisions and notify the employer of acceptance or rejection of the revised program. If a revised program is not accepted, the City of Woodinville will send written notice to that effect to the employer within 30 days and, if necessary, require the employer to attend a conference with program review staff for the purpose of reaching a consensus on the required program. A final decision on the required program will be issued in writing by the City of Woodinville within 10 working days of the conference.

(3) Violations. The following constitute violations if the deadlines established in this chapter are not met:

(a) Failure to implement an approved CTR program, unless the program elements that are carried out can be shown through quantifiable evidence to meet or exceed VMT and drive-alone goals as specified in this chapter;

(b) Submission of false or fraudulent data in response to survey requirements;

(c) Failure to self-identify as an affected employer;

(d) Failure to perform a baseline measurement, including:

(i) Employers notified or that have identified themselves to the City of Woodinville within 90 days of the ordinance codified in this chapter being adopted and that do not perform a baseline measurement consistent with the requirements specified by the City of Woodinville within 90 days from the notification or self-identification;

(ii) Employers not identified or self-identified within 90 days of the ordinance codified in this chapter being adopted and that do not perform a baseline measurement consistent with the requirements specified by the City of Woodinville within 90 days from the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter;

(e) Failure to develop and/or submit on time a complete CTR program;

(f) Failure to make a good faith effort, as defined in RCW 70.94.534 and this chapter; or

(g) Failure to revise a CTR program as defined in RCW 70.94.534(4) and this chapter.

(4) Penalties.

(a) No affected employer with an approved CTR program which has made a good faith effort may be held liable for failure to reach the applicable SOV or VMT goal;

(b) Each day of failure to implement the program shall constitute a separate violation, subject to penalties as described in Chapter 7.80 RCW; 

(c) An affected employer shall not be liable for civil penalties if failure to implement an element of a CTR program was the result of an inability to reach agreement with a certified collective bargaining agent under applicable laws where the issue was raised by the employer and pursued in good faith. Unionized employees shall be presumed to act in good faith compliance if they:

(i) Propose to a recognized union any provision of the employer’s CTR program that is subject to bargaining as defined by the National Labor Relations Act; and

(ii) Advise the union of the existence of the statute and the mandates of the CTR program approved by the City of Woodinville and advise the union that the proposal being made is necessary for compliance with State law (RCW 70.94.531).

(5) Appeals of Penalties.

(a) An affected employer to whom a notice of violation and imposition of monetary penalties is directed may appeal the notice including the determination that a violation exists or may appeal the amount of any monetary penalty imposed to the City Hearing Examiner.

(b) An affected employer may appeal a notice of violation by filing a written notice of appeal with the Department of Planning and Community Development within seven calendar days from the date of service of the notice of violation and imposition of monetary penalties.

(c) The monetary penalty for a continuing violation does not accrue during the pendency of the appeal; however, the Hearing Examiner may impose a daily monetary penalty from the date of service of the notice of civil infraction if he finds that the appeal is frivolous or intended solely to delay compliance.

(d) The hearing before the Hearing Examiner shall be conducted as follows:

(i) The Hearing Examiner shall give notice of the hearing before the Hearing Examiner to the appellant at least 17 calendar days before such hearing.

(ii) The Hearing Examiner shall conduct a hearing on the appeal pursuant to the rules of procedure as provided by the Administrative Procedure Act, Chapter 34.05 RCW. The City and the appellant may participate as parties in the hearing and each may call witnesses. The City shall have the burden of proof by a preponderance of the evidence that a violation has occurred.

(e) The Hearing Examiner shall determine whether the City has proved by a preponderance of the evidence that a violation has occurred and shall affirm, vacate, suspend or modify the amount of any monetary penalty imposed by the notice of civil violation, with or without written conditions.

(f) The Hearing Examiner shall consider the following in making his/her determination:

(i) Whether the intent of the appeal was to delay compliance; or

(ii) Whether the appeal is frivolous; or

(iii) Whether the appellant exercised reasonable and timely effort to comply with applicable requirements; or

(iv) Any other relevant factors.

(g) The Hearing Examiner shall mail a copy of his decision to the appellant by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested.

(h) The decision of the Hearing Examiner may be reviewed for illegal, corrupt or arbitrary or capricious action in King County Superior Court. The petition for review must be filed within 30 calendar days of the final decision of the Hearing Examiner.

(i) The collection of the monetary penalty shall be as follows:

(i) The monetary penalty constitutes a personal obligation of the person to whom the civil infraction is directed. Any monetary penalty assessed must be paid to the Finance Director within seven calendar days from the date of service of notice of violation and imposition of monetary penalties or, if an appeal was filed pursuant to this chapter, within seven calendar days of the Hearing Examiner’s decision.

(ii) The City Attorney, on behalf of the City, is authorized to collect the monetary penalty by use of appropriate legal remedies, the seeking or granting of which shall neither stay nor terminate accrual of additional per diem monetary penalties so long as the violation continues.

(iii) In the event of failure to appear at a hearing provided herein, the Hearing Examiner shall assess the monetary penalty prescribed and a penalty of $25.00.

(iv) In the event of a conflict between this chapter and any other city ordinance providing for a civil penalty, this chapter shall control.

(j) A person who willfully fails to pay a monetary penalty as required by provisions of this chapter may be found in civil contempt of court after notice and hearing. (Ord. 530 § 12, 2012; Ord. 474 § 1, 2008; Ord. 195 § 13, 1998. Formerly 14.12.130)


Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION

Chapters:

15.04    Building Codes

15.05    Site Development Regulations

15.06    Violations and Enforcement

15.09    Repealed

15.12    Repealed

15.15    Fire Code

15.17    Property Maintenance Code

15.19    Condominium Conversions

15.21    Repealed

15.36    Moving of Buildings

15.39    Utility Requirements

15.42    Fees for Work in Public/Private Rights-of-Way


Chapter 15.04 BUILDING CODES

Sections:

15.04.010    Short title.

15.04.020    Administration of Building Code.

15.04.030    Purpose and intent of adoption.

15.04.040    Liability.

15.04.050    Codes adopted.

15.04.060    Right-of-way improvements required for permit issuance.

15.04.070    International Building Code amendments.

15.04.080    International Residential Code amendments.

15.04.090    International Mechanical Code amendments.

15.04.100    Uniform Plumbing Code amendments.

15.04.120    International Existing Building Code amendments.

15.04.130    International Fuel Gas Code amendments.

15.04.140    Repealed.


15.04.010 Short title.

This chapter shall be known as the Woodinville Building Code, hereinafter referred to as “this code.” (Ord. 503 § 4 (Att. A), 2010)


15.04.020 Administration of Building Code.

The City Manager shall appoint a Building Official and such other personnel as are necessary to perform the duties required of the Building Department by this chapter and the codes of technical regulations adopted in this chapter by reference. The Building Official and said other personnel shall be part of the Development Services Department under the direction and management of the Development Services Director. (Ord. 503 § 4 (Att. A), 2010)


15.04.030 Purpose and intent of adoption.

It is the intent of the City of Woodinville in adopting this chapter to comply with the requirements of the State Building Code Act, Chapter 19.27 RCW, which mandate that the City adopt and enforce these codes. The City does not intend, by this adoption, to alter or amend the minimum standards set forth in the codes, or to do anything beyond what is necessary to comply with the law and make these codes enforceable in the City. (Ord. 567 § 1, 2013; Ord. 503 § 4 (Att. A), 2010)


15.04.040 Liability.

This title shall not be construed to relieve or lessen the responsibility of any person, partnership, firm, association, or corporation owning, building, altering, constructing, or moving any building or structure as defined in this title; nor shall the City or any agent thereof be held as assuming such liability by reason of inspection authorized herein or a certificate of inspection issued by the City or any of its agencies; provided, the purpose of this code is not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected by the terms of this code. (Ord. 503 § 4 (Att. A), 2010)


15.04.050 Codes adopted.

(1) Pursuant to RCW 19.27.031 and 35.21.140, the following codes of technical regulations are adopted by this reference as if fully set forth, subject to the modifications or amendments set forth in this chapter:

(a) The 2015 Edition of the International Building Code, as published by the International Code Council (ICC), together with the state amendments set forth in Chapter 51-50 WAC, and together with the following appendices: Appendix E – Supplementary Accessibility Requirements, Appendix G – Flood-Resistant Construction and Appendix H – Signs;

(b) The 2015 Edition of the International Residential Code, as published by the ICC, together with state amendments set forth in Chapter 51-51 WAC, and together with the following appendices: Appendix F – Radon Control Methods, and Appendix G – Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs and Appendix R, Dwelling Unit Fire Sprinkler Systems; Appendix S – Fire Sprinklers, is not adopted;

(c) The 2015 Edition of the International Mechanical Code, as published by the ICC, together with the state amendments as set forth in Chapter 51-52 WAC;

(d) The 2015 Edition of the Uniform Plumbing Code and Standards, as published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, together with the state amendments set forth in Chapters 51-56 and 51-57 WAC, and together with the following appendices: Appendix A – Recommended Rules for Sizing the Water Supply System, Appendix B – Explanatory Notes on Combination Waste and Vent Systems, Appendix C – Alternate Plumbing Systems, excluding sections L 6.0 Vent System Sizing, and Appendix I – Installation Standards,

(e) The latest of the National Electrical Code as adopted by the Washington State Department of Labor and Industries pursuant to Chapter 19.28 RCW;

(f) The 2015 Edition of the International Fuel Gas Code, as published by the ICC, together with state amendments set forth in Chapter 51-52 WAC, including that the standards for liquefied petroleum gas installations shall be the 2014 Edition of NFPA 58 (Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code) and the 2015 Edition of ANSI Z223.1/NFPA 54 (National Fuel Gas Code).

(g) The 2015 Edition of the International Energy Conservation Code, as published by the ICC, together with State amendments set forth in Chapter 51-11R and 51-11C WAC.

(2) In the case of a conflict between the codes adopted by subsection (1) of this section, the provisions of RCW 19.27.031(5) shall apply, and following that hierarchy, the more stringent (greater protection) code adopted shall govern. (Ord. 614 § 1, 2016; Ord. 567 § 1, 2013; Ord. 503 § 4 (Att. A), 2010)


15.04.060 Right-of-way improvements required for permit issuance.

(1) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to require the developer of private property to participate in the mitigation of the adverse impacts of private property development on City streets and on pedestrian facilities, non-motor-vehicle and motor vehicle traffic arising directly as a result of such development and to enable the development of the City’s street system concurrent with private property development in the City.

(2) Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions are adopted:

(a) “Street frontage” means the public right-of-way that abuts the applicant’s property, or the public right-of-way from which the applicant’s property obtains access by means of a private road or driveway.

(b) “Street improvements” includes the installation of open or enclosed curb, gutter, sidewalk, storm drainage, street lighting, traffic signal equipment, signing, striping, pavement markings, utility installation, relocation or undergrounding, landscaping, street trees, irrigation, street widening, and channelization, as needed to meet the adopted Transportation Infrastructure Standards. They may be required to extend beyond the street frontage that abuts the applicant’s property to provide adequate transitions from existing conditions to the applicant’s required improvements.

(3) Scope. The installation of street frontage improvements is required prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the following development:

(a) New Single-Family Residential Development. Street improvements shall only be required when new single-family residential units are permitted for construction in accordance with the City’s most recently adopted development standards. Single-family residential remodels, alterations, additions, expansions, or the addition of accessory dwelling units not meeting the definition of “new single-family residential unit,” regardless of size, shall not be required to construct street improvements. For the purposes of this section, the construction of or improvements made to an existing single-family residential unit shall be considered a “new single-family residential unit” if more than 50 percent of the exterior walls are removed, or the valuation for the work exceeds 50 percent of the assessed value of all existing improvements, as determined by the Director of Development Services.

(b) Multifamily and Nonresidential Development. Street improvements shall be required of all new construction of any multifamily residential or nonresidential structures in accordance with the City’s most recently adopted Transportation Infrastructure Standards. Street improvements shall be required of all additions to, or remodels of, multifamily residential or nonresidential structures where the expansion creates additional pedestrian impacts, additional vehicle trips (average daily trips), or additional parking spaces or improvements, in accordance with the City’s most recently adopted development standards.

(4) Right-of-Way Improvements. The applicant shall be required to construct complete half-street frontage improvements, or the minimum required to comply with the Fire Code as adopted in Chapter 15.15 WMC, on the side of the public road that abuts their property, along the entire street frontage of the property at the sole cost of the applicant. Such improvements shall be made on all sides of such property that abut a public street or planned public street. Beyond the property frontage, the applicant shall provide ramps from the new sidewalk or walkway to the existing shoulder, and pavement and channelization tapering back to the existing pavement and channelization as needed for safety. No building or other development permit, except as limited by the scope provisions in this section, shall be issued by the Building Official until or unless plans have been submitted, and approved by the Public Works Director, demonstrating that these requirements have been met, including:

(a) Improvements demonstrated or to be provided for shall meet the adopted Transportation Infrastructure Standards, pursuant to Chapter 12.09 WMC, as adopted at the time of a complete building or other development permit application.

(b) If any right-of-way dedication is needed to meet current adopted right-of-way widths, this dedication shall be a condition of permit approval, and shall be executed prior to final inspection or certificate of occupancy.

(c) If full right-of-way improvements as required above are not feasible due to utility or infrastructure conflicts, topographic conditions, project location(s) or on-site limitations and the above such improvements should not or cannot be accomplished at the time of building construction, the Public Works Director and Fire Marshal may waive, limit or modify the requirement(s) for such improvements through an approved deviation.

(d) When, in the opinion of the Public Works Director, circumstances such as traffic safety, pending projects, existing LID covenants, or other unusual circumstances make actual construction of right-of-way improvements on the frontage at the time of development or construction not in the best interests of orderly development, the City may require the applicant to (option chosen at the discretion of the Public Works Director):

(i) Pay to the City an amount equal to the property owner’s cost of installing the required improvements prior to issuance of a building permit. The property owner shall provide documentation satisfactory to the City of materials costs, quantities, and labor costs; or

(ii) Record an agreement and provide a guarantee which provides for these improvements to be installed by the property owner by a date acceptable to the City; or

(iii) Record an agreement to not protest a local improvement district to improve the street frontage.

(5) Posting of a Performance Guarantee.

(a) Building permit applicants required by their permit to construct street improvements, but who have not completed such improvements by the time the final inspection or certification of occupancy could otherwise be given or issued, may be allowed, by the Public Works Director subject to the criteria listed below, to submit a performance guarantee in the form of a surety bond, assignment of funds, or letter of credit, on a form approved by the Public Works Director and City Attorney. The amount of the bond or surety shall be based upon 150 percent of the total cost for design, construction and inspection of the street project, which costs shall be approved by the Public Works Director. Applicants shall have one year from posting of the bond or surety to complete the improvements. Thereafter, the City may avail itself of the proceeds of the bond or surety in order to complete the improvements.

(b) Applicants may be allowed to post a surety when the Public Works Director has determined that the following criteria have been met:

(i) Whether only minor items of the required improvements need to be completed such as the final lift of asphalt pavement and/or landscaping; or

(ii) Whether the City and/or other public agency’s capital project needs to be completed ahead of the required improvements to allow for logical sequence of construction to prevent damage or disruption to the improvements being made; or

(iii) Whether constructing the required improvements prior to final approval will create an unnecessary and unusual hardship to the applicant that is not self-created; and

(iv) Whether the need for the performance guarantee is not the result of deliberate actions of the applicant; and

(v) The extent to which public health, safety, and welfare are not endangered by allowing the final inspection or certificate of occupancy to be approved without the required improvements being completed, prior to final approval.

(6) Posting of a Maintenance Bond or Acceptable Surety. Before the City will release the performance guarantee, the applicant shall post a maintenance guarantee, pursuant to WMC 15.42.350 through 15.42.400.

(7) Reimbursement for Oversizing – Engineering Costs – Recovery Contracts.

(a) Oversizing. If an applicant is required to install a storm drainage improvement larger than what is required by their development, and if the purpose for such oversizing is to provide for future needs and not merely to meet the needs of the property responsible for constructing the improvement, the City may enter into a recovery contract in accordance with Chapter 35.91 RCW with the applicant for the difference in material, design and engineering, construction, installation, and right-of-way acquisition costs incurred solely by reason of the oversizing requirement. No such reimbursement shall be made except upon:

(i) Full compliance with this section;

(ii) Certification of the oversizing costs, with such verification from the material supplier and contractor as the City Engineer may require;

(iii) Approval of the oversizing costs by the City Council.

(b) Recovery Contracts. If, within 60 days after acceptance of improvements by the Public Works Director, the applicant presents a recovery contract acceptable to the City, the City may enter into the contract for recovery of a pro rata share of the costs described in subsection (7)(a) of this section from other parties that will later derive a benefit from using the improvements. No such contract shall extend for a period in excess of 15 years, and preference shall be given to contracts of five and 10 years’ duration. The City Council shall approve or disapprove such recovery contracts on a case-by-case basis.

(c) Collection Procedure. Upon the City’s entry into a recovery contract, the contract shall be recorded in the County Auditor’s office. Thereafter, the City shall collect for the applicant a prorated portion of the costs of the storm drainage improvements, based upon the applicant’s frontage as a percentage of the total frontage improved, from any latecoming property owner who benefits from the improvements. Such collection shall be paid to the original applicant who paid for the improvements, his personal representative or assigns, within 60 days after each collection. The City shall deduct five percent from each payment made by latecoming property owners in order to cover the City’s costs of administering the recovery contract and collecting the payments. The five percent charge shall be payable to the street improvement funds. Unless otherwise provided in the contract itself, the administrative charge shall be deducted from the amount paid by latecoming property owners and deposited to the City street fund prior to disbursement of the remaining balance to the contract applicant or his successors. If the recovery contract so provides, latecomer charges at the same rate may continue to be collected for the benefit of the City’s street fund from all latecoming property owners using the engineering after termination of the contract period.

(d) Enforcement of Collections. The City shall not have the right to waive any collections required by a recovery contract and shall exercise reasonable diligence to assure that payment of fair shares is not evaded; provided, however, that if the City neglects, for whatever reason, to collect any fair share, the City shall not be liable to the contract applicant. The sole and exclusive remedy shall be for the contract applicant to sue in the City’s name to collect such fair share. (Ord. 590 § 2, 2015; Ord. 503 § 4 (Att. A), 2010)


15.04.070 International Building Code amendments. 

The following sections or subsections of the 2015 International Building Code are hereby amended as provided below:

101.1 Title. The words “NAME OF JURISDICTION” are deleted, and “City of Woodinville” is substituted.

101.4.3 Plumbing. The word “Uniform” is substituted for the word “International” in the first sentence. 

105.2 Work exempt from permit. Item 2 is changed, Fences not over 6 feet high.

105.3 Application for permit. Item #8 is added, requiring: “All submittal requirements for a building permit in WMC 21.83.060 shall be met.”

105.5 Expiration. This section is revised to read: “Every permit issued shall become invalid unless work authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. The building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 days each. The extension shall be requested by writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.”

108.1 General. The state exception is removed.

109.1 Building Permit Valuations. This section is revised to read: “The applicant for a permit shall provide an estimated permit value at the time of application. Permit valuations shall include total value of work, including materials and labor, for which the permit is being issued, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and permanent systems. Final building permit valuation shall be set by the building official.”

111.2 Certificate issued. The first sentence is revised to read: “After the building official inspects the building or structure and finds no violations of the provisions of this code or other laws, including the payment of any outstanding fees, that are enforced by the department of building safety, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy that contains the following:”

113 Board of Appeals. All language in Section 113 is hereby deleted and the following is substituted: “Refer to Chapter 2.30, Chapter 21.83 and Chapter 21.85 of the Woodinville Municipal Code.”

1002.1 Definitions. The first sentence of the definition of Gross Floor Area is changed to: “The floor area within the exterior of the exterior wall of the building, exclusive of vent shafts and courts, without deduction for corridors, stairways, closets, the thickness of interior walls, columns or other features.”

1612.3 Establishment of flood hazard areas. The second sentence is revised to read: “The flood hazard map shall include, at a minimum, areas of special flood hazard as identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, as amended or revised with the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM) and related supporting data along with any revisions thereto.”

3103.1 General. The state exception is removed.

3412.2 Applicability. The words “DATE TO BE INSERTED BY THE JURISDICTION. NOTE: IT IS RECOMMENDED THAT THIS DATE COINCIDE WITH THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF BUILDING CODES WITHIN THE JURISDICTION” are removed, and “the effective date of this ordinance” is substituted.

(Ord. 614 § 1, 2016; Ord. 567 § 1, 2013; Ord. 503 § 4 (Att. A), 2010)


15.04.080 International Residential Code amendments.

The following sections or subsections of the 2015 International Residential Code are hereby amended as provided below:

R101.1 Title. The words “NAME OF JURISDICTION” are deleted, and “City of Woodinville” is substituted.

R105.2 Work exempt from permit. 

Building: 

In Exemption 1, One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, play houses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 200 square feet.

In Exemption 2, Fences not over 7 feet high.

In Exemption 10, Decks that are not more than 30 inches (762 mm) above grade at any point, are not attached to a dwelling and do not serve the exit door required by Section R311.4

R105.3 Application for permit. Item #8 is added, requiring: “All submittal requirements for a building permit in WMC 21.83.060 shall be met.”

R105.5 Expiration. This section is revised to read: “Every permit issued shall become invalid unless work authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. The building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 days each. The extension shall be requested by writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.”

R108.3 Building Permit Valuations. This section is revised to read: “The applicant for a permit shall provide an estimated permit value at the time of application. Permit valuations shall include total value of work, including materials and labor, for which the permit is being issued, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and permanent systems. Final building permit valuation shall be set by the building official.”

R110.3 Certificate issued. The first sentence is revised to read: “After the building official inspects the building or structure and finds no violations of the provisions of this code or other laws, including the payment of any outstanding fees, that are enforced by the department of building safety, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy which shall contain the following.”

R112 Board of Appeals. All language in Section R112 is hereby deleted and the following is substituted: “Refer to Chapter 2.30, Chapter 21.83 and Chapter 21.85 of the Woodinville Municipal Code.”

R202 Definitions. A definition is added: “Floor Area: The floor area within the exterior of the exterior wall of the building, exclusive of vent shafts and courts, without deduction for corridors, stairways, closets, the thickness of interior walls, columns or other features.”

Table 301.2(1) Climatic and Geographical Design Criteria. This table is revised to read: 

	GROUND AND ROOF SNOW LOAD	25#

	WIND DESIGN	Speed d (mph)	85 mph

	Topographical effects k	no

	SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORY	D-2

	SUBJECT TO DAMAGE FROM	Weathering a	Moderate

	Frost line depth b	12''

	Termite c	Slight to moderate

	WINTER DESIGN TEMP e	27 degrees F

	ICE BARRIER UNDERLAYMENT REQUIRED h	none

	FLOOD HAZARDS g	Per Chapter 21.51 WMC

	AIR FREEZING INDEX i	174

	MEAN ANNUAL TEMP j	50 degrees F

(Ord. 614 § 1, 2016; Ord. 567 § 1, 2013; Ord. 503 § 4 (Att. A), 2010)


15.04.090 International Mechanical Code amendments.

The following sections or subsections of the 2015 International Mechanical Code are hereby amended as provided below:

101.1 Title. The words “NAME OF JURISDICTION” are deleted, and “City of Woodinville” is substituted.

106.4.3 Expiration. This section is revised to read: “Every permit issued shall become invalid unless work authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. The building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 days each. The extension shall be requested by writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.”

106.4.4 Extensions. The last sentence is deleted, and replaced with “A fee shall be established for permit extensions.”

106.5.2 Fees. The words “indicated in the following fee schedule” and the fee schedule following thereafter are hereby deleted and the words “as adopted by resolution” are hereby substituted.

106.5.3 Fee Refunds. In subsections 2 and 3, the words “SPECIFY PERCENTAGE” are deleted and “65 percent” is substituted.

108.4 Violation penalties. This section is revised to read: “Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter or repair mechanical work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.”

108.5 Stop work orders. The last sentence of this section is revised to read: “Any person who shall continue any work on the system after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law.”

109 Appeals. All language in Section 109 is hereby deleted and the following is substituted: “Refer to Chapter 2.30, Chapter 21.83 and Chapter 21.85 of the Woodinville Municipal Code.”

(Ord. 614 § 1, 2016; Ord. 567 § 1, 2013; Ord. 503 § 4 (Att. A), 2010)


15.04.100 Uniform Plumbing Code amendments.

The following sections or subsections of the 2015 Uniform Plumbing Code are hereby amended as provided below:

Table 1-1 Fees. Table 1-1 is deleted.

103.3.3 Expiration. This section is revised to read: “Every permit issued shall become invalid unless work authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. The building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 days each. The extension shall be requested by writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.”

103.4.1 Permit Fees. The words “Table 1-1” are hereby deleted and replaced with “as adopted by resolution.”

103.4.2 Fees. The words “Table 1-1” in the fourth paragraph are deleted and replaced with “as adopted by resolution.”

103.4.5 Fee Refunds. The words “a percentage” in 103.4.5.2 and 103.4.5.3 are hereby deleted and “65 percent” is substituted.

(Ord. 614 § 1, 2016; Ord. 567 § 1, 2013; Ord. 503 § 4 (Att. A), 2010)


15.04.120 International Existing Building Code amendments.

The following sections or subsections of the 2015 International Existing Building Code are hereby amended as provided below:

101.1 Title. The words “NAME OF JURISDICTION” are deleted, and “City of Woodinville” is substituted.

105.5 Expiration. This section is revised to read: “Every permit issued shall become invalid unless work authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. The building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 days each. The extension shall be requested by writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.”

1301.2 Applicability. The words “DATE TO BE INSERTED BY THE JURISDICTION. Note: it is recommended that this date coincide with the effective date of building codes within the jurisdiction” are deleted, and “the effective date of this ordinance” is substituted. 

(Ord. 614 § 1, 2016; Ord. 567 § 1, 2013; Ord. 503 § 4 (Att. A), 2010)


15.04.130 International Fuel Gas Code amendments.

The following sections or subsections of the 2015 International Fuel Gas Code are hereby amended as provided below:

101.1 Title. The words “NAME OF JURISDICTION” are deleted, and “City of Woodinville” is substituted.

106.5.3 Expiration. This section is revised to read: “Every permit issued shall become invalid unless work authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. The building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 days each. The extension shall be requested by writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.”

106.6.2 Fee schedule. The words “indicated in the following schedule” are deleted, and “adopted by resolution” is substituted.

106.6.3 Fee refunds. The words “SPECIFY PERCENTAGE” are deleted in Section 106.6.3.1 and 106.6.3.2, and “65 percent” is substituted.

108.4 Violation penalties. This section is revised to read: “Persons who shall violate a provision of this code, fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or erect, install, alter or repair work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.”

108.5 Stop work orders. The last sentence of this section is revised to read: “Any person who shall continue any work on the system after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be prosecuted within the limits provided by state or local laws.”

(Ord. 614 § 1, 2016; Ord. 567 § 1, 2013; Ord. 503 § 4 (Att. A), 2010)


15.04.140 Violations and penalties.

Repealed by Ord. 685. (Ord. 503 § 4 (Att. A), 2010)


Chapter 15.05 SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS

Sections:

15.05.010    Purpose.

15.05.020    Definitions.

15.05.030    Applicability.

15.05.040    Administration.

15.05.050    Deviations.

15.05.060    Site development permit required.

15.05.070    Preliminary grading worksheet.

15.05.080    Permit requirements.

15.05.090    Expiration of permits and applications.

15.05.100    Operating conditions and standards of performance.

15.05.110    Grading – Land development projects.

15.05.120    Grading – Individual lots.

15.05.130    Drainage.

15.05.140    Slopes.

15.05.150    Fill.

15.05.160    Rock and retaining walls.

15.05.170    Utilities.

15.05.180    Driveways – Design.

15.05.190    Inspections.

15.05.200    Final approval.

15.05.210    Stop work order/permit revocation.

15.05.220    Forest practices.

15.05.230    Repealed.


15.05.010 Purpose.

(1) This chapter is intended to regulate clearing, grading, and earthwork construction, including cuts and fills, within the City of Woodinville in order to protect public health, safety, welfare, and aesthetics by:

(a) Minimizing adverse stormwater impacts generated by the removal of vegetation and alteration of landforms;

(b) Protecting water quality from the adverse impacts associated with erosion and sedimentation;

(c) Minimizing aquatic and terrestrial wildlife habitat loss caused by the removal of vegetation;

(d) Protecting critical areas from adverse clearing and grading activities; and

(e) Preventing damage to property and harm to persons caused by excavations and fills. (Ord. 635 § 1, 2016)


15.05.020 Definitions.

Certain words and phrases used in this chapter, unless otherwise clearly indicated by their context, mean as follows:

(1) “Applicant” means a property owner or any person or entity acting as an agent for the property owner in an application for a development proposal, permit, or approval. 

(2) “Bench” is a relatively level step excavated or constructed into earth material on which fill is to be placed. 

(3) “Berm” is a mound or raised area used for the purpose of screening a site or operation.

(4) “Best management practices (BMPs)” mean the best available and reasonable physical, structural, managerial, or behavioral activities that, when used singly, or in combination, eliminate or reduce potential adverse impacts associated with clearing and grading.

(5) “Borrow” means earth material used in grading a site. This includes soil and rock material utilized from the site, moved within the site, or imported to the site.

(6) “Civil engineer” means an engineer who is licensed as a professional civil engineer by the State of Washington in accordance with Chapter 18.43 RCW.

(7) “Clearing” means the limbing, pruning, trimming, topping, cutting, or removal of vegetation or other organic plant matter by physical, mechanical, chemical, or other means. 

(8) “Compaction” is the densification of fill soil or other materials by mechanical means.

(9) “Critical areas” means the environmentally sensitive areas described in WMC Title 21.

(10) “Development proposal” means any activities requiring a permit or other approval from the City of Woodinville relative to the use or development of land.

(11) “Director” means the Public Works Director or the Development Services Director or his/her designee.

(12) “Earth material” is any rock, natural soil or fill, or any combination thereof.

(13) “Engineering geologist” means a practicing engineering geologist licensed in the State of Washington.

(14) “Erosion” is the wearing away of the ground surface as the result of the movement of wind, water and/or ice.

(15) “Excavation” is the removal of earth material. The term “cut” can also be used to describe excavation.

(16) “Fill” is a deposit of earth material placed by mechanical or other means.

(17) “Geotechnical engineer” or “soils engineer” means a civil engineer who is licensed in the State of Washington and who has a minimum of five years of experience in the field of geotechnical, geological, or mining engineering.

(18) “Grade” means the elevation of the ground surface.

(a) “Existing grade” is the grade of the ground surface prior to any grading activity requested by the applicant at the time of permit application.

(b) “Rough grade” is the stage at which the grade approximately conforms to the approved site development permit.

(c) “Finish grade” is the grade that conforms to the approved site development permit at the conclusion of all grading efforts. 

(19) “Grading” is any excavating, filling, removing of the duff layer, or combination thereof.

(20) “Grubbing” is the removal and disposal of all unwanted vegetative material from the earth’s surface including roots, sumps, sod, weeds, buried logs, and other debris.

(21) “Infrastructure improvements” means streets, drainage facilities, utilities, and associated appurtenances typically constructed as part of a development project for the purposes of serving the development.

(22) “Key” means a compacted fill placed in a trench excavated in earth material beneath the toe of a slope.

(23) “Modular block wall” means a wall constructed of manufactured modular wall units acting as a protective facing for an exposed soil face or as a gravity retaining wall. The height of a modular block wall is measured from the base of the bottom row of blocks to the top of the wall as illustrated below.

Figure 15.05.020(23) Modular Block Wall
[IMAGE]


(24) “Open space” means an area, unoccupied by buildings, roads, or parking areas that has been set aside in perpetuity as a naturally vegetated area. Such open space areas may include native growth protection easements (NGPE), retained vegetated easement areas (RVEA), critical areas, and other tracts of land and easement areas set aside for this purpose.

(25) “Permittee” means the person(s) or entity to whom a site development permit is issued.

(26) “Reinforced fill” or “reinforced soil” means soil fill designed by a geotechnical engineer which includes reinforcement consisting of metal or synthetic materials in bars, strips, grids, or sheets.

(27) “Retaining wall” means a wall designed to resist the lateral displacement of soil or other materials. The height of a cast-in-place concrete retaining wall is measured from the base of the foundation to the top of the wall as illustrated below.

Figure 15.05.020(27) Retaining Wall
[IMAGE]


(28) “Rockery” or “rock wall” means one or more courses of large rocks stacked near vertical in front of an exposed soil face to protect the soil face from erosion and sloughing. A rockery or rock wall is not a retaining wall. The height of a rock wall is measured from the base of the bottom row of rocks to the top of the wall as illustrated below.

Figure 15.05.020(28) Rockery
[IMAGE]


(29) “Shorelines” means those lands defined as shorelines of the State in the Shoreline Management Act of 1971. In the City of Woodinville, the Sammamish River and Little Bear Creek are designated as shorelines.

(30) “Site” is any lot or parcel of land or contiguous combination thereof where projects covered by this chapter are performed or permitted.

(31) “Site development permit” or “SDL” means the written permission of the Director to the permittee to proceed with the act of clearing and/or grading within the provisions of this chapter. The site development permit shall include permit documentation, the associated approved plans, and any conditions of approval. 

(32) “Site restoration” is the permanent restoration of lands modified under the provisions of this code, typically in the form of the establishment of vegetation and drainage facilities to control the rate and erosive force of stormwater runoff.

(33) “Slope” is an inclined ground surface, the inclination of which is expressed as a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical height or as a percent.

(34) “Terrace” is a relatively level step excavated or constructed in the face of a graded slope surface for drainage and maintenance purposes. (Ord. 635 § 1, 2016)


15.05.030 Applicability.

(1) All clearing and grading activities within the City, regardless of whether a permit is required, shall meet the provisions of this chapter, including performance and restoration requirements and use best management practices to reduce erosion and protect water quality.

(2) All clearing and grading shall comply with the provisions of this municipal code including, but not limited to, the following:

(a) Chapter 12.09 WMC, Street and Construction Standards;

(b) Chapter 21.51 WMC, Critical Areas;

(c) Chapter 21.50 WMC, Tree Protection;

(d) Chapter 21.43 WMC, Landscaping;

(e) Chapter 21.70 WMC, Shoreline Management;

(f) Chapters 13.04 and 13.05 WMC for surface water runoff; and

(g) Requirements from Federal, State, and other local agencies.

(3) When another provision of the Woodinville Municipal Code conflicts with this chapter or when the provisions of this chapter are in conflict, that provision which provides greater environmental protection to critical areas shall apply, unless specifically provided otherwise in this chapter. (Ord. 635 § 1, 2016)


15.05.040 Administration.

(1) Conditions of Approval. The Director may impose conditions on permit approval as needed to mitigate identified project impacts and shall deny permit applications that are inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter. Permit approval shall only be granted if the following criteria are met:

(a) The proposal upholds public health, safety, and welfare;

(b) The proposal does not create long-term grading or drainage impacts on adjoining or downstream properties;

(c) The proposal reflects sound engineering and construction practices;

(d) The proposal protects critical areas pursuant to Chapter 21.51 WMC and shorelines pursuant to Chapter 21.70 WMC; and

(e) The proposal complies with Chapter 13.05 WMC and the adopted King County Surface Water Design Manual.

(2) Inspections. The Director is authorized to make such inspections and take such actions as may be required to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and to require as part of the application materials that the applicant grant permission for such entry and inspections.

(3) Right-of-Entry. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter, the Director may enter such property at all reasonable times to inspect the same or perform any duty imposed upon the Director by this chapter. If such property is occupied, the Director shall first present proper credentials and demand entry; and if such property is unoccupied, he or she shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the property and demand entry. (Ord. 635 § 1, 2016)


15.05.050 Deviations.

(1) The Director shall have the authority to grant a deviation from the provisions of this chapter. Deviations to the provisions of this chapter may be granted, with or without conditions, when the following criteria are met:

(a) The deviation is in the public interest;

(b) The deviation does not negatively impact adjoining properties;

(c) The deviation is based upon sound engineering judgement;

(d) The deviation provides the same or greater level of safety; and

(e) The deviation includes appropriate provisions on maintenance as necessary. (Ord. 635 § 1, 2016)


15.05.060 Site development permit required.

(1) A site development permit shall be issued as a standalone permit or as a component of or accessory to a building permit, land use approval, or other permit. The Director may require that single-family building permits and site development permits be combined.

(2) A site development permit shall be required when any of the following are proposed to be completed:

(a) Grading that exceeds 25 cubic yards in the R-1 through R-8 Zones, 50 cubic yards in all other zones on a single defined lot within a 12-month period;

(b) The existing ground level is changed by more than four feet in any location;

(c) Creating embankments or excavation slopes that are steeper than 2H:1V (horizontal:vertical), with more than two feet of relief, within 10 feet of the property line;

(d) Any clearing, grubbing, or grading in critical areas (as defined in Chapter 21.51 WMC) and associated buffers;

(e) Any increase in the amount of stormwater, any change in the location of where stormwater exits the property, or any change in the concentration or dispersion of stormwater (i.e., runoff characteristics) such that it would require a small project drainage review, a targeted drainage review, a full drainage review, or a large project drainage review as described in the City’s adopted surface water design manual; and

(f) Creating more than 2,000 square feet of new impervious surface, converting three-fourths acres or more of native vegetation to lawn/landscaping, converting two and one-half acres of native vegetation to pasture, or if the existing grade of the property is being changed by more than four feet vertically at any one or more locations.

(3) Exemptions. A site development permit shall not be required for the following activities, except for those occurring in critical areas pursuant to Chapter 21.51 WMC: 

(a) Isolated tree removal and landscape maintenance on sites with no other construction activities meeting standards in Chapters 21.43, 21.50 and 21.70 WMC. Tree removal and landscape maintenance includes clearing of brush, invasive or noxious weeds, pruning, limbing, or cutting of trees up to six inches DBH outside of critical areas and their buffers;

(b) Clearing or grading that does not alter the amount of stormwater or change the location of where stormwater exits the property, or changing the concentration or runoff characteristics of stormwater leaving the property;

(c) Cemetery graves;

(d) Gardening or farming activities;

(e) Exploratory excavations performed under the direction of a licensed engineer unless access grading involves grading more soil, earth, or materials greater than the limits specified in subsection (2) of this section;

(f) Any work within a public right-of-way for which a right-of-way permit has been granted by the City;

(g) Excavation of basements and footings of a building, retaining wall, or other structure authorized by a valid building permit. This shall not exempt any fill made with the material from such excavation;

(h) Topsoil up to a depth of six inches above the existing grade, regardless of quantity, may be placed on single-family residential properties without requiring a permit;

(i) Maintenance of existing driveways or private access roads within their existing road prisms;

(j) Normal, routine maintenance activities by a public agency, including maintenance of culverts, gravel shoulders, ditches, pavement, surface water management facilities, parks, trails, and utilities. (Ord. 635 § 1, 2016)


15.05.070 Preliminary grading worksheet.

(1) A preliminary grading worksheet shall be completed and submitted with the project permit application. The worksheet shall be used to make an early determination of the following:

(a) A site development permit is required or if the planned work is exempt; 

(b) A geotechnical report is required and whether a short letter-style report, or a longer formal report, is necessary; and

(c) Whether grading plans prepared by a licensed professional (either a civil engineer or engineering geologist) will be required. (Ord. 635 § 1, 2016)


15.05.080 Permit requirements.

(1) The following materials are required to submit for a site development permit. The Director shall have the authority to waive specific submittal requirements if the item is not necessary to evaluate the proposal or may require additional information if needed for review of an application. A separate permit shall be required for each site and may cover both excavations and fills.

(a) Application, completed and signed by the property owner;

(b) Preliminary grading worksheet;

(c) Site and construction plan, showing the following:

(i) A scale map of the project area;

(ii) Location and description of work to be covered by the permit for which application is made;

(iii) Property lines, setbacks, easement limits, and right-of-way location(s);

(iv) Type and extent of all critical areas and buffers on, adjacent to, or within 200 feet of the proposal to the extent feasible;

(v) Location of all existing and proposed structures, septic drainfields, roads, wells, and utilities on the property and within 50 feet of the property or which may be affected by proposed grading operations; 

(vi) Proposed clearing limits; and

(vii) Additional information and specifications as required in subsection (3) of this section for engineered plans.

(2) Engineered Plans and Specifications. Each application for a grading permit shall be accompanied by plans and specifications and other supporting data as may be required.

(a) When Required. The plans and specifications shall be prepared and signed by a civil engineer or engineering geologist and geotechnical engineering and drainage reports if one or more of the following conditions characterize the planned work:

(i) Grading is proposed within critical areas or their buffers as defined by Chapter 21.51 WMC. Minor work (such as enhancement or removal of invasive species) may be allowed in the buffers with an approved mitigation plan without the work being designed by a civil engineer, engineering geologist, and/or stream/wetland biologist;

(ii) Increase in the amount of stormwater runoff; change in the characteristics of stormwater runoff (i.e., change from sheet flow to concentrated flow); any change in the location of where stormwater exits the property; or any change that would require a review as described in the King County Surface Water Design Manual;

(iii) Grading exceeds 500 cubic yards in a project or is within 10 feet of a property line; or

(iv) Any slope proposed by the planned grading activities, including excavation or fill, is steeper than 2H:1V (50 percent).

(3) Additional Submittal Information. In addition to the requirements in subsection (1) of this section, engineered plans and specifications shall also include the following information:

(a) Limiting dimensions, existing elevation contours, finished contours at no greater than a two-foot interval to be achieved by the grading, and proposed drainage channels and related construction. Contours shall extend a minimum of 50 feet off site or to the extent feasible;

(b) Detailed plans of all surface and subsurface drainage devices, walls, cribbing, dams, berms, settling ponds and other protective devices to be constructed with or as a part of the proposed work, together with the maps showing the drainage area and the estimated runoff of the area served by any drains;

(c) A soils report. Soils reports shall be prepared by a licensed geotechnical engineer or licensed engineering geologist and shall cover all portions of the project within his/her expertise, including site history; geologic structures; surface conditions; subsurface conditions; recommendations for foundation support, site preparation, structural fill, slope stability and mitigation; design parameters for retaining structures and structure backfill, surface and subsurface drainage, dewatering, excavation conditions and hazards; seismic conditions, erosion and sedimentation hazards and controls; use of on-site materials for structural fill and backfill; and pavement design. The geotechnical engineer shall be retained as the engineer-of-record or the engineering geologist as geologist-of-record for the duration of the project;

(d) A drainage report and technical information report meeting the requirements of the adopted King County Surface Water Design Manual;

(e) If the clearing or grading is proposed to take place in or adjacent to a critical area as regulated in Chapter 21.51 WMC, provide information as required by that chapter; and

(f) Other information as may be required by the Director. The Director may require the applicant to submit additional information when he/she finds the submitted plans, specifications and associated information are not clear enough to allow for an adequate determination, or when special conditions are found to exist which require specific explanation. (Ord. 635 § 1, 2016)


15.05.090 Expiration of permits and applications.

(1) An application for a site development permit may be cancelled for inactivity if an applicant fails, without reasonable justification, to respond to the department’s written request for revisions or corrections within 90 calendar days. The Director may allow for a time extension to submit the required information, not to exceed an additional 90 days.

(2) Site development permits expire as follows:

(a) If a building permit is issued for the same site, the site development permit shall automatically expire or be extended when the building permit expires or is extended;

(b) If a building permit is not issued for the same site, the site development permit shall expire as follows:

(i) The permit shall expire if the authorized work has not begun within one year from the date of permit issuance, or if work is abandoned for over 180 days, unless an extension has been granted by the City. The permittee shall be responsible for notifying the Director, in writing, if delays or unforeseen circumstances are impacting the start or continuation of the work.

(ii) If the authorized work is continually performed, the permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance unless a different time frame is specified on the permit or an extension is granted by the City. A single one-year extension may be granted; provided, that conditions which were relevant to issuance of the permit have not changed substantially and no material detriment to the public welfare will result from the extension. (Ord. 635 § 1, 2016)


15.05.100 Operating conditions and standards of performance.

(1) Minimize Potential Impacts. All clearing and grading activities shall be conducted so as to minimize potential adverse effects on forested lands, surface water quality and quantity, groundwater recharge, fish and wildlife habitat, adjacent properties, and downstream drainage channels. The applicant shall attempt to prevent impacts and minimize the clearing of naturally occurring vegetation, retain existing soils, and maintain the existing natural hydrological functions of the site.

(2) Stormwater Consistency of Standards. All standards under this code will be consistent with the adopted King County Surface Water Design Manual. 

(3) Clearing and Grading and Land Disturbance Limits. When establishing clearing and grading areas, consideration shall be given to minimizing removal of existing trees and minimizing disturbance/compaction of native soils except as needed for building purposes. Clearing and grading areas and any other areas required to preserve critical areas, buffers, native growth protection easements, or tree retention areas shall be delineated on the site plans and the development site.

(a) Prior to beginning land disturbing activities, including clearing and grading, all clearing limits, critical areas and their buffers, and trees that are to be preserved within the construction area shall be clearly marked, both in the field and on the plans, to prevent damage and off-site impacts.

(4) Access. Access roads to sites shall be maintained and located to minimize problems of dust, mud and traffic circulation. Construction vehicle access shall be, whenever feasible, limited to one route. A temporary access road shall be provided at all sites. Access surfaces shall be stabilized to minimize the tracking of sediment onto adjacent roads by utilizing quarry spalls, crushed rock or other equivalent BMPs. Other measures may be required at the discretion of the Director in order to ensure that construction vehicles do not track sediment onto public streets in order to protect storm drains. All approach roads shall be kept clean. Wheel wash or tire baths shall be located on site if the stabilized construction entrance is not effective in preventing sediment from being tracked onto public roads. Sediment shall be removed from roads by shoveling or pickup sweeping and shall be transported to a controlled sediment disposal area. Street washing will be allowed only after sediment is removed in this manner. If sediment is tracked off site, public roads shall be cleaned thoroughly at the end of each day, or more frequently during wet weather. Street wash wastewater shall be controlled by pumping back on site or otherwise be prevented from discharging into systems tributary to State surface waters.

(5) Appearance. The site shall be operated and maintained in a neat and orderly manner, free from junk, trash, or unnecessary debris.

(6) Dust Suppression. Dust from clearing, grading, and other construction activities shall be minimized at all times. Impervious surfaces on or near the construction area shall be swept, vacuumed, or otherwise maintained to suppress dust. Any dust suppressants used shall be approved by the Director. Petrochemical dust suppressants are prohibited. 

(7) Fencing and Flagging. Prior to the start of clearing and grading operations, the permittee shall identify all clearing limits with flagging and four-foot-high orange safety fencing or silt fence as approved by the Director:

(a) Along the entire buffer of all critical areas; and

(b) Around all hazards that may exist on the site.

(8) Tree Protection. Tree protection prescribed in Chapter 21.50 WMC shall be installed prior to clearing and grading activities. Fencing shall be installed at the critical root zone of protected trees and shall be four-foot-high chainlink fence. “Tree Protection Area, Entrance Prohibited” signage per Chapter 21.50 WMC shall be installed.

(9) Haul Routes. Prior to the start of clearing and grading operations, the permittee shall identify all proposed haul routes and access points to the site for review and approval by the City.

(10) Hazard Signs. Signs warning of hazardous conditions, if such exist, shall be affixed at locations as required by the Director, prior to the start of clearing and grading operations.

(11) Hours of Operation. Hours of operation shall conform to Chapter 8.08 WMC.

(12) Off-Site Construction. If construction necessitates access, construction, or intrusion onto or across property not under the permittee’s control, then the permittee must provide the City with a copy of a valid construction easement or right-of-entry before the permit can be issued.

(13) Other Pollutants. The permittee must properly handle and dispose of other pollutants that are on site during construction in accordance with the adopted King County Surface Water Design Manual so as to avoid possible health risks or environmental contamination. Direct and indirect discharge of pollutants to the drainage system, critical areas, wetlands, streams, or any other adjacent properties is prohibited. Storage of fuel or other hazardous substances on site is prohibited. 

(14) Protect Adjacent and Downstream Property. The permittee shall at all times protect improvements to adjacent private properties and public rights-of-way or easements from damage during clearing and grading operations. The permittee shall restore public improvements damaged by his/her operations to the standards in effect at the time of the issuance of the permit. The permittee is responsible for following the erosion and sediment control measures outlined in the adopted King County Surface Water Design Manual.

(15) Site Security. It shall be the permittee’s responsibility to provide adequate security for the site, as determined by the Director. Should the Director determine that additional measures are required to protect the public, the Director may require the entire site be fenced, gated, and locked and access restricted by the permittee.

(16) Wet Season Clearing and Grading. Clearing and grading shall be prohibited from October 1st to April 30th, the “wet season,” unless otherwise approved by the Director. Building construction, landscaping, road, and utility work may be permitted year-round, so long as such work conforms with all other provisions of this chapter. Clearing and grading may proceed during the wet season upon approval by the Director under the following conditions:

(a) Clearing and grading will only be allowed if, in the opinion of the Director, the site and proposed work pose little or no threat to adjoining properties and downstream drainage facilities;

(b) All sites must implement and maintain effective erosion and sedimentation control. An erosion and sediment control plan shall be prepared at the discretion of the Director that specifically identifies methods of erosion control for wet weather conditions to control erosion/sedimentation, surface water runoff, and safeguard slope stability. In a situation where erosion or sediment is not contained on site, construction activity shall cease immediately and notification of the Director shall be made within 24 hours;

(c) Extraordinary erosion control measures may be required;

(d) Construction of large cuts and fills will not be allowed; and

(e) Failure to comply with adequate TESC measures for the site will warrant a shutdown of the clearing and grading operations until the erosion and sediment control measures are reinstated.

(f) When approval is issued in the dry season (defined as the months of April through September), and work is allowed to continue in the wet season, the City may require additional measures to limit erosion/sedimentation. The Director may prohibit land-disturbing activities during certain days of the wet season. Determinations shall be made on a site-specific basis and evaluation of the following:

(i) Average existing slope on the site with clear delineation of regulated steep slopes.

(ii) Quantity of proposed cut and/or fill.

(iii) Classification of the predominant soils and their erosion and runoff potential.

(iv) Hydraulic connection of the site to features that are sensitive to erosion impacts.

(v) Storm events and periods of heavy precipitation.

(17) Soil Amendments. The duff layer and native topsoil shall be retained in an undisturbed state to the maximum extent practicable. Any duff layer or topsoil removed during grading shall be stockpiled on site in a designated, controlled area not adjacent to public resources and critical areas. The material shall be reapplied to other portions of the site where feasible.

(a) Except as otherwise provided in subsection (17)(b) of this section, areas that have been cleared and graded shall have the soil moisture-holding capacity restored to that of the original undisturbed soil native to the site to the maximum extent practicable. The soil in any area that has been compacted or that has had some or all of the duff layer or underlying topsoil removed shall be amended to mitigate for lost moisture-holding capacity. The amendment shall take place between May 1st and October 1st. The topsoil layer shall be a minimum of eight inches thick, unless the applicant demonstrates that a different thickness will provide conditions equivalent to the soil moisture-holding capacity native to the site. The topsoil layer shall have an organic matter content of between five to 10 percent dry weight and a pH suitable for the proposed landscape plants. When feasible, subsoils below the topsoil layer should be scarified at least four inches with some incorporation of the upper material to avoid stratified layers. Compost used to achieve the required soil organic matter content must meet the definition of “composted materials” in WAC 173-350-220.

(b) This subsection does not apply to areas that:

(i) Are subject to a State surface mine reclamation permit; or

(ii) At project completion are covered by an impervious surface, incorporated into a drainage facility or engineered as structural fill or slope. 

(18) Protection of Critical Areas. The function and values of all critical areas, including all stream types, geologically sensitive areas, critical aquifer recharge areas, frequently flooded areas, wetlands, and fish and wildlife conservation areas or habitats, and their critical area buffers located on or adjacent to the site shall be protected from clearing and grading activities that result in sedimentation, erosion, and degradation. Such impacts shall be avoided by installing protection fencing around critical areas and buffers prior to any site disturbance, appropriate use of setbacks, erosion, and sediment control measures and other appropriate best development and management practices consistent with the adopted King County Surface Water Design Manual.

(19) Avoidance of Hazards. Land disturbance activities shall not result in off-site physical damage, nor pose a danger or hazard to life or property. Such activities shall neither contribute to nor create landslides, accelerated soil creep, or settlement of soils.

(20) Dewatering Devices.

(a) Foundation, vault, and trench dewatering water which has similar characteristics to stormwater runoff shall be discharged into a controlled conveyance system prior to discharge to a sediment pond. Channels must be stabilized according to the standards in the adopted King County Surface Water Design Manual.

(b) Clean, nonturbid dewatering water meeting the discharge requirements of the NPDES permit can be discharged to systems tributary to State surface waters, provided the dewatering flow does not cause erosion or flooding of receiving waters. These clean waters should not be routed through stormwater sediment ponds.

(c) Highly turbid or contaminated dewatering water shall be handled separately from stormwater.

(d) Other disposal options, depending on site constraints, may include the following; provided, that the discharge turbidity meets the Washington State Department of Ecology requirements:

(i) Infiltration.

(ii) Transport off site in a vehicle, such as a vacuum flush truck, for legal disposal in a manner that does not pollute State waters.

(iii) On-site treatment using chemical treatment or other suitable treatment technologies.

(iv) Use of a sedimentation bag with outfall to a ditch or swale for small volumes of localized dewatering.

(21) Natural Features and Vegetation Retention. Vegetation, drainage, duff layer, native topsoil, and other natural features of the site should be preserved, and the clearing and grading be performed in a manner that attempts to limit areas of impact to the development area (e.g., structures, roads, utilities, sidewalks, parking, landscaping, etc.). Groundcover and tree disturbance shall be minimized, and root zones shall be protected. Land disturbance activities shall be conducted so as to expose the smallest practical area to erosion for the least possible time. Projects shall be phased to the maximum degree practical and shall take into account seasonal work limitations, to decrease exposed soils and minimize adverse impacts to natural features and vegetation resulting from land disturbance activities.

(22) Slash Removal. Slash from clearing shall preferably be chipped and spread across the site or removed before project completion. 

(23) Revegetation. The site shall be revegetated and landscaped as soon as practical, in accordance with a revegetation plan, approved by the Director. 

(a) A permanent revegetation plan, utilizing vegetation that is known to have a high natural survival rate, shall be implemented.

(b) Where permanent revegetation measures are not in place within seven days in the dry season and two days in the wet season, the applicant shall provide temporary revegetation or stabilization measures in accordance with the recommendations of the adopted King County Surface Water Design Manual, and maintain such measures in good condition until the permanent revegetation measures are installed and inspected by the City. 

(i) Temporary revegetation during the dry season for all disturbed areas of the site (exposed and unworked) that are not covered by permanent improvements such as buildings, parking lots, and decks shall be hydro-seeded and irrigated within seven days until vegetation has been successfully established or the site otherwise revegetated or stabilized using straw mulch, or other approved methods, on an interim basis. 

(ii) Temporary revegetation during the wet season for disturbed areas of the site (exposed and unworked) that are not covered by permanent improvements such as buildings, parking lots, and decks shall be hydro-seeded, otherwise revegetated, or stabilized using plastic sheeting or other approved methods, on a temporary basis within two days until vegetation has been successfully established. 

(24) Construction Phasing. Development projects shall phase land disturbance to the maximum degree practicable and shall take into account seasonal work limitations in subsection (16) of this section. Construction stormwater pollution prevention plans (SWPPPs) shall indicate land clearing schedules intended to minimize the occurrence and extent of land disturbing activities in the wet season. Each phase of land disturbance shall comply with the requirements of this code.

(25) Maintenance. All temporary and permanent erosion and sediment control devices shall be maintained and repaired as needed. Erosion and sediment control devices that are damaged or not working properly shall be returned to operating condition within 24 hours of identifying they are not working properly or receiving notice from the City, or as otherwise directed by the Director. The contractor shall:

(a) Regularly inspect (weekly and within 24 hours after any runoff producing storm event during the dry season, and daily, including on weekends, during the wet season and during rainfall events) all temporary and permanent erosion and sedimentation BMPs and maintain them per the development standards so that they function as intended until the site has been permanently stabilized, and the potential for on-site erosion has passed. Inlets should be inspected weekly at a minimum and daily during storm events. Inlet protection devices should be cleaned or removed and replaced when sediment has filled one-third of the available storage (unless a different standard is specified by the product manufacturer).

(b) Return any BMPs that are not functioning properly to normal operating conditions within 24 hours of receiving notice from the City. BMPs that must be addressed include: critical area buffers/setbacks, stormwater/pollutant protection, natural feature preservation/vegetation retention, avoidance of hazards, revegetation, erosion and sediment control, and permanent retention/detention facilities. The responsibility for maintaining site stability and maintenance objectives for buffer vegetation and permanent erosion, sedimentation, and runoff control structures for the original permit requirements is the responsibility of the property owner once the work is complete and final restoration measures have been installed as per the plans or approved permit requirements. 

(26) Site-Specific Requirements. Additional, site-specific requirements may be established after a site visit by the City. These requirements shall be based on specific site conditions and are limited to additional temporary erosion and sedimentation control and the mitigation of hazardous or potentially hazardous conditions that pose a threat off site or habitat preservation.

(27) Project Management.

(a) Construction site operators shall maintain, update and implement their SWPPP as required in the adopted King County Surface Water Design Manual. Construction site operators shall modify their SWPPP whenever there is a change in design, construction, operation, or maintenance at the construction site that has, or could have, a significant effect on the discharge of pollutants to waters of the State.

(b) The SWPPP shall be modified whenever there is a significant change in the design, construction, operation, or maintenance at the construction site that has, or could have, a significant effect on the discharge of pollutants to waters of the State.

(c) The SWPPP shall be modified if, during inspections or investigations conducted by the owner/operator or the applicable local or State regulatory authority, it is determined that the SWPPP is ineffective in eliminating or significantly minimizing pollutants in stormwater discharges from the site. The SWPPP shall be modified as necessary to include additional or modified BMPs designed to correct problems identified. Revisions to the SWPPP shall be completed within seven calendar days following the inspection. (Ord. 635 § 1, 2016)


15.05.110 Grading – Land development projects.

(1) For all land development projects such as subdivisions and short subdivisions, the permittee shall, after being issued the proper permits, clear and grade the property and install infrastructure improvements. Individual lots shall be cleared and graded as follows:

(a) Individual lots shall be cleared and graded as part of the overall project mass grading and construction of infrastructure. The individual lots shall be graded to accept the expected buildings and driveways. All lots shall be designed and constructed with due regard to the natural topography: 

(i) Walls and slopes proposed as a means of grade separation between lots shall be constructed as part of the mass grading phase of the project and shall be constructed entirely on the downhill lot.

(ii) If lots are expected to be constructed for a daylight basement type building, the lot shall be prepared as near as possible for such a building, by grading a terrace at some distance from the street. The excess material from the terrace shall be hauled off site or utilized as fill, if suitable elsewhere on the project.

(b) The land developer may elect to defer clearing and grading of individual lots and only construct the infrastructure for the project. Clearing and grading of the deferred lots shall be in accordance with applicable criteria set forth in WMC 15.05.120. (Ord. 635 § 1, 2016)


15.05.120 Grading – Individual lots.

Individual lots may be cleared and graded with the following restrictions:

(1) Grading across property boundaries will only be allowed if a separate site development is issued for the grading activity for each affected lot. 

(2) Any grading of the property and individual lots shall generally conform to the natural topography of the property and adjacent properties, and all provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 635 § 1, 2016)


15.05.130 Drainage.

All clearing and grading operations shall take all necessary precautions, through the use of best management practices, to control drainage within the site and off site to avoid damage to adjoining properties and drainage facilities and prevent impacts to water quality:

(1) In addition to the measures in this and the adopted King County Surface Water Design Manual, the Director may impose the following erosion control measures, or other additional measures, as appropriate for the project: 

(a) Flow control facilities shall be installed for the duration of the clearing and grading operations in accordance with the adopted King County Surface Water Design Manual.

(b) Cut and fill slopes shall be provided with subsurface drainage as necessary for stability.

(c) All building lots shall be graded and prepared such that all roof, yard, wall, slope, driveway, and footing drains can be connected directly by gravity to the project’s drainage system. Discharge to an alternate location may be allowed only with prior approval of the Director, and appropriate easements from affected downstream property owners. (Ord. 635 § 1, 2016)


15.05.140 Slopes.

Slopes shall be constructed with due regard for drainage, access, maintenance, impacts to adjacent property, and aesthetics. Constructed slopes shall comply with all applicable codes and standards and the following criteria:

(1) Cut and fill surfaces shall be no steeper than is safe for the intended use. Slopes shall be constructed no steeper than 2H:1V. Steeper slopes may be constructed upon approval of the Director and the City’s concurrence with the recommendations of a geotechnical engineer, for those areas lying outside the building envelope. In addition, the following standards shall apply to cut and fill slopes:

(a) Clearing and grading on slopes shall meet any critical areas standards set forth in Chapter 21.51 WMC. 

(b) Intercept any groundwater, subsurface water, or surface water drainage encountered on a cut slope and discharge it at a location approved by the Director. Off-site stormwater (run-on) or groundwater shall be diverted away from slopes and undisturbed areas with interceptor dikes, pipes and/or swales. Off-site stormwater should be managed separately from stormwater generated on the site.

(c) Excavated material shall be placed in a manner consistent with safety and space considerations.

(d) Check dams shall be placed at regular intervals within constructed channels that are cut down a slope.

(e) At the top of slopes, collect drainage in pipe slope drains or protected channels to prevent erosion. Temporary pipe slope drains shall handle the expected peak 10-minute flow velocity from a Type 1A, 10-year, 24-hour frequency storm for the developed condition. Alternatively, the 10-year, one-hour flow rate predicted by an approved continuous runoff model, increased by a factor of 1.6, may be used. The hydrologic analysis shall use the existing land cover condition for predicting flow rates from tributary areas outside the project limits. For tributary areas on the project site, the analysis shall use the temporary or permanent project land cover condition, whichever will produce the highest flow rates. Bare soil areas should be modeled as “landscaped area.” 

(2) Existing slopes shall not be oversteepened beyond the criteria in subsection (1) of this section by placing fill or by constructing a fill wall near the top of the slope.

(3) If building sites are prepared by constructing slopes near the property line, the slope between building sites shall be constructed during the mass grading of the project, entirely on one lot.

(4) Drainage at the top and toe of any slope shall be appropriately collected and discharged:

(a) The ground surface above a slope shall be graded to direct surface runoff to an appropriate collection point. Water shall not be allowed to discharge over the top of a slope.

(b) Slopes shall not be constructed in a location or manner in which surface runoff and debris are permitted to drain onto an adjacent property.

(c) Slopes shall be designed and protected to minimize erosion.

(d) Terraces at least 10 feet in width shall be sloped away from the face of a slope and shall be established at not more than 25-foot vertical intervals to control surface drainage and debris. Swales or ditches on terraces shall have a maximum gradient of five percent.

(5) Setbacks. The tops and the toes of cut and fill slopes shall be set back from property boundaries as far as necessary, as determined by a geotechnical engineer for safety of the adjacent properties and to prevent damage resulting from water runoff or erosion. The tops and toes of cut and fill slopes shall be set back from structures as far as is necessary, as determined by a geotechnical engineer for adequacy of foundation support and to prevent damage as a result of water runoff or erosion. Slope setbacks shall be as follows:

(a) The top of slopes shall be no nearer the property line than five horizontal feet or one-fifth the vertical height of the slope, whichever is greater.

(b) The toe of fill slopes shall be no nearer the property line than five horizontal feet or one-half the vertical height of the slope, whichever is greater. 

(c) Rockeries shall be set back a minimum distance of 20 feet to allow for future maintenance. (Ord. 635 § 1, 2016)


15.05.150 Fill.

(1) Preparation of Ground. The ground surface shall be prepared to receive fill by removing vegetation and unsuitable soil and material such as concrete rubble, topsoil, tree stumps, and brush. Where slopes receiving fill are steeper than five horizontal to one vertical, the fill material shall be benched into adequate bearing nonorganic soil.

(2) Fill Material. All on-site materials used as fill on the site shall conform to the specifications identified in the approved soils report. 

(3) Compaction. All engineered fill material shall be mechanically compacted as determined by the design engineer or per the permit requirements as determined by the Director. At a minimum, all fills or embankments shall be compacted to a minimum density of 90 percent of Modified Proctor (ASTM D1557) unless different requirements are required to meet low impact development (LID) requirements as determined by the Director. (Ord. 635 § 1, 2016)


15.05.160 Rock and retaining walls.

Walls shall be designed and constructed with due regard for drainage, access, maintenance, impacts to adjacent property, and aesthetics. All walls shall be constructed in accordance with all applicable codes and standards and the following criteria:

(1) Rockeries may be used for erosion protection of cut or fill slopes. The primary function of a rock wall is to protect the slope face from soil erosion and sloughing. Rockeries may not be used to support building foundation loads or fills that support building foundation loads.

(2) Any wall supporting a surcharge or over four feet in height shall require a separate building permit.

(3) All walls shall be provided with a wall drainage system. The wall drainage system shall discharge at an appropriate location:

(a) Wall drains shall be connected to the storm drainage stub provided for the lot, if possible.

(b) Wall drains shall not discharge onto a downhill property, unless the downhill property is a vegetated area that has been set aside as permanent open space or critical area, with approval from the City and affected property owner.

(c) Wall drains shall not discharge onto a steep slope as defined by WMC 21.51.250(2)(b)(vi) or areas susceptible to erosion. 

(d) The area above the wall shall be graded to channel water in a direction parallel to the face of the wall until the water can be collected in a pipe or drain, or discharged at an appropriate location.

(4) All walls parallel to a building shall be set back from the building a minimum of five feet. This setback applies to the horizontal space between the wall and the building as measured from the front face of a wall or the cut slope for a wall and the face of the building. 

(5) Walls existing at the time of the ordinance codified in this chapter, if constructed under a valid permit, may be repaired or replaced to their original height.

(6) Walls shall not support earth, walls, or other structures on an adjacent property.

(7) Walls taller than eight feet must be screened if visible from adjacent property or a public right-of-way. 

(8) Walls shall not be located in separate tracts or public rights-of-way for the purposes of circumventing the provisions of this chapter.

(9) Walls shall not be stacked wherein a lower wall is supporting an upper wall unless the lower wall is designed to do so. Minimum horizontal spacing between rock or retaining walls, as measured from face to face, shall be no less than the thickness of the lower wall plus the height of the lower wall.

(10) When preparing a grading plan and designing a driveway or private road, use of a retaining wall to support the roadway shall be considered only after other design options are exhausted. When a roadway must be supported by a retaining wall, the City may require additional building setbacks, easements or other restrictions and provisions to allow proper maintenance of the wall.

(11) Walls shall not be located or constructed so as to impede travel on the public right-of-way or impinge on it. 

(12) The area above the wall shall be designed and constructed to prevent surface water and debris from flowing over the top of the wall, and to allow for access and maintenance to the area above the wall. The area between the wall and the building shall be graded no steeper than five percent, perpendicular to the face of the wall, for a distance of five feet, for that area located within five feet of the building. 

(13) Walls shall not be used to break up a slope or to circumvent the definition of or the restrictions for steep slope hazard areas as described in Chapter 21.51 WMC.

(14) Walls constructed between lots shall be constructed entirely on the downhill side of the property line entirely on one lot, including the wall drainage system. (Ord. 635 § 1, 2016)


15.05.170 Utilities.

The installation of utilities (e.g., water, sewer, and drainage pipes) across steep topography on single-family lots greatly reduces the amount of buildable space on the lot. Cutting, filling or constructing walls within storm, water, and sanitary sewer easements is prohibited, unless specific written approval from the utility owner is provided. It shall be the permittee’s responsibility to obtain said approval, and provide a copy to the City. (Ord. 635 § 1, 2016)


15.05.180 Driveways – Design.

Lots shall be prepared to accept a driveway meeting all applicable public works standards regarding width and slope. Where a lot fronts on a steep roadway, the driveway shall be narrowed and/or lengthened in order to meet the standards regarding driveway slope. Where increased driveway lengths are required, subdivisions and short plats shall contain a note on the face of the plat indicating those lots affected, and to what degree the driveways are to be lengthened. (Ord. 635 § 1, 2016)


15.05.190 Inspections.

(1) All projects with a site development permit are subject to City inspections to ensure compliance with the permit, and that adequate control is being exercised by the contractor, civil engineer, and geotechnical engineer. The City shall specify the general stages of work when inspection is required and may require inspection and testing by an approved testing agency, to be paid by the permittee.

(2) The permittee shall employ qualified professionals to perform inspections of the site grading when using an approved testing agency. (Ord. 635 § 1, 2016)


15.05.200 Final approval.

(1) The Director shall give final approval to the clearing and grading operations once all the work is completed per the permit. The following must be completed, as a minimum, prior to final approval:

(a) All clearing and grading must be complete;

(b) The site shall be permanently stabilized, temporary erosion control measures removed, and storm drainage control facilities constructed and operational;

(c) The site shall be in a neat and orderly manner, free from junk, trash, debris, equipment, stockpiles and other construction materials;

(d) All required inspection, observation, and testing summary reports, as-built drawings, and other documentation as required by the permit shall be submitted and approved by the City;

(e) The site shall be free of hazards; and

(f) All disputes regarding property damage caused by the clearing and grading operations shall be resolved to the satisfaction of the Director or judicial authority.

(2) The City shall not issue final approval for any development proposal or issue a certificate of occupancy or final building inspection for property which has not received final approval for the clearing and grading operations. (Ord. 635 § 1, 2016)


15.05.210 Stop work order/permit revocation.

(1) Permit Suspension/Revocation. The Director may suspend work or revoke a site development permit, as appropriate, whenever:

(a) The work is not authorized by a valid permit;

(b) The permittee requests such revocation or suspension;

(c) The work does not proceed in accordance with the plans, as approved, or is not in compliance with the requirements of this chapter or other City ordinances;

(d) Entry upon the property for the purposes of investigation or inspection has been denied;

(e) The permittee has made a misrepresentation of a material fact in applying for such permit;

(f) The progress of the work indicates that the plan is or will be inadequate to protect the public, the adjoining property, the street, protected areas, the drainage system, or other utilities;

(g) The required project security has expired or has been expended to the point that it no longer provides assurance of completion of the project in compliance with the permit approval; or

(h) The permit has not been acted upon or extended within the time allowed pursuant to WMC 15.05.090.

(2) Stop Work Order. The Director shall issue the permittee a written stop work order specifying the nature of the violation or problem which must be remedied prior to resuming other work on the project. If the permittee does not comply with the order within the time specified, the Director, as an alternative to other remedies, may enter the project site and perform the required work. All costs incurred by the City in performing such work shall be drawn against the surety posted by the permittee to ensure the enforcement of the provisions of the permit. In the absence of sufficient surety, the City may place a lien against the property in the amount of the funds expended to perform the required work.

(3) Restoration. Violators of this chapter, or of a permit issued hereunder, shall be responsible for restoring unlawfully damaged areas in conformance with a restoration plan, approved by the Director, which provides for repair of any environmental and property damage, and restoration of the site; and which results in a site condition that, to the greatest extent practical, equals the site condition that would have existed in the absence of the violation(s).

(4) Prohibition of Further Approvals. The City shall not accept, process, or approve any application for development proposal, or issue a certificate of occupancy or final building inspection for property on which a violation of this chapter has occurred until the violation is cured by restoration or other means acceptable to the Director and by payment of any penalty imposed for the violation. (Ord. 635 § 1, 2016)


15.05.220 Forest practices.

(1) Class IV Forest Practice. Under a Class IV forest practice, all clearing not otherwise exempted under this chapter shall be subject to the requirements of this chapter. All such clearing shall be subject to the State Environmental Policy Act, Chapter 43.21C RCW, and the City shall accept or assume lead agency status. The review of the Class IV application shall be consolidated with the review of the associated development permit or approval. Clearing independent of permit or approval shall require a separate site development permit pursuant to this chapter. The City will also combine its SEPA review of Class IV forest practices and City permits.

(2) Development applications on lands cleared or graded pursuant to a Class I, II, III or IV special forest practice as defined in Chapter 76.09 RCW, or cleared or graded without forest practices or City authorization, shall be denied for a period of six years unless the applicant demonstrates that the clearing was consistent with requirements of this chapter or the applicant adequately restores the site. Restoration shall include, but is not limited to, reforestation, erosion control, critical areas enhancement and restoration, surface water management controls, and compliance with other applicable City and State regulations. Administrative rules may set out further details as to how restoration is accomplished and when it will be deemed sufficient. (Ord. 635 § 1, 2016)


15.05.230 Violations – Penalties.

Repealed by Ord. 685. (Ord. 635 § 1, 2016)


Chapter 15.06 VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT

Sections:

15.06.010    Violations defined.

15.06.020    Enforcement.


15.06.010 Violations defined.

(1) It shall be a violation for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, repair, move, remove, convert, demolish, use, occupy, or maintain any structure or use of land, or any portion, contrary to or inconsistent with the provisions of this title. The violation shall exist until the unlawful act and/or unlawful use has been remedied or abated.

(2) It shall be a violation for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, repair, move, remove, convert, demolish, use, occupy, or maintain any structure or use of land within the City of Woodinville in any manner contrary to or inconsistent with the terms or conditions of any permit, approved plans or authorization; provided, that the terms or conditions are explicitly stated on the permit, approved plans or authorization. (Ord. 685 § 14, 2019)


15.06.020 Enforcement. 

The provisions for enforcement set forth in Chapters 1.06 and 21.12 WMC shall apply to violations of this title. (Ord. 685 § 14, 2019)


Chapter 15.09 INTERNATIONAL CODES

(Repealed by Ord. 503)


Chapter 15.12 ADDITIONAL STATE CODES

(Repealed by Ord. 503)


Chapter 15.15 FIRE CODE

Sections:

15.15.010    Adoption.

15.15.020    Amendments and additions.


15.15.010 Adoption.

The 2015 Edition of the International Fire Code (IFC), as adopted and amended by the State Building Code Council in Chapter 51-54 WAC, as published by the International Code Council, excluding WAC 51-54-0500: Chapter 5, Fire Service Features, is adopted by reference, together with the amendments and additions set forth below.

The following appendices of the 2015 Edition of the International Fire Code are also adopted by reference: Appendix B – Fire-Flow Requirements for Buildings; Appendix C – Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution; and Appendix D – Fire Apparatus Access Roads.

The 2015 International Wildland Urban Interface Code is included in this Code as Section 4800 with amendments found in Appendix K.

Exceptions: The provisions of this code do not apply to temporary growing structures used solely for the commercial production of horticultural plants including ornamental plants, flowers, vegetables, and fruits. “Temporary growing structure” means a structure that has the sides and roof covered with polyethylene, polyvinyl, or similar flexible synthetic material and is used to provide plants with either frost protection or increased heat retention. A temporary growing structure is not considered a building for purposes of this code. 

The provisions of this code do not apply to the construction, alteration, or repair of temporary worker housing except as provided by rule adopted under Chapter 70.114A RCW or Chapter 37, Laws of 1998 (2SSB 6168). “Temporary worker housing” means a place, area, or piece of land where sleeping places or housing sites are provided by an employer for his or her employees or by another person, including a temporary worker housing operator, who is providing such accommodations for employees, for temporary, seasonal occupancy, and includes “labor camps” under RCW 70.54.110. The manufacture, storage, handling, sale and use of fireworks shall be governed by Chapter 70.77 RCW and by Chapter 212-17 WAC and local ordinances consistent with Chapter 212-17 WAC. (Ord. 614 § 2, 2016; Ord. 567 § 2, 2013; Ord. 503 § 5 (Att. B), 2010)


15.15.020 Amendments and additions.

The following sections or subsections of the 2015 International Fire Code are hereby amended as provided below:

101.1 Title. The words “NAME OF JURISDICTION” are deleted, and “City of Woodinville” is substituted.

102.7 Referenced codes and standards. The words, “except as required by RCW 19.27.031” are added to the last sentence.

103.2 Appointment. The words “chief appointing authority” shall be deleted, and “City Manager” substituted.

105.1.1 Permits required. The second sentence is revised to read: “Permit fees, as established by City Council resolution, shall be paid prior to issuance of the permit.”

105.3.1 Expiration. This section is revised to read: “An operational permit shall remain in effect until reissued, renewed or revoked, or for such a period of time as specified in the permit

Every permit issued shall become invalid unless work authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. The building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 days each. The extension shall be requested by writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.”

108 Appeals. All language in Section 108 is hereby deleted and the following is substituted: “Refer to Chapter 2.30, Chapter 21.83 and Chapter 21.85 of the Woodinville Municipal Code.”

109.4 Violation penalties. This section is revised to read: “Persons who shall violate a provision of this code, fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or erect, install, alter or repair work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.”

111.4 Failure to comply. This section is revised to read: “Any person who shall continue any work on the system after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be prosecuted within the limits provided by state or local laws.”

903.2 Where required. This section is revised to read: “Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new buildings and structures shall be provided in the locations described in Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.12, and in all buildings with a gross floor area of 5,000 square feet or greater, regardless of type or use.”

(Ord. 614 § 2, 2016; Ord. 567 § 2, 2013; Ord. 503 § 5 (Att. B), 2010)


Chapter 15.17 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE

Sections:

15.17.010    Short title.

15.17.020    Adoption of codes.


15.17.010 Short title.

This chapter shall be known as and may be referred to as the “Property Maintenance Code.” (Ord. 503 § 6 (Att. C), 2010)


15.17.020 Adoption of codes.

The International Property Maintenance Code, 2009 Edition, is hereby adopted as set forth below; provided, however, that the purpose of the code is not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be protected or benefited by the terms of this code.

SECTION 101

GENERAL 

101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the International Property Maintenance Code of The City of Woodinville hereinafter referred to as “this code.”

101.2 Scope. The provisions of this code shall apply to all existing residential and nonresidential structures and all existing premises and constitute minimum requirements and standards for premises, structures, equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, space, heating, sanitation, protection from the elements, life safety, safety from fire and other hazards, and for safe and sanitary maintenance; the responsibility of owners, operators and occupants; the occupancy of existing structures and premises, and for administration, enforcement and penalties.

101.3 Intent. This code shall be construed to secure its expressed intent, which is to ensure public health, safety and welfare insofar as they are affected by the continued occupancy and maintenance of structures and premises. Existing structures and premises that do not comply with these provisions shall be altered or repaired to provide a minimum level of health and safety as required herein.

101.4 Severability. If a section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code.

SECTION 102

APPLICABILITY

102.1 General. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall govern. Where differences occur between provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall apply. Where, in a specific case, different sections of this code specify different requirements, the most restrictive shall govern.

102.2 Maintenance. Equipment, systems, devices and safeguards required by this code or a previous regulation or code under which the structure or premises was constructed, altered or repaired shall be maintained in good working order. No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment or utility which is required under this section to be removed from or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling, except for such temporary interruption as necessary while repairs or alterations are in progress. The requirements of this code are not intended to provide the basis for removal or abrogation of fire protection and safety systems and devices in existing structures. Except as otherwise specified herein, the owner or the owner’s designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures and premises.

102.3 Application of other codes. Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the International Building Code, International Fuel Gas Code, International Mechanical Code and NFPA 70. Nothing in this code shall be construed to cancel, modify or set aside any provision of the International Zoning Code.

102.4 Existing remedies. The provisions in this code shall not be construed to abolish or impair existing remedies of the jurisdiction or its officers or agencies relating to the removal or demolition of any structure which is dangerous, unsafe and insanitary.

102.5 Workmanship. Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or installations which are caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this code shall be executed and installed in a workman like manner and installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions.

102.6 Historic buildings. The provisions of this code shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures designated as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the code official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare.

102.7 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those that are listed in Chapter 8 and considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall apply.

Exception: Where enforcement of a code provision would violate the conditions of the listing of the equipment or appliance, the conditions of the listing shall apply.

102.8 Requirements not covered by code. Requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing fixture, structure or equipment, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this code, shall be determined by the code official.

102.9 Application of references. References to chapter or section numbers, or to provisions not specifically identified by number, shall be construed to refer to such chapter, section or provision of this code.

102.10 Other laws. The provisions of this code shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law. 

PART 2 – ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT

SECTION 103

DEPARTMENT OF PROPERTY MAINTENANCE INSPECTION

103.1 General. This code shall be administered by the code official.

103.2 Appointment. The code official shall be appointed by the City Manager.

103.3 Deputies. In accordance with the prescribed procedures of this jurisdiction and with the concurrence of the appointing authority, the code official shall have the authority to appoint a deputy(s). Such employees shall have powers as delegated by the code official.

103.4 Liability. The code official, member of the board of appeals or employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting for the jurisdiction, in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties required by this code or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of an act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against any officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this code shall be defended by the legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. The code official or any subordinate shall not be liable for costs in an action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this code.

SECTION 104

DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE CODE OFFICIAL 

104.1 General. The code official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this code. The code official shall have the authority to render interpretations of this code and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this code. Such policies and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this code.

104.2 Inspections. The code official shall make all of the required inspections, or shall accept reports of inspection by approved agencies or individuals. All reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the responsible individual. The code official is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise, subject to the approval of the appointing authority.

104.3 Right of entry. Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this code, or whenever the code official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a structure or upon a premises a condition in violation of this code, the code official is authorized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or perform the duties imposed by this code, provided that if such structure or premises is occupied the code official shall present credentials to the occupant and request entry. If such structure or premises is unoccupied, the code official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the structure or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the code official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry.

104.4 Identification. The code official shall carry proper identification when inspecting structures or premises in the performance of duties under this code.

104.5 Notices and orders. The code official shall issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this code.

104.6 Department records. The code official shall keep official records of all business and activities of the department specified in the provisions of this code. Such records shall be retained in the official records for the period required for retention of public records.

SECTION 105

APPROVAL

105.1 Modifications. Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of this code, the code official shall have the authority to grant modifications for individual cases upon application of the owner or owner’s representative, provided the code official shall first find that special individual reason makes the strict letter of this code impractical and the modification is in compliance with the in-

tent and purpose of this code and that such modification does not lessen health, life and fire safety requirements. The details of action granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the department files.

105.2 Alternative materials, methods and equipment. The provisions of this code are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to prohibit any method of construction not specifically prescribed by this code, provided that any such alternative has been approved. An alternative material or method of construction shall be approved where the code official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of this code, and that the material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this code in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety.

105.3 Required testing. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of this code, or evidence that a material or method does not conform to the requirements of this code, or in order to substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the code official shall have the authority to require tests to be made as evidence of compliance at no expense to the jurisdiction.

105.3.1 Test methods. Test methods shall be as specified in this code or by other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the code official shall be permitted to approve appropriate testing procedures performed by an approved agency.

105.3.2 Test reports. Reports of tests shall be retained by the code official for the period required for retention of public records.

105.4 Used material and equipment. The use of used materials which meet the requirements of this code for new materials is permitted. Materials, equipment and devices shall not be reused unless such elements are in good repair or have been reconditioned and tested when necessary, placed in good and proper working condition and approved by the code official.

105.5 Approved materials and equipment. Materials, equipment and devices approved by the code official shall be constructed and installed in accordance with such approval.

105.6 Research reports. Supporting data, where necessary to assist in the approval of materials or assemblies not specifically provided for in this code, shall consist of valid research reports from approved sources.

SECTION 106

VIOLATIONS

106.1 Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to be in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this code.

SECTION 107

ENFORCEMENT

The procedures and penalties for enforcing this chapter are set forth in Chapter 1.06 WMC.

107.6 Transfer of ownership. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling unit or structure who has received a compliance order or upon whom a notice of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such dwelling unit or structure to another until the provisions of the compliance order or notice of violation have been complied with, or until such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any compliance order or notice of violation issued by the code official and shall furnish to the code official a signed and notarized statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or notice of violation and fully accepting the responsibility without condition for making the corrections or repairs required by such compliance order or notice of violation.

SECTION 108

UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT

108.1 General. When a structure or equipment is found by the code official to be unsafe, or when a structure is found unfit for human occupancy, or is found unlawful, such structure shall be condemned pursuant to the provisions of this code.

108.1.1 Unsafe structures. An unsafe structure is one that is found to be dangerous to the life, health, property or safety of the public or the occupants of the structure by not providing minimum safeguards to protect or warn occupants in the event of fire, or because such structure contains unsafe equipment or is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe or of such faulty construction or unstable foundation, that partial or complete collapse is possible.

108.1.2 Unsafe equipment. Unsafe equipment includes any boiler, heating equipment, elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device, flammable liquid containers or other equipment on the premises or within the structure which is in such disrepair or condition that such equipment is a hazard to life, health, property or safety of the public or occupants of the premises or structure.

108.1.3 Structure unfit for human occupancy. A structure is unfit for human occupancy whenever the code official finds that such structure is unsafe, unlawful or, because of the degree to which the structure is in disrepair or lacks maintenance, is insanitary, vermin or rat infested, contains filth and contamination, or lacks ventilation, illumination, sanitary or heating facilities or other essential equipment required by this code, or because the location of the structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants of the structure or to the public.

108.1.4 Unlawful structure. An unlawful structure is one found in whole or in part to be occupied by more persons than permitted under this code, or was erected, altered or occupied contrary to law.

108.1.5 Dangerous structure or premises. For the purpose of this code, any structure or premises that has any or all of the conditions or defects described below shall be considered dangerous:

1. Any door, aisle, passageway, stairway, exit or other means of egress that does not conform to the approved building or fire code of the jurisdiction as related to the requirements for existing buildings.

2. The walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway, exit or other means of egress is so warped, worn loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate means of egress.

3. Any portion of a building, structure or appurtenance that has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood, deterioration, neglect, abandonment, vandalism or by any other cause to such an extent that it is likely to partially or completely collapse, or to become detached or dislodged.

4. Any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance or ornamentation on the exterior thereof that is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting natural or artificial loads of one and one-half the original designed value.

5. The building or structure, or part of the building or structure, because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction, the removal or movement of some portion of the ground necessary for the support, or for any other reason, is likely to partially or completely collapse, or some portion of the foundation or underpinning of the building or structure is likely to fail or give way.

6. The building or structure, or any portion thereof, is clearly unsafe for its use and occupancy.

7. The building or structure is neglected, damaged, dilapidated, unsecured or abandoned so as to become an attractive nuisance to children who might play in the building or structure to their danger, becomes a harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons, or enables persons to resort to the building or structure for committing a nuisance or an unlawful act.

8. Any building or structure has been constructed, exists or is maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to such building or structure provided by the approved building or fire code of the jurisdiction, or of any law or ordinance to such an extent as to present either a substantial risk of fire, building collapse or any other threat to life and safety.

9. A building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, ventilation, mechanical or plumbing system, or otherwise, is determined by the code official to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease.

10. Any building or structure, because of a lack of sufficient or proper fire-resistance-rated construction, fire protection systems, electrical system, fuel connections, mechanical system, plumbing system or other cause, is determined by the code official to be a threat to life or health.

11. Any portion of a building remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or whenever any building or structure is abandoned so as to constitute such building or portion thereof as an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public.

108.2 Closing of vacant structures. If the structure is vacant and unfit for human habitation and occupancy, and is not in danger of structural collapse, the code official is authorized to post a placard of condemnation on the premises and order the structure closed up so as not to be an attractive nuisance. Upon failure of the owner to close up the premises within the time specified in the order, the code official shall cause the premises to be closed and secured through any available public agency or by contract or arrangement by private persons and the cost thereof shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate and may be collected by any other legal resource.

108.2.1 Authority to disconnect service utilities. The code official shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by this code and the referenced codes and standards set forth in Section 102.7 in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property or when such utility connection has been made without approval. The code official shall notify the serving utility and, whenever possible, the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnection the owner or occupant of the building structure or service system shall be notified in writing as soon as practical thereafter.

108.3 Notice. Whenever the code official has condemned a structure or equipment under the provisions of this section, notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice and served on the owner or the person or persons responsible for the structure or equipment in accordance with Section 107.3. If the notice pertains to equipment, it shall also be placed on the condemned equipment. The notice shall be in the form prescribed in Section 107.2.

108.4 Placarding. Upon failure of the owner or person responsible to comply with the notice provisions within the time given, the code official shall post on the premises or on defective equipment a placard bearing the word “Condemned” and a statement of the penalties provided for occupying the premises, operating the equipment or removing the placard.

108.4.1 Placard removal. The code official shall remove the condemnation placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the condemnation and placarding action were based have been eliminated. Any person who defaces or removes a condemnation placard without the approval of the code official shall be subject to the penalties provided by this code.

108.5 Prohibited occupancy. Any occupied structure condemned and placarded by the code official shall be vacated as ordered by the code official. Any person who shall occupy a placarded premises or shall operate placarded equipment, and any owner or any person responsible for the premises who shall let anyone occupy a placarded premises or operate placarded equipment shall be liable for the penalties provided by this code.

108.6 Abatement methods. The owner, operator or occupant of a building, premises or equipment deemed unsafe by the code official shall abate or cause to be abated or corrected such unsafe conditions either by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or other approved corrective action.

108.7 Record. The code official shall cause a report to be filed on an unsafe condition. The report shall state the occupancy of the structure and the nature of the unsafe condition.

SECTION 109

EMERGENCY MEASURES 

109.1 Imminent danger. When, in the opinion of the code official, there is imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building or structure which endangers life, or when any structure or part of a structure has fallen and life is endangered by the occupation of the structure, or when there is actual or potential danger to the building occupants or those in the proximity of any structure because of explosives, explosive fumes or vapors or the presence of toxic fumes, gases or materials, or operation of defective or dangerous equipment, the code official is hereby authorized and empowered to order and require the occupants to vacate the premises forthwith. The code official shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such structure a notice reading as follows: “This Structure Is Unsafe and Its Occupancy Has Been Prohibited by the Code Official.” It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such structure except for the purpose of securing the structure, making the required repairs, removing the hazardous condition or of demolishing the same.

109.2 Temporary safeguards. Notwithstanding other provisions of this code, whenever, in the opinion of the code official, there is imminent danger due to an unsafe condition, the code official shall order the necessary work to be done, including the boarding up of openings, to render such structure temporarily safe whether or not the legal procedure herein described has been instituted; and shall cause such other action to be taken as the code official deems necessary to meet such emergency. 

109.3 Closing streets. When necessary for public safety, the code official shall temporarily close structures and close, or order the authority having jurisdiction to close, sidewalks, streets, public ways and places adjacent to unsafe structures, and prohibit the same from being utilized.

109.4 Emergency repairs. For the purposes of this section, the code official shall employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the required work as expeditiously as possible.

109.5 Costs of emergency repairs. Costs incurred in the performance of emergency work shall be paid by the jurisdiction. The legal counsel of the jurisdiction shall institute appropriate action against the owner of the premises where the unsafe structure is or was located for the recovery of such costs.

SECTION 110

DEMOLITION

110.1 General. The code official shall order the owner of any premises upon which is located any structure, which in the code official’s judgment after review is so deteriorated or dilapidated or has become so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, insanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation or occupancy, and such that it is unreasonable to repair the structure, to demolish and remove such structure; or if such structure is capable of being made safe by repairs, to repair and make safe and sanitary, or to board up and hold for future repair or to demolish and remove at the owner’s option; or where there has been a cessation of normal construction of any structure for a period of more than two years, the code official shall order the owner to demolish and remove such structure, or board up until future repair. Boarding the building up for future repair shall not extend beyond one year, unless approved by the building official.

110.2 Notices and orders. All notices and orders shall comply with Section 107.

110.3 Failure to comply. If the owner of a premises fails to comply with a demolition order within the time prescribed, the code official shall cause the structure to be demolished and removed, either through an available public agency or by contract or arrangement with private persons, and the cost of such demolition and removal shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.

110.4 Salvage materials. When any structure has been ordered demolished and removed, the governing body or other designated officer under said contract or arrangement aforesaid shall have the right to sell the salvage and valuable materials at the highest price obtainable. The net proceeds of such sale, after deducting the expenses of such demolition and removal, shall be promptly remitted with a report of such sale or transaction, including the items of expense and the amounts deducted, for the person who is entitled thereto, subject to any order of a court. If such a surplus does not remain to be turned over, the report shall so state.

SECTION 112

STOP WORK ORDER

112.1 Authority. Whenever the code official finds any work regulated by this code being performed in a manner contrary to the provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, the code official is authorized to issue a stop work order.

112.2 Issuance. A stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, to the owner’s agent, or to the person doing the work. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the reason for the order and the conditions under which the cited work is authorized to resume.

112.3 Emergencies. Where an emergency exists, the code official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work.

112.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than 125.00 dollars or more than 250.00 dollars.

CHAPTER 2

DEFINITIONS

SECTION 201

GENERAL

201.1 Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the purposes of this code, have the meanings shown in this chapter.

201.2 Interchangeability. Words stated in the present tense include the future; words stated in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; the singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular.

201.3 Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this code and are defined in the International Building Code, International Fire Code, International Zoning Code, Uniform Plumbing Code, International Mechanical Code or NFPA 70, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as stated in those codes.

201.4 Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined through the methods authorized by this section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies.

201.5 Parts. Whenever the words “dwelling unit,” “dwelling,” “premises,” “building,” “rooming house,” “rooming unit,” “housekeeping unit” or “story” are stated in this code, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words “or any part thereof.”

SECTION 202

GENERAL DEFINITIONS

ANCHORED. Secured in a manner that provides positive connection.

APPROVED. Approved by the code official.

BASEMENT. That portion of a building which is partly or completely below grade.

BATHROOM. A room containing plumbing fixtures including a bathtub or shower.

BEDROOM. Any room or space used or intended to be used for sleeping purposes in either a dwelling or sleeping unit.

CODE OFFICIAL. The official who is charged with the administration and enforcement of this code, or any duly authorized representative.

CONDEMN. To adjudge unfit for occupancy.

DETACHED. When a structural element is physically disconnected from another and that connection is necessary to provide a positive connection.

DETERIORATION. To weaken, disintegrate, corrode, rust or decay and lose effectiveness.

DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.

EASEMENT. That portion of land or property reserved for present or future use by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the property. The easement shall be permitted to be for use under, on or above a said lot or lots.

EQUIPMENT SUPPORT. Those structural members or assemblies of members or manufactured elements, including braces, frames, lugs, snuggers, hangers or saddles, that transmit gravity load, lateral load and operating load between the equipment and the structure.

EXTERIOR PROPERTY. The open space on the premises and on adjoining property under the control of owners or operators of such premises.

GARBAGE. The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.

GUARD. A building component or a system of building components located at or near the open sides of elevated walking surfaces that minimizes the possibility of a fall from the walking surface to a lower level.

HABITABLE SPACE. Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces, and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces.

HOUSEKEEPING UNIT. A room or group of rooms forming a single habitable space equipped and intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating which does not contain, within such a unit, a toilet, lavatory and bathtub or shower. 

IMMINENT DANGER. A condition which could cause serious or life-threatening injury or death at any time.

INFESTATION. The presence, within or contiguous to, a structure or premises of insects, rats, vermin or other pests.

INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle which cannot be driven upon the public streets for reason including but not limited to being unlicensed, wrecked, abandoned, in a state of disrepair, or incapable of being moved under its own power.

LABELED. Equipment, materials or products to which have been affixed a label, seal, symbol or other identifying mark of a nationally recognized testing laboratory, inspection agency or other organization concerned with product evaluation that maintains periodic inspection of the production of the above labeled items and whose labeling indicates either that the equipment, material or product meets identified standards or has been tested and found suitable for a specified purpose.

LET FOR OCCUPANCY OR LET. To permit, provide or offer possession or occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building, premises or structure by a person who is or is not the legal owner of record thereof, pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or license, or pursuant to a recorded or unrecorded agreement of contract for the sale of land.

NEGLECT. The lack of proper maintenance for a building or structure.

OCCUPANCY. The purpose for which a building or portion thereof is utilized or occupied.

OCCUPANT. Any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having possession of a space within a building.

OPENABLE AREA. That part of a window, skylight or door which is available for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.

OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises which is let or offered for occupancy.

OWNER. Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court.

PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group acting as a unit.

PEST ELIMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rodents or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that serve as their food or water; by other approved pest elimination methods.

PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or public way, including any structures thereon.

PUBLIC WAY. Any street, alley or similar parcel of land essentially unobstructed from the ground to the sky, which is deeded, dedicated or otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use.

ROOMING HOUSE. A building arranged or occupied for lodging, with or without meals, for compensation and not occupied as a one- or two-family dwelling.

ROOMING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping or living, but not for cooking purposes.

RUBBISH. Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage; the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials.

SLEEPING UNIT. A room or space in which people sleep, which can also include permanent provisions for living, eating and either sanitation or kitchen facilities, but not both. Such rooms and spaces that are also part of a dwelling unit are not sleeping units.

STRICT LIABILITY OFFENSE. An offense in which the prosecution in a legal proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as a part of its case. It is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which was prohibited, or failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required to do.

STRUCTURE. That which is built or constructed or a portion thereof.

TENANT. A person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not the legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit.

TOILET ROOM. A room containing a water closet or urinal but not a bathtub or shower.

ULTIMATE DEFORMATION. The deformation at which failure occurs and which shall be deemed to occur if the sustainable load reduces to 80 percent or less of the maximum strength.

VENTILATION. The natural or mechanical process of supplying conditioned or unconditioned air to, or removing such air from, any space.

WORKMANLIKE. Executed in a skilled manner; e.g., generally plumb, level, square, in line, undamaged and without marring adjacent work.

YARD. An open space on the same lot with a structure.

CHAPTER 3

GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

SECTION 301

GENERAL 

301.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum conditions and the responsibilities of persons for maintenance of structures, equipment and exterior property.

301.2 Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall maintain the structures and exterior property in compliance with these requirements, except as otherwise provided for in this code. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy premises which are not in a sanitary and safe condition and which do not comply with the requirements of this chapter. Occupants of a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit are responsible for keeping in a clean, sanitary and safe condition that part of the dwelling unit, rooming unit, housekeeping unit or premises which they occupy and control.

301.3 Vacant structures and land. All vacant structures and premises thereof or vacant land shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition as provided herein so as not to cause a blighting problem or adversely affect the public health or safety.

SECTION 302

EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS

302.1 Sanitation. All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition. The occupant shall keep that part of the exterior property which such occupant occupies or controls in a clean and sanitary condition.

302.2 Grading and drainage. All premises shall be graded and maintained to prevent the erosion of soil and to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any structure located thereon.

Exception: Approved retention areas and reservoirs.

302.3 Sidewalks and driveways. All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces and similar areas shall be kept in a proper state of repair, and maintained free from hazardous conditions.

302.4 Weeds. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs provided; however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens. Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of a property to cut and destroy weeds after service of a notice of violation, they shall be subject to prosecution in accordance with Section 106.3 and as prescribed by the authority having jurisdiction. Upon failure to comply with the notice of violation, any duly authorized employee of the jurisdiction or contractor hired by the jurisdiction shall be authorized to enter upon the property in violation and cut and destroy the weeds growing thereon, and the costs of such removal shall be paid by the owner or agent responsible for the property.

302.5 Rodent harborage. All structures and exterior property shall be kept free from rodent harborage and infestation. Where rodents are found, they shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes which will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to eliminate rodent harborage and prevent reinfestation.

302.6 Exhaust vents. Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans or blowers shall not discharge gases, steam, vapor, hot air, grease, smoke, odors or other gaseous or particulate wastes directly upon abutting or adjacent public or private property or that of another tenant.

302.7 Accessory structures. All accessory structures, including detached garages, fences and walls, shall be maintained structurally sound and in good repair.

302.8 Motor vehicles. Except as provided for in other regulations, no inoperative or unlicensed motor vehicle shall be parked, kept or stored on any premises, and no vehicle shall at any time be in a state of major disassembly, disrepair, or in the process of being stripped or dismantled. Painting of vehicles is prohibited unless conducted inside an approved spray booth.

Exception: A vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo major overhaul, including body work, provided that such work is performed inside a structure or similarly enclosed area designed and approved for such purposes.

302.9 Defacement of property. No person shall willfully or wantonly damage, mutilate or deface any exterior surface of any structure or building on any private or public property by placing thereon any marking, carving or graffiti. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to restore said surface to an approved state of maintenance and repair.

SECTION 303

SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS

303.1 Swimming pools. Swimming pools shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, and in good repair. 

303.2 Enclosures. Private swimming pools, hot tubs and spas, containing water more than 24 inches (610 mm) in depth shall be completely surrounded by a fence or barrier at least 48 inches (1219 mm) in height above the finished ground level measured on the side of the barrier away from the pool. Gates and doors in such barriers shall be self-closing and self-latching. Where the self-latching device is less than 54 inches (1372 mm) above the bottom of the gate, the release mechanism shall be located on the pool side of the gate. Self-closing and self-latching gates shall be maintained such that the gate will positively close and latch when released from an open position of 6 inches (152 mm) from the gatepost. No existing pool enclosure shall be removed, replaced or changed in a manner that reduces its effectiveness as a safety barrier.

Exception: Spas or hot tubs with a safety cover that complies with ASTM F 1346 shall be exempt from the provisions of this section.

SECTION 304

EXTERIOR STRUCTURE

304.1 General. The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare.

304.1.1 Unsafe conditions. The following conditions shall be determined as unsafe and shall be repaired or replaced to comply with the International Building Code or the International Existing Building Code as required for existing buildings:

1. The nominal strength of any structural member is exceeded by nominal loads, the load effects or the required strength;

2. The anchorage of the floor or roof to walls or columns, and of walls and columns to foundations is not capable of resisting all nominal loads or load effects;

3. Structures or components thereof that have reached their limit state;

4. Siding and masonry joints including joints between the building envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors and skylights are not maintained, weather resistant or water tight;

5. Structural members that have evidence of deterioration or that are not capable of safely supporting all nominal loads and load effects;

6. Foundation systems that are not firmly supported by footings, are not plumb and free from open cracks and breaks, are not properly anchored or are not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;

7. Exterior walls that are not anchored to supporting and supported elements or are not plumb and free of holes, cracks or breaks and loose or rotting materials, are not properly anchored or are not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;

8. Roofing or roofing components that have defects that admit rain, roof surfaces with inadequate drainage, or any portion of the roof framing that is not in good repair with signs of deterioration, fatigue or without proper anchorage and incapable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects; 

9. Flooring and flooring components with defects that affect serviceability or flooring components that show signs of deterioration or fatigue, are not properly anchored or are incapable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;

10. Veneer, cornices, belt courses, corbels, trim, wall facings and similar decorative features not properly anchored or that are anchored with connections not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;

11. Overhang extensions or projections including, but not limited to, trash chutes, canopies, marquees, signs, awnings, fire escapes, standpipes and exhaust ducts not properly anchored or that are anchored with connections not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects; 

12. Exterior stairs, decks, porches, balconies and all similar appurtenances attached thereto, including guards and handrails, are not structurally sound, not properly anchored or that are anchored with connections not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects; or

13. Chimneys, cooling towers, smokestacks and similar appurtenances not structurally sound or not properly anchored, or that are anchored with connections not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects.

Exceptions:

1. When substantiated otherwise by an approved method.

2. Demolition of unsafe conditions shall be permitted when approved by the code official.

304.2 Protective treatment. All exterior surfaces, including but not limited to, doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies, decks and fences, shall be maintained in good condition. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. All siding and masonry joints, as well as those between the building envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors and skylights, shall be maintained weather resistant and water tight. All metal surfaces subject to rust or corrosion shall be coated to inhibit such rust and corrosion, and all surfaces with rust or corrosion shall be stabilized and coated to inhibit future rust and corrosion. Oxidation stains shall be removed from exterior surfaces. Surfaces designed for stabilization by oxidation are exempt from this requirement.

304.3 Premises identification. Buildings shall have approved address numbers placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of 4 inches (102 mm) high with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch (12.7 mm).

304.4 Structural members. All structural members shall be maintained free from deterioration, and shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed dead and live loads.

304.5 Foundation walls. All foundation walls shall be maintained plumb and free from open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to prevent the entry of rodents and other pests. 

304.6 Exterior walls. All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks, and loose or rotting materials; and maintained weatherproof and properly surface coated where required to prevent deterioration.

304.7 Roofs and drainage. The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and not have defects that admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the structure. Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in good repair and free from obstructions. Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance.

304.8 Decorative features. All cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings and similar decorative features shall be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition.

304.9 Overhang extensions. All overhang extensions including, but not limited to canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes and exhaust ducts shall be maintained in good repair and be properly anchored so as to be kept in a sound condition. When required, all exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.

304.10 Stairways, decks, porches and balconies. Every exterior stairway, deck, porch and balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto, shall be maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage and capable of supporting the imposed loads.

304.11 Chimneys and towers. All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks, and similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe and sound, and in good repair. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.

304.12 Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition.

304.13 Window, skylight and door frames. Every window, skylight, door and frame shall be kept in sound condition, good repair and weather tight.

304.13.1 Glazing. All glazing materials shall be maintained free from cracks and holes.

304.13.2 Openable windows. Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be easily openable and capable of being held in position by window hardware.

304.14 Insect screens. Every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of food preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm), and every screen door used for insect control shall have a self-closing device in good working condition.

Exception: Screens shall not be required where other approved means, such as air curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed.

304.15 Doors. All exterior doors, door assemblies and hardware shall be maintained in good condition. Locks at all entrances to dwelling units and sleeping units shall tightly secure the door. Locks on means of egress doors shall be in accordance with Section 702.3.

304.16 Basement hatchways. Every basement hatchway shall be maintained to prevent the entrance of rodents, rain and surface drainage water.

304.17 Guards for basement windows. Every basement window that is openable shall be supplied with rodent shields, storm windows or other approved protection against the entry of rodents.

304.18 Building security. Doors, windows or hatchways for dwelling units, room units or housekeeping units shall be provided with devices designed to provide security for the occupants and property within.

304.18.1 Doors. Doors providing access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a deadbolt lock designed to be readily openable from the side from which egress is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort and shall have a lock throw of not less than 1 inch (25 mm). Such deadbolt locks shall be installed according to the manufacturer’s specifications and maintained in good working order. For the purpose of this section, a sliding bolt shall not be considered an acceptable deadbolt lock.

304.18.2 Windows. Operable windows located in whole or in part within 6 feet (1828 mm) above ground level or a walking surface below that provide access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a window sash locking device. 

304.18.3 Basement hatchways. Basement hatchways that provide access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with devices that secure the units from unauthorized entry.

SECTION 305

INTERIOR STRUCTURE

305.1 General. The interior of a structure and equipment therein shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary condition. Occupants shall keep that part of the structure which they occupy or control in a clean and sanitary condition. Every owner of a structure containing a rooming house, housekeeping units, a hotel, a dormitory, two or more dwelling units or two or more nonresidential occupancies, shall maintain, in a clean and sanitary condition, the shared or public areas of the structure and exterior property.

305.1.1 Unsafe conditions. The following conditions shall be determined as unsafe and shall be repaired or replaced to comply with the International Building Code or the International Existing Building Code as required for existing buildings:

1. The nominal strength of any structural member is exceeded by nominal loads, the load effects or the required strength;

2. The anchorage of the floor or roof to walls or columns, and of walls and columns to foundations is not capable of resisting all nominal loads or load effects;

3. Structures or components thereof that have reached their limit state;

4. Structural members are incapable of supporting nominal loads and load effects;

5. Stairs, landings, balconies and all similar walking surfaces, including guards and handrails, are not structurally sound, not properly anchored or are anchored with connections not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;

6. Foundation systems that are not firmly supported by footings are not plumb and free from open cracks and breaks, are not properly anchored or are not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects.

Exceptions:

1. When substantiated otherwise by an approved method.

2. Demolition of unsafe conditions shall be permitted when approved by the code official.

305.2 Structural members. All structural members shall be maintained structurally sound, and be capable of supporting the imposed loads.

305.3 Interior surfaces. All interior surfaces, including windows and doors, shall be maintained in good, clean and sanitary condition. Peeling, chipping, flaking or abraded paint shall be repaired, removed or covered. Cracked or loose plaster, decayed wood and other defective surface conditions shall be corrected.

305.4 Stairs and walking surfaces. Every stair, ramp, landing, balcony, porch, deck or other walking surface shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair.

305.5 Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition.

305.6 Interior doors. Every interior door shall fit reasonably well within its frame and shall be capable of being opened and closed by being properly and securely attached to jambs, headers or tracks as intended by the manufacturer of the attachment hardware.

SECTION 306

COMPONENT SERVICEABILITY

306.1 General. The components of a structure and equipment therein shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary condition.

306.1.1 Unsafe conditions. Where any of the following conditions cause the component or system to be beyond its limit state, the component or system shall be determined as unsafe and shall be repaired or replaced to comply with the International Building Code as required for existing buildings:

1. Soils that have been subjected to any of the following conditions:

1.1. Collapse of footing or foundation system;

1.2. Damage to footing, foundation, concrete or other structural element due to soil expansion;

1.3. Adverse effects to the design strength of footing, foundation, concrete or other structural element due to a chemical reaction from the soil;

1.4. Inadequate soil as determined by a geotechnical investigation;

1.5. Where the allowable bearing capacity of the soil is in doubt; or

1.6. Adverse effects to the footing, foundation, concrete or other structural element due to the ground water table.

2. Concrete that has been subjected to any of the following conditions:

2.1. Deterioration;

2.2. Ultimate deformation;

2.3. Fractures;

2.4. Fissures;

2.5. Spalling;

2.6. Exposed reinforcement; or

2.7. Detached, dislodged or failing connections.

3. Aluminum that has been subjected to any of the following conditions:

3.1. Deterioration;

3.2. Corrosion;

3.3. Elastic deformation;

3.4. Ultimate deformation;

3.5. Stress or strain cracks;

3.6. Joint fatigue; or

3.7. Detached, dislodged or failing connections.

4. Masonry that has been subjected to any of the following conditions:

4.1. Deterioration;

4.2. Ultimate deformation;

4.3. Fractures in masonry or mortar joints;

4.4. Fissures in masonry or mortar joints;

4.5. Spalling;

4.6. Exposed reinforcement; or

4.7. Detached, dislodged or failing connections.

5. Steel that has been subjected to any of the following conditions:

5.1. Deterioration;

5.2. Elastic deformation;

5.3. Ultimate deformation;

5.4. Metal fatigue; or

5.5. Detached, dislodged or failing connections.

6. Wood that has been subjected to any of the following conditions:

6.1. Ultimate deformation;

6.2. Deterioration;

6.3. Damage from insects, rodents and other vermin;

6.4. Fire damage beyond charring;

6.5. Significant splits and checks;

6.6. Horizontal shear cracks;

6.7. Vertical shear cracks;

6.8. Inadequate support;

6.9. Detached, dislodged or failing connections; or

6.10. Excessive cutting and notching.

Exceptions:

1. When substantiated otherwise by an approved method.

2. Demolition of unsafe conditions shall be permitted when approved by the code official.

SECTION 307

HANDRAILS AND GUARDRAILS

307.1 General. Every exterior and interior flight of stairs having more than four risers shall have a handrail on one side of the stair and every open portion of a stair, landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp or other walking surface which is more than 30 inches (762 mm) above the floor or grade below shall have guards. Handrails shall not be less than 30 inches (762 mm) high or more than 42 inches (1067 mm) high measured vertically above the nosing of the tread or above the finished floor of the landing or walking surfaces. Guards shall not be less than 30 inches (762 mm) high above the floor of the landing, balcony, porch, deck, or ramp or other walking surface.

Exception: Guards shall not be required where exempted by the adopted building code.

SECTION 308

RUBBISH AND GARBAGE

308.1 Accumulation of rubbish or garbage. All exterior property and premises, and the interior of every structure, shall be free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage.

308.2 Disposal of rubbish. Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of all rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such rubbish in approved containers.

308.2.1 Rubbish storage facilities. The owner of every occupied premises shall supply approved covered containers for rubbish, and the owner of the premises shall be responsible for the removal of rubbish.

308.2.2 Refrigerators. Refrigerators and similar equipment not in operation shall not be discarded, abandoned or stored on premises without first removing the doors.

308.3 Disposal of garbage. Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such garbage in an approved garbage disposal facility or approved garbage containers.

308.3.1 Garbage facilities. The owner of every dwelling shall supply an approved leak proof, covered, outside garbage container.

308.3.2 Containers. The operator of every establishment producing garbage shall provide, and at all times cause to be utilized, approved leak proof containers provided with close-fitting covers for the storage of such materials until removed from the premises for disposal.

SECTION 309

PEST ELIMINATION

309.1 Infestation. All structures shall be kept free from insect and rodent infestation. All structures in which insects or rodents are found shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes that will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent reinfestation.

309.2 Owner. The owner of any structure shall be responsible for extermination within the structure prior to renting or leasing the structure.

309.3 Single occupant. The occupant of a one-family dwelling or of a single-tenant nonresidential structure shall be responsible for extermination on the premises.

309.4 Multiple occupancy. The owner of a structure containing two or more dwelling units, a multiple occupancy, a rooming house or a nonresidential structure shall be responsible for extermination in the public or shared areas of the structure and exterior property. If infestation is caused by failure of an occupant to prevent such infestation in the area occupied, the occupant and owner shall be responsible for extermination.

309.5 Occupant. The occupant of any structure shall be responsible for the continued rodent and pest-free condition of the structure.

Exception: Where the infestations are caused by defects in the structure, the owner shall be responsible for extermination.

CHAPTER 4

LIGHT, VENTILATION AND OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS

SECTION 401

GENERAL

401.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum conditions and standards for light, ventilation and space for occupying a structure.

401.2 Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain light, ventilation and space conditions in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant, or permit another person to occupy, any premises that do not comply with the requirements of this chapter.

401.3 Alternative devices. In lieu of the means for natural light and ventilation herein prescribed, artificial light or mechanical ventilation complying with the Washington State Building Code and all local amendments shall be permitted.

SECTION 402

LIGHT

402.1 Habitable spaces. Every habitable space shall have at least one window of approved size facing directly to the outdoors or to a court. The minimum total glazed area for every habitable space shall be 8 percent of the floor area of such room. Wherever walls or other portions of a structure face a window of any room and such obstructions are located less than 3 feet (914 mm) from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors nor to a court and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window area for the room.

Exception: Where natural light for rooms or spaces without exterior glazing areas is provided through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the adjoining room shall be at least 8 percent of the floor area of the interior room or space, but not less than 25 square feet (2.33 m2). The exterior glazing area shall be based on the total floor area being served.

402.2 Common halls and stairways. Every common hall and stairway in residential occupancies, other than in one- and two-family dwellings, shall be lighted at all times with at least a 60-watt standard incandescent light bulb for each 200 square feet (19 m2) of floor area or equivalent illumination, provided that the spacing between lights shall not be greater than 30 feet (9144 mm). In other than residential occupancies, means of egress, including exterior means of egress, stairways shall be illuminated at all times the building space served by the means of egress is occupied with a minimum of 1 foot candle (11 lux) at floors, landings and treads.

402.3 Other spaces. All other spaces shall be provided with natural or artificial light sufficient to permit the maintenance of sanitary conditions, and the safe occupancy of the space and utilization of the appliances, equipment and fixtures.

SECTION 403

VENTILATION

403.1 Habitable spaces. Every habitable space shall have at least one openable window. The total openable area of the window in every room shall be equal to at least 45 percent of the minimum glazed area required in Section 402.1. 

Exception: Where rooms and spaces without openings to the outdoors are ventilated through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the adjoining room shall be at least 8 percent of the floor area of the interior room or space, but not less than 25 square feet (2.33 m2). The ventilation openings to the outdoors shall be based on a total floor area being ventilated.

403.2 Bathrooms and toilet rooms. Every bathroom and toilet room shall comply with the ventilation requirements for habitable spaces as required by Section 403.1, except that a window shall not be required in such spaces equipped with a mechanical ventilation system. Air exhausted by a mechanical ventilation system from a bathroom or toilet room shall discharge to the outdoors and shall not be recirculated. 

403.3 Cooking facilities. Unless approved through the certificate of occupancy, cooking shall not be permitted in any rooming unit or dormitory unit, and a cooking facility or appliance shall not be permitted to be present in the rooming unit or dormitory unit.

Exceptions:

1. Where specifically approved in writing by the code official.

2. Devices such as coffee pots and microwave ovens shall not be considered cooking appliances.

403.4 Process ventilation. Where injurious, toxic, irritating or noxious fumes, gases, dusts or mists are generated, a local exhaust ventilation system shall be provided to remove the contaminating agent at the source. Air shall be exhausted to the exterior and not be recirculated to any space.

403.5 Clothes dryer exhaust. Clothes dryer exhaust systems shall be independent of all other systems and shall be exhausted outside the structure in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

Exception: Listed and labeled condensing (ductless) clothes dryers.

SECTION 404

OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS

404.1 Privacy. Dwelling units, hotel units, housekeeping units, rooming units and dormitory units shall be arranged to provide privacy and be separate from other adjoining spaces.

404.2 Minimum room widths. A habitable room, other than a kitchen, shall not be less than 7 feet (2134 mm) in any plan dimension. Kitchens shall have a clear passageway of not less than 3 feet (914 mm) between counter fronts and appliances or counter fronts and walls.

404.3 Minimum ceiling heights. Habitable spaces, hallways, corridors, laundry areas, bathrooms, toilet rooms and habitable basement areas shall have a clear ceiling height of not less than 7 feet (2134 mm).

Exceptions:

1. In one- and two-family dwellings, beams or girders spaced not less than 4 feet (1219 mm) on center and projecting not more than 6 inches (152 mm) below the required ceiling height.

2. Basement rooms in one- and two-family dwellings occupied exclusively for laundry, study or recreation purposes, having a ceiling height of not less than 6 feet 8 inches (2033 mm) with not less than 6 feet 4 inches (1932 mm) of clear height under beams, girders, ducts and similar obstructions.

3. Rooms occupied exclusively for sleeping, study or similar purposes and having a sloped ceiling over all or part of the room, with a clear ceiling height of at least 7 feet (2134 mm) over not less than one-third of the required minimum floor area. In calculating the floor area of such rooms, only those portions of the floor area with a clear ceiling height of 5 feet (1524 mm) or more shall be included.

404.4 Bedroom and living room requirements. Every bedroom and living room shall comply with the requirements of Sections 404.4.1 through 404.4.5.

404.4.1 Room area. Every living room shall contain at least 120 square feet (11.2m2) and every bedroom shall contain at least 70 square feet (6.5 m2).

404.4.2 Access from bedrooms. Bedrooms shall not constitute the only means of access to other bedrooms or habitable spaces and shall not serve as the only means of egress from other habitable spaces.

Exception: Units that contain fewer than two bedrooms.

404.4.3 Water closet accessibility. Every bedroom shall have access to at least one water closet and one lavatory without passing through another bedroom. Every bedroom in a dwelling unit shall have access to at least one water closet and lavatory located in the same story as the bedroom or an adjacent story.

404.4.4 Prohibited occupancy. Kitchens and nonhabitable spaces shall not be used for sleeping purposes.

404.4.5 Other requirements. Bedrooms shall comply with the applicable provisions of this code including, but not limited to, the light, ventilation, room area, ceiling height and room width requirements of this chapter; the plumbing facilities and water-heating facilities requirements of Chapter 5; the heating facilities and electrical receptacle requirements of Chapter 6; and the smoke detector and emergency escape requirements of Chapter 7.

404.5 Overcrowding. The number of persons occupying a dwelling unit shall not create conditions that, in the opinion of the code official, endanger the life, health, safety or welfare of the occupants.

404.6 Efficiency unit. Nothing in this section shall prohibit an efficiency living unit from meeting the following requirements:

1. A unit occupied by not more than two occupants shall have a clear floor area of not less than 220 square feet (20.4 m2). A unit occupied by three occupants shall have a clear floor area of not less than 320 square feet (29.7 m2). These required areas shall be exclusive of the areas required by Items 2 and 3.

2. The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance and refrigeration facilities, each having a clear working space of not less than 30 inches (762 mm) in front. Light and ventilation conforming to this code shall be provided.

3. The unit shall be provided with a separate bathroom containing a water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower.

4. The maximum number of occupants shall be three.

404.7 Food preparation. All spaces to be occupied for food preparation purposes shall contain suitable space and equipment to store, prepare and serve foods in a sanitary manner. There shall be adequate facilities and services for the sanitary disposal of food wastes and refuse, including facilities for temporary storage.

CHAPTER 5

PLUMBING FACILITIES AND FIXTURE REQUIREMENTS

SECTION 501

GENERAL

501.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum plumbing systems, facilities and plumbing fixtures to be provided.

501.2 Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain such plumbing facilities and plumbing fixtures in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy any structure or premises which does not comply with the requirements of this chapter.

SECTION 502

REQUIRED FACILITIES

502.1 Dwelling units. Every dwelling unit shall contain its own bathtub or shower, lavatory, water closet and kitchen sink which shall be maintained in a sanitary, safe working condition. The lavatory shall be placed in the same room as the water closet or located in close proximity to the door leading directly into the room in which such water closet is located. A kitchen sink shall not be used as a substitute for the required lavatory.

502.2 Rooming houses. At least one water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower shall be supplied for each four rooming units.

502.3 Hotels. Where private water closets, lavatories and baths are not provided, one water closet, one lavatory and one bathtub or shower having access from a public hallway shall be provided for each ten occupants.

502.4 Employees’ facilities. A minimum of one water closet, one lavatory and one drinking facility shall be available to employees.

502.4.1 Drinking facilities. Drinking facilities shall be a drinking fountain, water cooler, bottled water cooler or disposable cups next to a sink or water dispenser. Drinking facilities shall not be located in toilet rooms or bathrooms.

502.5 Public toilet facilities. Public toilet facilities shall be maintained in a safe sanitary and working condition in accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code. Except for periodic maintenance or cleaning, public access and use shall be provided to the toilet facilities at all times during occupancy of the premises.

SECTION 503

TOILET ROOMS

503.1 Privacy. Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall provide privacy and shall not constitute the only passageway to a hall or other space, or to the exterior. A door and interior locking device shall be provided for all common or shared bathrooms and toilet rooms in a multiple dwelling.

503.2 Location. Toilet rooms and bathrooms serving hotel units, rooming units or dormitory units or housekeeping units, shall have access by traversing not more than one flight of stairs and shall have access from a common hall or passageway. 

503.3 Location of employee toilet facilities. Toilet facilities shall have access from within the employees’ working area. The required toilet facilities shall be located not more than one story above or below the employees’ working area and the path of travel to such facilities shall not exceed a distance of 500 feet (152 m). Employee facilities shall either be separate facilities or combined employee and public facilities. 

Exception: Facilities that are required for employees in storage structures or kiosks, which are located in adjacent structures under the same ownership, lease or control, shall not exceed a travel distance of 500 feet (152 m) from the employees’ regular working area to the facilities.

503.4 Floor surface. In other than dwelling units, every toilet room floor shall be maintained to be a smooth, hard, nonabsorbent surface to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition.

SECTION 504

PLUMBING SYSTEMS AND FIXTURES

504.1 General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly installed and maintained in working order, and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects and be capable of performing the function for which such plumbing fixtures are designed. All plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary and functional condition.

504.2 Fixture clearances. Plumbing fixtures shall have adequate clearances for usage and cleaning.

504.3 Plumbing system hazards. Where it is found that a plumbing system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service, inadequate venting, cross connection, back siphonage, improper installation, deterioration or damage or for similar reasons, the code official shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard.

SECTION 505

WATER SYSTEM

505.1 General. Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain, water closet or other plumbing fixture shall be properly connected to either a public water system or to an approved private water system. All kitchen sinks, lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied with hot or tempered and cold running water in accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code.

505.2 Contamination. The water supply shall be maintained free from contamination, and all water inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be located above the flood-level rim of the fixture. Shampoo basin faucets, janitor sink faucets and other hose bibs or faucets to which hoses are attached and left in place, shall be protected by an approved atmospheric-type vacuum breaker or an approved permanently attached hose connection vacuum breaker.

505.3 Supply. The water supply system shall be installed and maintained to provide a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices and appurtenances in sufficient volume and at pressures adequate to enable the fixtures to function properly, safely, and free from defects and leaks.

505.4 Water heating facilities. Water heating facilities shall be properly installed, maintained and capable of providing an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower and laundry facility at a temperature of not less than 110°F (43°C). A gas-burning water heater shall not be located in any bathroom, toilet room, bedroom or other occupied room normally kept closed, unless adequate combustion air is provided. An approved combination temperature and pressure-relief valve and relief valve discharge pipe shall be properly installed and maintained on water heaters.

SECTION 506

SANITARY DRAINAGE SYSTEM

506.1 General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected to either a public sewer system or to an approved private sewage disposal system.

506.2 Maintenance. Every plumbing stack, vent, waste and sewer line shall function properly and be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects.

506.3 Grease interceptors. Where it has been determined that a grease interceptor is not being maintained and serviced as intended by this code and the manufacturer’s instructions, an approved interceptor monitoring system shall be provided or a maintenance program shall be established with documentation submitted to the code official.

SECTION 507

STORM DRAINAGE

507.1 General. Drainage of roofs and paved areas, yards and courts, and other open areas on the premises shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance.

CHAPTER 6

MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS

SECTION 601

GENERAL

601.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment to be provided.

601.2 Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy any premises which does not comply with the requirements of this chapter.

SECTION 602

HEATING FACILITIES

602.1 Facilities required. Heating facilities shall be provided in structures as required by this section.

602.2 Residential occupancies. Dwellings shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms based on the winter outdoor design temperature for the locality indicated in Appendix D of the Uniform Plumbing Code. Cooking appliances shall not be used to provide space heating to meet the requirements of this section. 

Exception: In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30°F (-1°C), a minimum temperature of 65°F (18°C) shall be maintained.

602.3 Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat to maintain a temperature of not less than 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms.

602.4 Occupiable work spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat to maintain a temperature of not less than 65°F (18°C) during the period the spaces are occupied.

Exceptions:

1. Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special temperature conditions.

2. Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical activities.

602.5 Room temperature measurement. The required room temperatures shall be measured 3 feet (914 mm) above the floor near the center of the room and 2 feet (610 mm) inward from the center of each exterior wall.

SECTION 603

MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT

603.1 Mechanical appliances. All mechanical appliances, fireplaces, solid fuel-burning appliances, cooking appliances and water heating appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe working condition, and shall be capable of performing the intended function.

603.2 Removal of combustion products. All fuel-burning equipment and appliances shall be connected to an approved chimney or vent.

Exception: Fuel-burning equipment and appliances which are labeled for unvented operation.

603.3 Clearances. All required clearances to combustible materials shall be maintained.

603.4 Safety controls. All safety controls for fuel-burning equipment shall be maintained in effective operation.

603.5 Combustion air. A supply of air for complete combustion of the fuel and for ventilation of the space containing the fuel-burning equipment shall be provided for the fuel-burning equipment.

603.6 Energy conservation devices. Devices intended to reduce fuel consumption by attachment to a fuel-burning appliance, to the fuel supply line thereto, or to the vent outlet or vent piping therefrom, shall not be installed unless labeled for such purpose and the installation is specifically approved.

SECTION 604

ELECTRICAL FACILITIES

604.1 Facilities required. Every occupied building shall be provided with an electrical system in compliance with the requirements of this section and Section 605.

604.2 Service. The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall serve as a basis for determining the need for additional facilities in accordance with NFPA 70. Dwelling units shall be served by a three-wire, 120/240 volt, single-phase electrical service having a rating of not less than 60 amperes. 

604.3 Electrical system hazards. Where it is found that the electrical system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient receptacle and lighting outlets, improper wiring or installation, deterioration or damage, or for similar reasons, the code official shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard.

604.3.1 Abatement of electrical hazards associated with water exposure. The provisions of this section shall govern the repair and replacement of electrical systems and equipment that have been exposed to water.

604.3.1.1 Electrical equipment. Electrical distribution equipment, motor circuits, power equipment, transformers, wire, cable, flexible cords, wiring devices, ground fault circuit interrupters, surge protectors, molded case circuit breakers, low-voltage fuses, luminaires, ballasts, motors and electronic control, signaling and communication equipment that have been exposed to water shall be replaced in accordance with the provisions of the International Building Code.

Exception: The following equipment shall be allowed to be repaired where an inspection report from the equipment manufacturer or approved manufacturer’s representative indicates that the equipment has not sustained damage that requires replacement:

1. Enclosed switches, rated 600 volts or less;

2. Busway, rated 600 volts or less;

3. Panelboards, rated 600 volts or less;

4. Switchboards, rated 600 volts or less;

5. Fire pump controllers, rated 600 volts or less;

6. Manual and magnetic motor controllers;

7. Motor control centers;

8. Alternating current high-voltage circuit breakers;

9. Low-voltage power circuit breakers;

10. Protective relays, meters and current transformers;

11. Low- and medium-voltage switchgear;

12. Liquid-filled transformers;

13. Cast-resin transformers;

14. Wire or cable that is suitable for wet locations and whose ends have not been exposed to water;

15. Wire or cable, not containing fillers, that is suitable for wet locations and whose ends have not been exposed to water;

16. Luminaires that are listed as submersible;

17. Motors;

18. Electronic control, signaling and communication equipment.

604.3.2 Abatement of electrical hazards associated with fire exposure. The provisions of this section shall govern the repair and replacement of electrical systems and equipment that have been exposed to fire.

604.3.2.1 Electrical equipment. Electrical switches, receptacles and fixtures, including furnace, water heating, security system and power distribution circuits that have been exposed to fire, shall be replaced in accordance with the provisions of the International Building Code.

Exception: Electrical switches, receptacles and fixtures that shall be allowed to be repaired where an inspection report from the equipment manufacturer or approved manufacturer’s representative indicates that the equipment has not sustained damage that requires replacement.

SECTION 605

ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT

605.1 Installation. All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe and approved manner.

605.2 Receptacles. Every habitable space in a dwelling shall contain at least two separate and remote receptacle outlets. Every laundry area shall contain at least one grounded-type receptacle or a receptacle with a ground fault circuit interrupter. Every bathroom shall contain at least one receptacle. Any new bathroom receptacle outlet shall have ground fault circuit interrupter protection.

605.3 Luminaires. Every public hall, interior stairway, toilet room, kitchen, bathroom, laundry room, boiler room and furnace room shall contain at least one electric luminaire.

605.4 Extension cords. Extension cords shall not be used for permanent wiring. Extension cords shall not extend from one room to another, be placed across a doorway, extend through a wall or partition, or be used in any area where such a cord may be subject to physical damage. 

SECTION 606

ELEVATORS, ESCALATORS AND DUMBWAITERS

606.1 General. Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators shall be maintained in compliance with ASME A17.1. The most current certificate of inspection shall be on display at all times within the elevator or attached to the escalator or dumbwaiter, be available for public inspection in the office of the building operator or be posted in a publicly conspicuous location approved by the code official. The inspection and tests shall be performed at not less than the periodic intervals listed in ASME A17.1, Appendix N, except where otherwise specified by the authority having jurisdiction.

606.2 Elevators. In buildings equipped with passenger elevators, at least one elevator shall be maintained in operation at all times when the building is occupied.

Exception: Buildings equipped with only one elevator shall be permitted to have the elevator temporarily out of service for testing or servicing.

SECTION 607

DUCT SYSTEMS

607.1 General. Duct systems shall be maintained free of obstructions and shall be capable of performing the required function.

CHAPTER 7

FIRE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS

SECTION 701

GENERAL

701.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum conditions and standards for fire safety relating to structures and exterior premises, including fire safety facilities and equipment to be provided.

701.2 Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall provide and maintain such fire safety facilities and equipment in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy any premises that do not comply with the requirements of this chapter.

SECTION 702

MEANS OF EGRESS

702.1 General. A safe, continuous and unobstructed path of travel shall be provided from any point in a building or structure to the public way. Means of egress shall comply with the International Fire Code.

702.2 Aisles. The required width of aisles in accordance with the International Fire Code shall be unobstructed.

702.3 Locked doors. All means of egress doors shall be readily openable from the side from which egress is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort, except where the door hardware conforms to that permitted by the International Building Code.

702.4 Emergency escape openings. Required emergency escape openings shall be maintained in accordance with the code in effect at the time of construction, and the following. Required emergency escape and rescue openings shall be operational from the inside of the room without the use of keys or tools. Bars, grilles, grates or similar devices are permitted to be placed over emergency escape and rescue openings provided the minimum net clear opening size complies with the code that was in effect at the time of construction and such devices shall be releasable or removable from the inside without the use of a key, tool or force greater than that which is required for normal operation of the escape and rescue opening.

SECTION 703

FIRE-RESISTANCE RATINGS

703.1 Fire-resistance-rated assemblies. The required fire-resistance rating of fire-resistance-rated walls, fire stops, shaft enclosures, partitions and floors shall be maintained.

703.2 Opening protectives. Required opening protectives shall be maintained in an operative condition. All fire and smoke stop doors shall be maintained in operable condition. Fire doors and smoke barrier doors shall not be blocked or obstructed or otherwise made inoperable.

SECTION 704

FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS

704.1 General. All systems, devices and equipment to detect a fire, actuate an alarm, or suppress or control a fire or any combination thereof shall be maintained in an operable condition at all times in accordance with the International Fire Code.

704.1.1 Automatic sprinkler systems. Inspection, testing and maintenance of automatic sprinkler systems shall be in accordance with NFPA 25.

704.2 Smoke alarms. Single- or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed and maintained in Groups R-2, R-3, R-4 and in dwellings not regulated in Group R occupancies, regardless of occupant load at all of the following locations:

1. On the ceiling or wall outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of bedrooms.

2. In each room used for sleeping purposes.

3. In each story within a dwelling unit, including basements and cellars but not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. In dwellings or dwelling units with split levels and without an intervening door between the adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall suffice for the adjacent lower level provided that the lower level is less than one full story below the upper level. Single- or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed in other groups in accordance with the International Fire Code.

704.3 Power source. In Group R occupancies and in dwellings not regulated as Group R occupancies, single-station smoke alarms shall receive their primary power from the building wiring provided that such wiring is served from a commercial source and shall be equipped with a battery backup. Smoke alarms shall emit a signal when the batteries are low. Wiring shall be permanent and without a disconnecting switch other than as required for over current protection.

Exception: Smoke alarms are permitted to be solely battery operated in buildings where no construction is taking place, buildings that are not served from a commercial power source and in existing areas of buildings undergoing alterations or repairs that do not result in the removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or basement available which could provide access for building wiring without the removal of interior finishes.

704.4 Interconnection. Where more than one smoke alarm is required to be installed within an individual dwelling unit in Group R-2, R-3, R-4 and in dwellings not regulated as Group R occupancies, the smoke alarms shall be interconnected in such a manner that the activation of one alarm will activate all of the alarms in the individual unit. The alarm shall be clearly audible in all bedrooms over background noise levels with all intervening doors closed.

Exceptions:

1. Interconnection is not required in buildings which are not undergoing alterations, repairs or construction of any kind.

2. Smoke alarms in existing areas are not required to be interconnected where alterations or repairs do not result in the removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or basement available which could provide access for interconnection without the removal of interior finishes.

(Ord. 685 § 15, 2019; Ord. 503 § 6 (Att. C), 2010)


Chapter 15.19 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS

Sections:

15.19.010    Conversion condominium requirements created.

15.19.020    Written inspection report.

15.19.030    Repair of violations.

15.19.040    Warrant of repairs.


15.19.010 Conversion condominium requirements created.

This chapter establishes requirements pertaining to the conversion of apartments to condominiums as set forth in Chapter 64.34 RCW, The Condominium Act. Unless otherwise specified, all terms used herein shall have the same meaning as defined in Chapter 64.34 RCW as now exists or as may hereafter be amended. (Ord. 611 § 9, 2016)


15.19.020 Written inspection report.

(1) The public offering statement of a conversion condominium shall contain, in addition to the information required by RCW 64.34.410 and 64.34.415, a copy of the written inspection report prepared by the City’s Building Official, which report shall list any violations of the construction codes, as adopted by City of Woodinville ordinances or other applicable governmental regulation related to life/safety matters. Costs of the inspection shall be borne by declarant.

(2) Said inspection shall be made within 45 days of the declarant’s written request for the inspection and said report shall be issued within 14 days of said inspection being made.

(3) The Building Official may require a report from a qualified inspection service in lieu of the inspection required above.

(4) A building permit is required to record the transfer of occupancy sub-type and ensure compliance with this chapter. Fees shall be based per building and based on the current fee resolution table established by City Council. (Ord. 611 § 9, 2016)


15.19.030 Repair of violations.

(1) Prior to the conveyance of any residential unit within a conversion condominium, other than a conveyance to a declarant or affiliate of a declarant:

(a) All violations disclosed in the inspection report, not otherwise waived by the City, shall be repaired with valid building permits; and

(b) A letter of certification shall be obtained from the City stating that such repairs have been made. This certification shall be based on a reinspection to be made within seven days of the declarant’s written request for the reinspection and shall be issued within seven days of the reinspection being made. Costs of the reinspection shall be borne by declarant at the rates set forth by the City.

(2) Certification by the City shall state that only those defects discovered by the residential inspection have been corrected and that the certification does not guarantee that all relevant code violations have been corrected. No declarant shall use the City’s certification in any advertising, nor shall a declarant indicate or imply to anyone, for the purpose of inducing a person to purchase a condominium unit, that the City has “approved” the premises or any unit for sale. (Ord. 611 § 9, 2016)


15.19.040 Warrant of repairs.

(1) The repairs required to be made under this section shall be warranted by the declarant against defects due to workmanship or materials for a period of one year following the completion of such repairs after building permits have been finalized and the public statement of condition is received by the City and the homeowners association.

(2) Prior to the conveyance of any residential unit within a conversion condominium, other than a conveyance to a declarant or affiliate of a declarant:

(a) The declarant shall establish and maintain, during the one-year warranty period, an account containing a sum equal to 10 percent of the actual cost of making the repairs.

(b) During the one-year warranty period, the funds in such account shall be used exclusively for paying the actual cost of making repairs required, or for otherwise satisfying claims made, under such warranty.

(c) Following the expiration of the one-year warranty period, any funds remaining in such account shall be disbursed to the declarant.

(d) The declarant shall notify in writing the property association and the City as to the location of such account and any disbursements from it. (Ord. 611 § 9, 2016)


Chapter 15.21 FLOOD HAZARD REGULATIONS

(Repealed by Ord. 611)


Chapter 15.36 MOVING OF BUILDINGS

Sections:

15.36.010    Purpose and scope of chapter.

15.36.020    Definitions.

15.36.030    Permit – Required.

15.36.040    Permit – Application information.

15.36.050    Permit – Application – Deposits and fees.

15.36.060    Permit – Conditions for granting.

15.36.070    Special requirements.

15.36.080    Repealed.


15.36.010 Purpose and scope of chapter.

It is the purpose of this chapter to establish standards, including minimum requirements for the moving of all buildings and other structures within the corporate limits of the City, and to provide for the issuance of a permit, collection of various fees and inspection services for all such movements. (Ord. 37 § 1, 1993)


15.36.020 Definitions.

Definitions as used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates, shall be as follows:

(1) “Building” means and includes any building, house, structure, or other like object;

(2) Classification of movements:

(a) “Class I” move is the movement of any building from an origin outside the City to a destination within the City,

(b) “Class II” move is the movement of any building from one point within the City to another point within the City,

(c) “Class III” move is the movement of a building from a point within the City to a destination outside the City, and

(d) “Class IV” move is the movement of any building through the City with both an origin and destination outside the City;

(3) “Housemover” means any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of moving houses, buildings, structures or other like object; and

(4) “Person” means and includes any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. (Ord. 37 § 2, 1993)


15.36.030 Permit – Required.

No person shall move any building over, upon, along or across any public street without a written permit from the City for all such moves as classified and defined in WMC 15.36.020. (Ord. 37 § 3, 1993)


15.36.040 Permit – Application information.

Application for a permit shall be furnished by the City. The application for permit shall contain, or have attached thereto the following information:

(1) Name and address of applicant;

(2) Location of building to be moved (present address if assigned);

(3) Location of proposed site to which building is to be moved (include legal description);

(4) Date and time requested for movement;

(5) Map or description of requested route to be taken;

(6) Height, width and length of building to be moved and truck or equipment to be used for moving the building; and

(7) Classification of movement (as defined in WMC 15.36.020). (Ord. 37 § 4, 1993)


15.36.050 Permit – Application – Deposits and fees.

(1) Every applicant before being granted a permit shall pay an application filing fee as shall be established from time to time by the City.

(2) For any application for a Class I or II move herein provided for, there shall be charged and collected an inspection fee in an amount as shall be established from time to time by the City.

(3) An application hereunder shall be accompanied by the following:

(a) A cash deposit or corporate surety bond in the sum of $1,000 or such greater amount as the Building Official determines necessary as indemnity for any damage which the City may sustain by reason or damage or injury to any highway, street or alley, sidewalk or other property of the City, which may be caused by or be incidental to the removal of any building over, along or across any street in the City and to indemnify the City against any claim of damages to persons or private property;

(b) A public liability insurance policy, naming the City as an additional insured and providing $100,000 or such greater amount as the Building Official determines necessary to satisfy any claim by private individuals, firms or corporations arising out of, caused by, or incidental to the moving of any building over, along or across any street in the City; and

(c) A cash deposit or a corporate surety performance bond in the sum of $500.00 or such greater amount as the Building Official determines necessary conditioned upon the permittee, within six months from the date of the issuance of such permit (1) completing the construction, painting and finishing of the exterior of the building, and (2) faithfully complying with all requirements of this chapter, the building code, the zoning code, the other ordinances and codes then in effect within the City including but not limited to permittee completing such work within six months of the date of the issuance of such permit. In the event the provisions of this subsection are not complied with within the time specified, the sum of $500.00 shall be forfeited to the City as a penalty for the default and this shall be in addition to any other penalties provided for failure to comply with the terms of this chapter. (Ord. 37 § 5, 1993)


15.36.060 Permit – Conditions for granting.

As a condition of securing the permit for a Class I or II move:

(1) The permittee shall furnish the City with a set of plans and specifications for the completed building to include a plot plan prepared by a registered engineer or land surveyor from the State of Washington showing in detail the placement of the proposed structure upon the lot within the City;

(2) The permittee shall, prior to making application for such permit or within 10 days after making such application cause all of the interior or exterior walls, ceiling or flooring to be removed to such extent as may be necessary to permit the building official to examine the materials and type of construction of such building to ascertain whether it will comply with the existing building code and other applicable ordinances in the City; and

(3) The permittee shall obtain certified statements of inspection and present to the building official from the Seattle-King County Department of Public Health relating to plumbing and the Department of Labor and Industries, Electrical Inspection Division, State of Washington, relating to electrical, to certify that such electrical and plumbing facilities of the building meet the minimum applicable code requirements. Such statements of inspection shall be presented to the building official within the 10-day period referenced in subsection (2) above. All buildings involved in a Class I or II move shall meet all minimum standards for plumbing and electrical facilities or shall be improved to such code standards prior to a permit being issued by the City. (Ord. 37 § 6, 1993)


15.36.070 Special requirements.

(1) Escort. For Class I, II, III and IV moves, the housemover shall provide at least two off-duty police officers or other appropriate agency employees which provide an escort service for the purpose of regulating traffic along the route such building is being moved; provided, that any such police or special agency escort shall be at the expense of the housemover in addition to any other fees or deposits heretofore required. No variances of the provisions of the permit shall be permitted by the escort.

(2) Time. Time of the movement shall be designated by the City. Every such permit shall become and be void unless such removal shall be completed and the building removed from the public right-of-way within the time specified in the application for such permit; provided, however, that the City may extend such time when the moving of any building is rendered impractical by reason of inclemency of the weather, strikes or other causes not within the control of the housemover.

(3) Lights. No person moving any building over, upon, along or across any public street shall fail, neglect or refuse to keep a red light (or such other devices as the City may require) at all times at each corner of such building and at the end of any projection thereon while the same is located in or upon any public street.

(4) Notice to Utilities. Before any building shall be moved the housemover shall give written notice to the public utilities or agencies designated in the application not less than three days in advance of the proposed moved.

(5) Condition of Lot. After the completion of any Class II or III move the area or lot upon which the structure was formerly located shall be cleaned up and satisfactorily graded; the sanitary sewer connection, if one exists, shall be plugged and marked; the water meter shall be removed and the line satisfactorily capped and marked; the electrical and telephone lines removed; and all trash removed therefrom to the satisfaction of the Building Official. (Ord. 37 § 7, 1993)


15.36.080 Penalty.

Repealed by Ord. 230. (Ord. 37 § 8, 1993)


Chapter 15.39 UTILITY REQUIREMENTS

Sections:

15.39.010    Undergrounding of utilities.


15.39.010 Undergrounding of utilities.

(1) As a condition of any new development or redevelopment, new and existing utilities shall be installed or relocated underground consistent with the provisions of this chapter except as hereafter provided. Utilities include infrastructure to support public services, such as electricity, gas, water, sewer, and communications.

(a) The applicant shall be responsible for complying with the requirements of this section and shall make all necessary arrangements with the utility companies and adjacent properties affected by the installation of such facilities.

(b) The applicant shall include utility location and details on grading and building plans as part of construction permit submittal, including providing anticipated locations for utility features and apparatuses.

(2) The term “new” or “redevelopment” for purposes of this section includes any one of the following conditions:

(a) A building permit for a new building where frontage improvements are required pursuant to WMC 15.04.060;

(b) A building permit for a project where the cost of construction equals or exceeds 50 percent of the assessed value of the existing structures on site, excluding interior remodel of existing single-family residential structures and auxiliary buildings; or

(c) A project where there are 10 or more additional average daily trips generated or more parking spaces required.

(3) New and existing utilities shall be placed entirely below ground when located within a property undergoing new development or redevelopment, and/or along the length of the property in the adjoining half-street, except when:

(a) Where undergrounding of utilities within a site is not feasible due to utility or infrastructure conflicts, topographic conditions, or site limitations. The facilities shall be screened with landscaping consistent with subsection (5) of this section. The Public Works Director may waive, limit, or modify the requirement for such improvements.

(b) For existing utilities only, when the cost of undergrounding is greater than two and one-half percent of the valuation of the project as determined by the summation of the valuation on all required development permits.

(4) Utility features and apparatuses may be placed above ground when meeting one of the following requirements. Utility features and apparatuses include ancillary equipment or devices required for the operation of the utility, rather than for conveyance, including but not limited to transformers, meters, vents, assemblies, and other related equipment.

(a) Fire hydrants and Fire Department connections as required by the International Fire Code, electric lines as exempted in WMC 12.30.310, and wireless service facilities constructed in accordance with Chapter 21.37 WMC.

(b) Gas and electrical meters when located on the side or rear of a building.

(c) Other utility features and apparatuses in residential zones R-1 through R-8, except multifamily and nonresidential development, placed at least five feet from the edge of sidewalk, pavement edge, or back of ditch and screened with landscape consistent with subsection (5) of this section.

(d) Other utility features and apparatuses in multifamily or nonresidential development may be placed above ground only when:

(i) Less than 36 inches in height from finished grade, and located within a building or at least five feet from the edge of sidewalk or pavement edge, whichever is greater; and screened with landscape consistent with subsection (5) of this section; or

(ii) Greater than 36 inches in height from finished grade, and located within a building, or placed in a nonprominent location on the side or rear of the building at least 30 feet from the right-of-way or other public areas, and located behind decorative fencing or required landscaping pursuant to Chapter 21.43 WMC.

(e) Publicly operated traffic signal controllers, electric service cabinets, irrigation controllers, and similar utility features.

(5) Landscaping shall be required for aboveground utility features and apparatuses and planted in a manner to provide a vegetated screen of the subject facilities, meeting the following requirements:

(a) Landscaping shall be installed in a manner that meets the requirements of the serving utility, including prescribed minimum distances or clear working area, planting locations above service lines, and species selection.

(b) The landscaping area shall be required on sides that are visible from the public right-of-way or public areas. The depth of any landscaping area shall be at least five feet.

(c) Landscaping shall incorporate a variety of plant types and species that feature a range of heights, colors, and textures. The landscaping shall include a minimum of three different species.

(d) Shrubs shall be a minimum of 24 inches in height at time of planting and spaced no more than three feet apart. Groundcovers shall be spaced 18 inches on center.

(e) Alternative screening methods, such as decorative fencing or walls, and other concealment measures may be allowed as approved by the Development Services Director or through design review pursuant to Chapter 21.40 WMC. Screening shall meet the access and visibility standards for the serving utility and may not prohibit access for maintenance and emergency access.

(6) Deviation requests from these standards may be granted by the Development Services Director or Public Works Director where strict application of these standards will conflict with utility installation or maintenance required by the serving utility. (Ord. 602 § 2, 2015; Ord. 517 § 2, 2010; Ord. 58 § 1, 1993)


Chapter 15.42 FEES FOR WORK IN  PUBLIC/PRIVATE RIGHTS-OF-WAY

Sections:

Article I. Definitions

15.42.010    Definitions.

Article II. Applications, Permits, and Expirations

15.42.020    Permits.

15.42.030    Applications.

15.42.040    Emergency conditions.

15.42.050    Errors within City plans.

15.42.060    Validity of permit.

15.42.070    Approval and expiration of plans.

15.42.080    Expiration of permits.

15.42.090    Current approved plans and issued permits.

15.42.100    Conditions of approval.

Article III. Construction Within the  Public Rights-of-Way

15.42.110    Notification.

15.42.120    Approval.

15.42.130    Standards.

15.42.140    Shoulder restoration.

15.42.150    Backfill.

15.42.160    Utility strip restoration.

15.42.170    Existing drainage.

15.42.180    Safety.

15.42.190    Trench length.

15.42.200    Placement of pipe.

15.42.210    Cleanup.

15.42.220    Optional street restoration.

15.42.230    Cleanup street.

15.42.240    Wasting of material.

15.42.250    Traffic control.

15.42.260    Materials at the site.

15.42.270    Police and fire notification.

15.42.280    Insurance.

Article IV. Inspection, Approval, Violation

15.42.290    Inspection.

15.42.300    Approval.

15.42.310    Repealed.

Article V. Plan Check and Permit Fees

15.42.320    Plan check and permit fees required.

Article VI. Guarantees

15.42.330    Street invasion performance guarantee.

15.42.340    Performance guaranteed for required improvements.

15.42.350    Maintenance guarantee.

15.42.360    Performance.

15.42.370    Maintenance guarantees and warranty guarantees against defects in materials and/or workmanship.

15.42.380    Termination date for guarantee.

15.42.390    Utilization of funds provided by guarantees.

15.42.400    Reimbursement of City’s costs incurred to obtain funds provided by guarantees.

Article I. Definitions


15.42.010 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, public or private improvements are defined as all construction constituting a valuable addition to or modification of all public and private lands by the installation of any and all facilities conveying water, sanitary sewage, storm waters, grading, clearing, electricity, heating gases, telephone and television signals, vehicular and pedestrian traffic, and by creating in accordance with City ordinances vehicular parking, landscaping, irrigation, and sight screening. (Ord. 68 § 1, 1993)

Article II. Applications, Permits, and Expirations


15.42.020 Permits.

A permit is required for the construction of all public and private improvements where earth or public improvements are disturbed on or under public or private properties. The work shall not be made in any place other than the location specified in the permit. (Ord. 68 § 2.1, 1993)


15.42.030 Applications.

Applications for such permits shall be filed with the City a minimum of 15 days prior to date anticipated commencement of construction. Construction shall not commence until receipt of a permit from the City. Plans and profiles as required by the Public Service Department shall be submitted in triplicate and accompany said application delineating all proposed construction. A drawing of all submitted plans on mylar media, from which additional copies can be made shall be submitted to the City for a permanent file. (Ord. 68 § 2.2, 1993)


15.42.040 Emergency conditions.

In the event of an emergency occurring after office hours, at night, on Sundays, or legal holidays, when an excavation may be necessary for the protection of public or private property, the same can be made after the person making such excavation has notified the Police and Fire Department of such work; an application for a written permit as provided in this chapter shall be made on the next succeeding business day whether or not the emergency work has been completed. (Ord. 68 § 2.3, 1993)


15.42.050 Errors within City plans.

Neither the City of Woodinville nor any employee or agent thereof shall be held responsible for the accuracy or any error appearing in any map. (Ord. 68 § 2.4, 1993)


15.42.060 Validity of permit.

The issuance of a permit based upon approved plans, specifications, and other data shall not prevent the Public Services Administrator from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in said plans, specifications, and other data or from preventing construction being carried on thereunder when in violation of this chapter or any other ordinance or standard of the City. (Ord. 68 § 2.5, 1993)


15.42.070 Approval and expiration of plans.

Prior to issuance of permits for the construction of public or private improvements, plans of the construction shall be submitted for approval by the Public Services Administrator or his/her designated representative. All plans shall conform with the City’s Comprehensive Plan, ordinances, and adopted standards. Upon assurance of conformance, the Public Services Administrator will affix his/her signature and date of approval to the original construction drawings. Approval for plans for which no permit is issued within 180 days following the date of approval shall expire by limitation, and plans and other data submitted for review may thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed by the Public Services Administrator. The Public Services Administrator may extend the time for action by the applicant for a period not exceeding 180 days upon request by the applicant showing that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have prevented action being taken. No plan approval shall be extended more than once. In order to renew action on any application after expiration, the applicant shall resubmit plans and pay a new plan review fee. (Ord. 68 § 2.6.1, 1993)


15.42.080 Expiration of permits.

Every permit issued by the Public Services Administrator, or his/her designee, under the provisions of this chapter shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the construction authorized by such a permit is not commenced within 180 days from the date of such permit, or if the construction authorized by such permit is suspended at any time after the work is commenced for a period of 180 days. Before such construction can be recommenced, a new permit shall be first obtained to do so, and the fee therefor shall be one half the amount required for a new permit for such work; provided, no changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work; and provided, that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year. In order to renew action on a permit after expiration, the permit fee shall be a new full permit fee.

Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for an extension of the time within which he may commence work under that permit when he is unable to commence work within the time required by this section for good and satisfactory reasons. The Public Services Administrator may extend the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding 180 days upon written request by the permittee showing that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have prevented action from being taken. No permit shall be extended more than once. (Ord. 68 § 2.6.2, 1993)


15.42.090 Current approved plans and issued permits.

All approved plans or permits issued prior to the date of effect of this chapter are hereby placed under the conditions of this chapter with the time limitations beginning on the date of effect of this chapter. (Ord. 68 § 2.6.3, 1993)


15.42.100 Conditions of approval.

In granting any permit, the Public Services Administrator may attach such other conditions thereto as may be reasonably necessary as identified in State, Federal, or local codes, standards, or guidelines, to prevent the operation from being conducted in a manner hazardous to life or property or in a manner likely to create a nuisance. Such conditions may include but shall not be limited to: 

(1) Limitations on the hour, the day and the period of the year in which the work may be performed; 

(2) Restrictions as to the size and type of excavating equipment; 

(3) Designation of routes upon which materials may be transported; 

(4) The manner of removal of excavated materials; 

(5) Requirements as to the control of dust nuisance, the cleaning of street and the prevention of noise and other results offensive or injurious to the neighborhood, the general public, or any portion thereof. 

Additionally, at any time conditions unforeseen at the time of issuance of the permit are discovered which could, in the opinion of the Public Services Administrator, cause unforeseen damage to public or private property, be a hazard to life or property, or become a public nuisance, the Public Services Administrator may forthwith order the stoppage of any further work under the permit until the permit conditions have been modified by the Public Services Administrator in such a manner as to protect from or eliminate the potential damages, hazards or nuisances enumerated in this chapter. (Ord. 68 § 2.6.4, 1993)

Article III. Construction Within the  Public Rights-of-Way


15.42.110 Notification.

The City shall exercise full control of all excavating, construction, and other invasions of City rights-of-way. The Public Services Administrator shall be notified 48 hours prior to commencement of construction. (Ord. 68 § 3.1, 1993)


15.42.120 Approval.

No open cut crossings of City streets shall be made without the approval of the Public Services Administrator. (Ord. 68 § 3.2, 1993)


15.42.130 Standards.

All open cuts of City streets shall be in accordance with the current adopted edition of the “City of Woodinville Engineering Standards”, and current edition of the Washington State Department of Transportation/APWA, “Standard Specifications for Road, Bridge, and Municipal Construction”. (Ord. 68 § 3.3, 1993)


15.42.140 Shoulder restoration.

Shoulders disturbed by excavation shall be reshaped to satisfaction of the Public Services Administrator and followed with a minimum four-inch compacted crushed rock top course. (Ord. 68 § 3.4, 1993)


15.42.150 Backfill.

All backfill of trenches within the improved roadway shall be compacted by mechanical means to the minimum density of 95 percent. Upon request, the contractor shall, at his/her expense, furnish the Public Services Department as many compaction tests as the department may deem necessary for proof of minimum compaction. Compaction by water settling or wheel rolling shall be permitted only with the written consent of the Public Services Administrator. (Ord. 68 § 3.5, 1993)


15.42.160 Utility strip restoration.

Backfilling and restoration of trenches authorized within the utility strip on fully improved streets shall be accomplished as follows: Areas shown on the drawing or as required by the Public Services Administrator to receive seeding or sodding shall receive topsoil. Areas to be seeded shall receive four inches of topsoil; areas to be sodded shall receive three inches of topsoil. (Ord. 68 § 3.6, 1993)


15.42.170 Existing drainage.

Existing drainage ditches, culverts, etc., shall be kept clean at all times. Temporary diversion of any drainage system shall not be permitted without the written consent of the Public Services Administrator. Any drainage culverts, catch basins, manholes, etc., disturbed by excavation shall be replaced with new material or repaired as directed by the Public Services Administrator. (Ord. 68 § 3.7, 1993)


15.42.180 Safety.

If, in the opinion of the Public Services Administrator, it appears that the traveled roadway is, or may become unsafe for the traveling public due to weather or other reasons, excavation shall cease immediately, and cleanup shall be promptly accomplished. (Ord. 68 § 3.8, 1993)


15.42.190 Trench length.

Maximum lengths of open trench on streets shall be 200 lineal feet. (Ord. 68 § 3.9, 1993)


15.42.200 Placement of pipe.

All pipe strung along City rights-of-way shall be placed at a safe distance from traveled roadway in such a manner as to avoid accidental rolling onto roadway. (Ord. 68 § 3.10, 1993)


15.42.210 Cleanup.

Final cleanup, including complete restoration of shoulders, cleaning of ditches, culverts, and catch basins, removal of loose material from backslope of ditches, shall not exceed 1,500 lineal feet, behind excavating operations. (Ord. 68 § 3.11, 1993)


15.42.220 Optional street restoration.

If, in the opinion of the Public Services Administrator, the final restoration of open cuts are inadequate to protect the base of the street from erosion caused by seepage of water, the contractor shall be required to seal coat the full width of the street a distance to be determined by the Public Services Administrator. (Ord. 68 § 3.12, 1993)


15.42.230 Cleanup street.

Street surface shall be cleaned at the end of each day’s operation with a power broom or other approved means. (Ord. 68 § 3.13, 1993)


15.42.240 Wasting of material.

No excess material or unsuitable material shall be wasted on City right-of-way without expressed written consent of the Public Services Administrator. (Ord. 68 § 3.14, 1993)


15.42.250 Traffic control.

Every permittee shall place around the project such barriers, barricades, lights, warning flags and danger signs as required by the MUTCD or the Washington State Department of Labor and Industrial standards, whichever is more restrictive, for the protection of the public. Whenever any permittee fails to provide proper safety devices, within a reasonable time after being notified, such devices may be installed and maintained by the City or its contracted representative. The cost incurred shall be paid by the permittee. (Ord. 68 § 3.15, 1993)


15.42.260 Materials at the site.

All materials shall be readily available to the job site, and provisions shall be made to complete the construction in one continuous operation. Failure to comply shall result in excavation being halted until such time as the conditions are corrected. (Ord. 68 § 3.16, 1993)


15.42.270 Police and fire notification.

The Police and Fire Departments shall be notified 24 hours prior to barricading or closing of streets. Proper provisions shall be made for the public convenience, safety and travel. (Ord. 68 § 3.17, 1993)


15.42.280 Insurance.

Before a permit shall be issued for any construction within the public right-of-way, all applicants shall file with the Public Services Administrator a certificate of insurance of general liability showing a minimum public liability of at least $1 million combined single limits per occurrence and a copy of the endorsement naming the City as an additional insured. The policy shall provide that it will not be canceled or reduced without 30 days advanced written notice to the City. (Ord. 68 § 3.18, 1993)

Article IV. Inspection, Approval, Violation


15.42.290 Inspection.

The Public Services Administrator shall be notified 24 hours prior to any requested inspection, except where emergency repairs in existing systems are necessary to maintain normal operation. (Ord. 68 § 4.1, 1993)


15.42.300 Approval.

Prior to final approval of construction, the applicant shall furnish the Public Services Administrator all tests the City deems necessary to assure proper installation of all improvements. Should any improvements be rejected, the applicant shall make required repairs and retest the rejected portion of the improvement. (Ord. 68 § 4.2, 1993)


15.42.310 Violation.

Repealed by Ord. 230. (Ord. 68 § 4.3, 1993)

Article V. Plan Check and Permit Fees


15.42.320 Plan check and permit fees required.

Plan check and permit fees are determined by the Woodinville City Council under separate resolution. Plan check and permit fees, and charges for that portion of work, if any, to be done by the City shall be paid prior to the issuance of a permit. (Ord. 68 § 5.1, 1993)

Article VI. Guarantees


15.42.330 Street invasion performance guarantee.

In addition to any other required performance and maintenance guarantees, and in conjunction with associated utility construction permit(s), the developer shall be required to make a cash deposit to the City for assurance of proper street invasion controls to protect improved public rights-of-way during the course of a development project. The developer shall deposit $1,000 for each invasion of improved public street, with a maximum of $2,000. Said cash deposit shall be made prior to issuance of any associated utility construction permit. The City shall give the developer 24 hours notice of any required correction or clean up work related to street invasion episodes, except that this shall be reduced to a four-hour notice if there is obvious hazard to health or safety. If the developer fails to adequately respond within the given time frame, the City will perform the work, and any costs incurred will be charged against the cash deposit. If there is any possibility of reoccurrence of problems associated with the street invasion incident, the City shall then give the developer written notice to replenish the cash deposit to its original level within five calendar days. If the developer fails to replenish the cash deposit as required, the City reserves the right to stop any work on the project which is associated with the street invasion incident. (Ord. 68 § 6.1, 1993)


15.42.340 Performance guaranteed for required improvements.

Before a permit, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be issued, the applicant may be required to execute to the City a performance guarantee. In some instances, and at the sole option of the City, a certificate of occupancy, final inspection, or final approval may be issued prior to completion of required public or site improvements if an acceptable form of guarantee is provided by the applicant. The guarantee shall be in such sum as designated by the Public Services Administrator as necessary (but not less than 150 percent of the estimated completion cost of the improvements) for the proper protection of the City. (Ord. 68 § 6.2, 1993)


15.42.350 Maintenance guarantee.

Prior to acceptance by the City of any newly constructed public improvements to be deeded to the City, repair of any City street associated with a street invasion, or on- or off-site storm drainage improvements, the developer shall file with the City a construction maintenance guarantee. The maintenance guarantee is to be held by the City for a period of two years. The City shall require the applicant, at his cost, to correct all failures. Should the applicant fail to perform within a period of 15 days, the City may use said maintenance guarantee to correct any failures. (Ord. 68 § 6.3, 1993)


15.42.360 Performance.

(1) All performance guarantees except for street invasion shall be for not less than 150 percent of the written estimate of the cost of construction of the required improvements associated with any development project. Said written cost estimate shall be provided by the developer and is subject to review and acceptance by the City.

(2) The following forms of guarantees are acceptable to the City to assure completion of required improvements associated with any development project:

(a) Bond in a form approved by the City;

(b) Escrow or assigned bank account in a form approved by the City;

(c) Cash deposit to the City of Woodinville;

(d) Local Improvement District (LID) subject to City Council approval;

(e) A combination of the above. (Ord. 68 § 6.4.1, 1993)


15.42.370 Maintenance guarantees and warranty guarantees against defects in materials and/or workmanship.

All maintenance and warranty guarantees shall be for 20 percent of the estimated cost of construction of the required improvements associated with any development project. The following forms of guarantees are acceptable to the City to assure proper maintenance of required improvements associated with any development project, or to assure good quality materials and workmanship for required improvements:

(1) Bond in a form approved by the City;

(2) Escrow or assigned bank account in a form approved by the City;

(3) Cash deposit to the City of Woodinville;

(4) A combination of the above. (Ord. 68 § 6.4.2, 1993)


15.42.380 Termination date for guarantee.

Regardless of the form or type of guarantee, the City shall establish a termination date for the guarantee. The maximum time period for a performance guarantee shall be six months from the date of acceptance of the guarantee. The minimum time period for a maintenance guarantee or a warranty guarantee against defects in materials and/or workmanship shall be two years. (Ord. 68 §6.5, 1993)


15.42.390 Utilization of funds provided by guarantees.

(1) Performance Guarantees. If the required improvements associated with a development project are not completed by the termination date of the performance guarantee, the City shall use said guarantee to construct the improvements in accordance with the City’s standards. In the case of the street invasion performance guarantees, if the developer or utility fails to adequately respond within the specified time frame of the City’s notification of required corrective or clean up work, the City shall apply these funds toward the cost of performing this work.

(2) Maintenance Guarantees. In the event that required improvements are not properly maintained during the required maintenance guarantee period, the City shall notify the developer/owner. If the developer/owner fails to correct the problem within a period of 15 days, the City shall use said maintenance guarantee to perform the maintenance work. 

(3) Warranty Guarantees Against Defects in Materials and/or Workmanship. Should any failures occur in regard to required improvements associated with a development project within the warranty period, the City shall require the developer/owner to correct all failures. Should the developer/owner fail to perform within a period of 15 days, the City shall use said warranty guarantee to correct any failures. (Ord. 68 § 6.6, 1993)


15.42.400 Reimbursement of City’s costs incurred to obtain funds provided by guarantees.

If the City finds it necessary to utilize funds provided for any guarantee, and incurs expenses in obtaining and administering such funds, a portion of these monies shall also be used to reimburse the City for such recovery costs. If the guarantee is not adequate to cover all necessary costs, the developer/owner is required to make up the deficit in cash within 30 days of receipt of written notice from the City. (Ord. 68 § 6.7, 1993)


Title 16* (Reserved)

*Code reviser’s note: The provisions of WMC Title 16 have been recodified in WMC Title 14.


Title 17 (Reserved)


Title 18 (Reserved)


Title 19 (Reserved)


Title 20 (Reserved)


Title 21 ZONING

Chapters:

Division 1. General Administration

21.10    Authority, Purpose, Interpretation and Administration

21.11    Technical Terms and Land Use Definitions

21.12    Enforcement

Division 2. Zoning, Districts, and Land Use

21.20    Zones, Maps and Designations

21.21    Permitted Uses

21.22    Density and Dimensions

21.23    Office/Research Park Development Overlay

21.24    Pedestrian-Oriented Commercial Overlay

21.25    Sexually Oriented Business Overlay

21.26    Tourist District Overlay

21.27    Transit-Oriented Housing Development Overlay

Division 3. Special Development Standards

21.30    Accessory Uses and Structures

21.31    Animals, Home Occupation, Home Industry

21.32    Essential Public Facilities

21.33    Landmark Protection and Preservation

21.34    Nonconformity

21.35    Signs

21.36    Temporary Uses

21.37    Wireless Service Facilities

Division 4. Project Design

21.40    Commercial Design Standards

21.41    Industrial Design Guidelines

21.42    Residential Design Standards

21.43    Landscaping

21.44    Parking and Circulation

21.45    Recreation and Trail Corridors

Division 5. Environment

21.50    Development Standards – Tree Protection

21.51    Critical Areas

21.52    Environmental Protection

21.53    Flood Damage Prevention

Division 6. Subdivisions

21.60    Subdivision Design

21.61    Subdivision Review Procedures

Division 7. Shoreline Master Program

21.70    Shoreline Management

Division 8. Project Permit and Legislative Procedures

21.80    Decision Criteria

21.81    Adequacy of Public Facilities

21.82    Development Agreement Procedure and Criteria

21.83    Review Procedures

21.84    Application and Notice Requirements

21.85    Appeals

21.86    Text Amendment Procedures

21.87    Area-Wide Zoning Map Amendment Procedures

21.88    Comprehensive Plan Amendment Procedures

21.89    Annexation Procedures


Chapter 21.10 AUTHORITY, PURPOSE, INTERPRETATION AND ADMINISTRATION

Sections:

21.10.010    Title.

21.10.020    Authority to adopt code.

21.10.030    Purpose.

21.10.040    Conformity with this title required.

21.10.050    Minimum requirements.

21.10.060    Interpretation – General.

21.10.070    Interpretation – North American Industrial Classification System.

21.10.080    Interpretation – Zoning maps.

21.10.090    Administration and review authority.

21.10.100    Severability.


21.10.010 Title.

This title shall be known as the City of Woodinville Zoning Code, hereinafter referred to as “this title.” (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.10.020 Authority to adopt code.

(1) The City of Woodinville Zoning Code is adopted by City of Woodinville ordinance, pursuant to the Washington State Constitution, and Chapter 35A.63 RCW. 

(2) The comprehensive land use plan entitled “The City of Woodinville Comprehensive Plan,” as may be amended, is on file with the office of the City Clerk for public inspection, and is hereby adopted as the GMA Comprehensive Plan for the City of Woodinville. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.10.030 Purpose.

The general purposes of this title are: 

(1) To encourage land use decisionmaking in accordance with the public interest and applicable laws of the State of Washington;

(2) To protect the general public health, safety, and welfare;

(3) To implement the City of Woodinville Comprehensive Plan’s goals and policies through land use regulations;

(4) To provide for the economic, social, and aesthetic advantages of orderly development through harmonious groupings of compatible and complementary land uses and the application of appropriate development standards;

(5) To provide for adequate public facilities and services in conjunction with development; and

(6) To promote general public safety by regulating development of lands containing physical hazards and to minimize the adverse environmental impacts of development. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.10.040 Conformity with this title required. 

(1) No use or structure shall be established, substituted, expanded, constructed, altered, moved, maintained, or otherwise changed except in conformance with this title. 

(2) Creation of or changes to lot lines shall conform with the use provisions, dimensional and other standards, and procedures of this title.

(3) All land uses and development authorized by this title shall comply with all other regulations and/or requirements of this title as well as any other applicable local, State or Federal law. Where a difference exists between this title and other City regulations, the more restrictive requirements shall apply. Where a conflict exists between Federal law and State law, Federal law prevails.

(a) The growing, production, processing and sale of marijuana are prohibited in all zoning districts of the City of Woodinville whether it is grown, produced, processed or sold for medical or recreational use, and nothing in this title should be construed differently. 

(4) Where more than one part of this title applies to the same aspect of a proposed use or development, the more restrictive requirement shall apply. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.10.050 Minimum requirements.

In interpretation and application, the requirements set forth in this title shall be considered the minimum requirements necessary to accomplish the purposes of this title. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.10.060 Interpretation – General.

(1) In case of inconsistency or conflict, regulations, conditions or procedural requirements that are specific to an individual land use shall supersede regulations, conditions or procedural requirements of general application.

(2) A land use includes the necessary structures to support the use unless specifically prohibited or the context clearly indicates otherwise, subject to other standards in code and any required permits for structures. 

(3) Chapter and section headings, captions, illustrations and references to other sections or titles are for reference or explanation only and shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify, or in any manner affect the scope, meaning, or intent of any section. In case of any ambiguity, difference of meaning or implication between the text and any heading, caption or illustration, the text and the permitted use tables in Chapter 21.21 WMC shall control. All applicable requirements shall govern a use whether or not they are cross-referenced in a text section or land use table.

(4) The word “shall” is mandatory and the word “may” is discretionary.

(5) Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, words in the present tense shall include past and future tense, and words in the singular shall include the plural, or vice versa. Except for words and terms defined in this title, all words and terms used in this title shall have their customary meanings. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.10.070 Interpretation – North American Industrial Classification System. 

(1) All references to the North American Industrial Classification System (NAICS) are to the titles and descriptions found in the North American Industrial Classification System, 2002 Edition, prepared by the United States Office of Management and Budget which is hereby adopted by reference. The NAICS is used, with modifications to suit the purposes of this title, to list and define land uses authorized to be located in the various zones.

(2) The NAICS categorizes each land use under a general two-digit major group number, or under a more specific five- or six-digit industry group or industry number. A use shown on a land use table with a two-digit number includes all uses listed in the SIC for that major group. A use shown with a five-digit or six-digit number includes only the uses listed in the NAICS for that industry group or industry, respectively, and the uses so listed are excluded from the respective major group. 

(3) An asterisk (*) in the NAICS number column of a land use table means that the NAICS definition for the specific land use identified has been modified by this title. The definition may include one or more NAICS subclassification numbers, or may define the use without reference to the NAICS. 

(4) The Development Services Director shall determine whether a proposed land use not specifically listed in a land use table or specifically included within a NAICS classification is allowed in a zone. The Development Services Director’s determination shall be based on whether or not permitting the proposed use in a particular zone is consistent with the purposes of this title and the zone’s purpose as set forth in Chapter 21.20 WMC, by considering the following factors:

(a) The physical characteristics of the use and its supporting structures, including but not limited to scale, traffic and other impacts, and hours of operation;

(b) Whether or not the use complements or is compatible with other uses permitted in the zone; and

(c) The NAICS classification, if any, assigned to the business or other entity that will carry on the primary activities of the proposed use.

(5) The decision of the Development Services Director on an NAICS classification shall be final unless the applicant or an adverse party files an appeal to the Hearing Examiner pursuant to Chapters 2.30 and 21.85 WMC. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.10.080 Interpretation – Zoning maps.

Where uncertainties exist as to the location of any zone boundaries, the following rules of interpretation, listed in priority order, shall apply: 

(1) Where boundaries are indicated as parallelling the approximate centerline of the street right-of-way, the zone shall extend to each adjacent boundary of the right-of-way. Non-road-related uses by adjacent property owners, if allowed in the right-of-way, shall meet the same zoning requirements regulating the property owners lot;

(2) Where boundaries are indicated as following approximately lot lines, the actual lot lines shall be considered the boundaries; 

(3) Where boundaries are indicated as following lines of ordinary high water, or government meander line, the lines shall be considered to be the actual boundaries. If these lines should change the boundaries shall be considered to move with them; and

(4) If none of the rules of interpretation described in subsections (1) through (3) of this section apply, then the zoning boundary shall be determined by map scaling. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.10.090 Administration and review authority.

(1) The Hearing Examiner shall have authority to hold public hearings and make decisions and recommendations on development proposals as set forth in this title, and appeals of Development Services Director and Building Official decisions, as set forth in Chapter 2.30 WMC and WMC Title 15 and this title.

(2) The Development Services Director shall have the authority to grant, condition or deny applications for development proposals as set forth in this title.

(3) Except for other agencies with authority to implement specific provisions of this title, the Development Services Director shall have the sole authority to issue official interpretations of this title.

(4) The Development Services Director is hereby authorized after July 14, 1997, to incorporate drawings as necessary for the purpose of illustrating concepts and regulatory standards contained in this title; provided, that the adopted provisions of the code shall control. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.10.100 Severability.

Should any chapter, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this title be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of this title. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


Chapter 21.11 TECHNICAL TERMS AND LAND USE DEFINITIONS

Sections:

21.11.010    Scope of chapter.

21.11.020    Purpose.

21.11.030    A.

21.11.040    B.

21.11.050    C.

21.11.060    D.

21.11.070    E.

21.11.080    F.

21.11.090    G.

21.11.100    H.

21.11.110    I.

21.11.120    J.

21.11.130    K.

21.11.140    L.

21.11.150    M.

21.11.160    N.

21.11.170    O.

21.11.180    P.

21.11.190    Q.

21.11.200    R.

21.11.210    S.

21.11.220    T.

21.11.230    U.

21.11.240    V.

21.11.250    W.

21.11.260    Y.

21.11.270    Z.


21.11.010 Scope of chapter.

This chapter contains definitions of technical and procedural terms used throughout the code as well as definitions of land use shown in Chapter 21.21 WMC, Permitted Uses. See Chapter 21.10 WMC, Authority, Purpose, Interpretation and Administration, for rules on interpretation of the code, including use of these definitions. Development standards are found in Chapters 21.22 through 21.37 WMC. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.11.020 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to set forth the meanings of words and phrases used in this title. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.11.030 A.

“Abutting, adjoining” means to touch along a border or bounding at a point or line.

“Access” means ingress and egress to and from premises. This also means access to public way and general road system.

“Access corridor” means a vehicle circulation area in private ownership, including easements, tracts and driveways in common ownership, over which access is afforded to more than one lot, or which serves more than 30 dwelling units in a multifamily development. Driveways serving a group of less than 30 dwelling units in multifamily developments shall not be considered access corridors.

“Accessible electric vehicle charging station” means an electric vehicle charging station where the battery charging station equipment is located within accessible reach of a barrier-free access aisle (minimum 44-inch width) and the electric vehicle.

“Accessory living quarters” means living quarters in an accessory building for the use of the occupant or persons employed on the premises, or for temporary use of guests of the occupant. Such quarters have no kitchen as defined in the International Building Code and are not otherwise used as a separate dwelling unit.

“Accessory use, commercial/industrial” means:

(1) A use that is subordinate and incidental to a commercial or industrial use; including but not limited to the following uses:

(a) Administrative offices, not to exceed 49 percent of gross floor area (in industrial uses);

(b) Employee exercise facilities;

(c) Employee food service facilities;

(d) Incidental storage of raw materials and finished products sold or manufactured on site;

(e) Business owner or caretaker residence; 

(f) Cogeneration facilities;

(g) Ground maintenance facilities; and

(h) Retail area is limited to 10 percent of the gross floor area, not to exceed 3,000 square feet regardless of gross floor area of the principal manufacturing use.

(2) Some accessory uses within the scope of this section may be defined separately to enable the code to apply different conditions of approval.

“Accessory use, residential” means:

(1) A use, structure, or activity which is subordinate and incidental to a residence including, but not limited to, the following uses: 

(a) Accessory living quarters and dwellings;

(b) Fallout/bomb shelters;

(c) Keeping household pets;

(d) On-site rental office; 

(e) Pools, private docks, piers;

(f) Antennas for private telecommunication services;

(g) Storage of yard maintenance equipment; or

(h) Storage of private vehicles, e.g., motor vehicles, boats, trailers or aircraft. 

(2) Some accessory uses within the scope of this section may be defined separately to enable the code to apply different conditions of approval.

“Accessory use, resource” means:

(1) A use, structure, or part of a structure which is customarily subordinate and incidental to a resource use including, but not limited to, the following uses: 

(a) Housing of agricultural workers; or 

(b) Storage of agricultural products or equipment used on site.

(2) Some accessory uses within the scope of this section may be defined separately to enable the code to apply different conditions of approval.

“Adjacent” means property that is located within 300 feet of a property line of a subject property.

“Adult use facility” means an enterprise predominantly involved in the selling, renting or presenting for commercial purposes of books, magazines, motion pictures, films, video cassettes, cable television, live entertainment, performance or activity distinguished or characterized by a predominant emphasis on the depiction, simulation or relation to “specified sexual activities” as defined in this chapter for observation by patrons therein. Examples of such establishments include, but are not limited to, adult book or video stores and establishments offering panoramas, peep shows or topless or nude dancing.

“Agricultural crop sales” means the retail sale of fresh fruits, vegetables and flowers produced on site. This use is frequently found in roadside stands or U-pick establishments and includes uses located in NAICS Major Group and Industry Group Nos.: 

(1) 111 – Agricultural production – crops; and 

(2) 44523 – Fruit and vegetable markets.

“Agricultural produce” means items resulting from the practice of agriculture, including crops such as fruits, vegetables, grains, seed, feed, and plants, or animal products such as eggs, milk and meat.

“Aircraft, ship and boat building” means the fabrication and/or assembling of aircraft, ships or boats, and including uses located in NAICS Industry Group Nos.:

(1) 33641 – Aerospace, and aircraft product and parts manufacturing; 

(2) 541771 – Aircraft research and development in the physical engineering and life sciences;

(3) 48839 – Other support activities for water transportation;

(4) 33661 – Ship and boat building and repairing.

“Airport/heliport” means any runway, landing area or other facility excluding facilities for the primary use of the individual property owner which is designed or used by both public carriers or private aircraft for the landing and taking off of aircraft, including the following associated facilities:

(1) Taxiways;

(2) Aircraft storage and tie-down areas;

(3) Hangars;

(4) Servicing; and 

(5) Passenger and air freight terminals.

“Alley” means an improved thoroughfare or right-of-way, whether public or private, usually narrower than a street, that provides vehicular access to an interior boundary of one or more lots, and is not designed for general traffic circulation.

Alternative Antenna Support Structure. An “alternative antenna support structure” shall include flat roofs of buildings; bell towers; clock towers; water towers; church steeples; street light standards; traffic light and traffic sign structures; utility poles; and other manmade structures and devices, excluding billboards and commercial signs, that extend vertically from the ground to a sufficient height or elevation to accommodate the attachment of antennas at an altitude or elevation that is required for commercial activity for wireless communications signal transmission and reception.

“Amusement arcades” means a building or part of a building in which five or more pinball machines, video games, or other such player-operator amusement devices (excluding jukeboxes or gambling-related machines) are operated.

“Anadromous fish” means fish that spawn and rear in fresh water and mature in the marine environment.

“Animal, small” means any animal other than livestock or animals considered to be predatory or wild which are kept outside a dwelling unit all or part of the time. Animals considered predatory or wild shall be considered small animals when they are taken into captivity for the purposes of breeding, domestication, training, hunting or exhibition.

“Antenna” means a specific device, the surface of which is used to transmit and/or receive radio-frequency signals, microwave signals, or other signals transmitted to or from other antennas. For purposes of illustration, such antennas include, but are not limited to, the following:

(1) Omni-directional (or “whip”) antennas, designed to transmit and/or receive signals in a 360-degree pattern;

(2) Directional (or “panel”) antennas, designed to transmit and/or receive signals in a directional pattern which is less than 360 degrees, typically an arc of approximately 120 degrees;

(3) Parabolic (or “dish”) antennas, generally bowl-shaped devices that are designed to transmit and/or receive signals in a specific directional pattern; and

(4) Ancillary antennas that are not directly used to provide wireless communication services, such as a global positioning system (“GPS”) antenna.

“Antenna array” means two or more devices used for the transmission or reception of radio frequency signals, microwave or other signals for personal wireless services purposes and may include omni-directional antennas, directional antennas, parabolic antennas, and ancillary antennas. Two or more antennas situated or mounted upon or attached to a single platform or mounting structure which is affixed or attached to the top of an antenna support structure or midway thereon, or to an alternative antenna support structure, including the roof of a flat-roofed building, are included in the definition of antenna array.

“Antenna support structure” means a structure or device specifically designed, constructed and/or erected for the purpose of attaching, mounting or otherwise affixing antennas at a height, altitude, or elevation for the purpose of providing personal wireless services. For purposes of illustration, antenna support structures include, but are not limited to, the following:

(1) A “lattice tower” is a support structure that consists of metal crossed strips, bars, or braces, forming a tower which may have three, four, or more sides;

(2) A “monopole tower” is a support structure consisting of a single vertical metal, concrete or wooden pole, typically round or square, and driven into the ground or attached to a foundation; and

(3) A “guyed tower” is a support structure usually over 100 feet tall, which consists of metal crossed strips or bars, and is steadied by wire guys in a radial pattern around the tower.

“Applicant” means a property owner or any person or entity acting as an agent for the property owner in an application for a development proposal, permit or approval.

“Appropriate provisions” means the adequate and timely provision of public services and facilities to be utilized by the lots of a plat, including roads, access, potable water, sanitary waste, parks and open space, and playgrounds, consistent with level of service standards established by the City of Woodinville Comprehensive Plan.

“Auction house” means an establishment where the property of others is sold by a broker or auctioneer to persons who attend scheduled sales periods or events.

“Auto parts yard” means a tract of land on which used, damaged or otherwise inoperable motor vehicles are stored and disassembled, the parts of which may be sold (wholesale or retail) on site. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.11.040 B.

“Base flood” means a flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, often referred to as the “100-year flood.” Designation on FIRM maps always includes the letter A or V.

“Base flood elevation” means the water surface elevation of the base flood in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929.

“Basement” means any area of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. That portion of a building that is partly or entirely below grade and intended as building square footage and used for habitation, storage, or parking.

“Battery charging station” means an electrical component assembly or cluster of component assemblies designed specifically to charge batteries within electric vehicles, which meet or exceed any standards, codes, and regulations set forth by Chapter 19.28 RCW and consistent with rules adopted under RCW 19.27.540.

“Battery electric vehicle (BEV)” means any vehicle that operates exclusively on electrical energy from an off-board source that is stored in the vehicle’s batteries, and produces zero tailpipe emissions or pollution when stationary or operating.

“Battery exchange station” means a fully automated facility that will enable an electric vehicle with a swappable battery to enter a drive lane and exchange the depleted battery with a fully charged battery through a fully automated process, which meets or exceeds any standards, codes, and regulations set forth by Chapter 19.27 RCW and consistent with rules adopted under RCW 19.27.540.

“Bed and breakfast” means a dwelling unit or accessory building within which bedrooms are available for paying guests.

“Beehive” means a structure designed to contain one colony of honey bees (Apis mellifera).

“Best available science” means current scientific information used in the process to designate, protect, or restore critical areas that is derived from a valid scientific process as defined by WAC 365-195-900 through 365-195-925. Sources of best available science are included in “Citations of Recommended Sources of Best Available Science for Designated and Protecting Critical Areas,” published by the State Office of Community Development.

“Billboard” means a sign, including both the supporting structural framework and attached billboard faces, used principally for advertising a business activity, use, product, or service unrelated to the primary use or activity of the property on which the billboard is located; excluding off-premises directional or temporary real estate signs.

“Billboard face” means that portion of a billboard, exclusive of its structural support, on which changeable advertising copy is displayed, either by affixing preprinted poster panels or by painting copy on location; subclassified as follows:

(1) Billboard face I – a billboard face not exceeding a height of 14 feet or a width of 48 feet; and

(2) Billboard face II – a billboard face not exceeding a height of 12 feet or a width of 24 feet.

“Binding site plan” means a drawing to a scale of no smaller than one inch to 100 feet which: 

(1) Identifies and shows the areas and locations of all streets, roads, improvements, utilities, open spaces, and any other matters specified by local regulations;

(2) Contains inscriptions or attachments setting forth such appropriate limitations and conditions for the use of the land as are established by the City of Woodinville; and

(3) Contains provisions making any development be in conformity with the site plan.

“Biologist” means a person who has earned at least a Bachelor of Science degree in the biological sciences from an accredited college or university or who has equivalent educational training and experience.

“Bioretention” means a stormwater best management practice consisting of a shallow landscaped depression designed to temporarily store and promote infiltration of stormwater runoff. Standards for bioretention design, including soil mix, plants, storage volume and feasibility criteria, are specified in Appendix C of the King County Surface Water Design Manual.

“Block” means a group of lots, tracts, or parcels within well defined and fixed boundaries.

“Book, stationery, video and art supply store” means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of books and magazines, stationery, records and tapes, video and art supplies, including uses located in NAICS Industry Nos.:

(1) 451211 – Book stores;

(2) 45321 – Stationery stores;

(3) 453998 – Limited to art supply and architectural supply stores;

(4) 53223 – Video tape rental;

(5) 45122 – Record and prerecorded tape stores; and

(6) 45114 – Musical instrument stores.

“Buffer, critical area” means a designated area contiguous to and protective of a critical area that is required for the continued maintenance, functioning, and/or structural stability of a critical area.

“Building” means any structure having a roof.

“Building, hardware and garden materials” means an establishment engaged in selling lumber and other building materials, feed, and lawn and garden supplies, including but not limited to uses located in NAICS Major Group No. 444 – Building materials, hardware, garden supply.

“Building coverage” means area of a lot that is covered by the total horizontal surface area of the roof of a building.

“Building envelope” means area of a lot that delineates the limits of where a building may be placed on the lot.

“Building facade” means that portion of any exterior elevation of a building extending from the grade of the building to the top of the parapet wall or eaves, for the entire width of the building elevation.

“Building footprint” means portion of a building, measured from the exterior of the exterior walls that covers the ground, including cantilevered portions of the building, but excluding roof overhangs.

“Building Official” means the officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of construction codes.

“Bulk retail” means an establishment offering the sale of bulk goods to the general public, including limited sales to wholesale customers. These establishments may include a variety of lines of merchandise such as food, building, hardware and garden materials, dry goods, apparel and accessories, home furnishings, housewares, drugs, auto supplies, hobby, toys, games, photographic, and electronics. (Ord. 634 § 22, 2016; Ord. 622 § 2, 2016; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.11.050 C.

“Calculated LOS” means a quantitative measure of traffic congestion identified by a declining letter scale (A – F) as calculated by the methodology contained in the 1985 Highway Capacity Manual Special Report 209 or as calculated by another method approved by the department. LOS “A” indicates free flow of traffic with no delays while LOS “F” indicates jammed conditions or extensive delay.

“Camouflage” means the use of shape, color, and/or texture to cause an object to appear to become a part of something else, usually a structure, such as a building, wall, or roof. Camouflage does not mean “invisible,” but rather “appearing as part or exactly like the structure used as a mount.”

“Campground” means an area of land on which accommodations for temporary occupancy such as tents or recreational vehicles without hook-up facilities are permitted and which is used primarily for recreational purposes.

“Cannabis” means all parts of the plant cannabis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. For the purposes of this definition, “cannabis” does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks, except the resin extracted therefrom, fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. The term “cannabis” includes cannabis products and usable cannabis.

“Cannabis collective garden” means a garden where “qualifying patients” as described in Section 403 of Engrossed Second Substitute Senate Bill 5073 and Chapter 181, Laws (of the State of Washington) of 2011 may engage in the production, processing, and/or delivery of cannabis for medical use.

“Cannabis dispensary” means any facility or location where cannabis is grown, produced, manufactured or made available to and/or distributed.

“Canopy” means the percentage of the City or a site’s area that is shaded by trees.

“Capacity, school” means the number of students a school district’s facilities can accommodate district-wide, based on the district’s standard of service, as determined by the school district.

“Capital facilities plan, school” means a district’s facilities plan adopted by the school board consisting of:

(1) A forecast of future needs for school facilities based on the district’s enrollment projections;

(2) The long-range construction and capital improvements projects of the district;

(3) The schools under construction or expansion;

(4) The proposed locations and capacities of expanded or new school facilities;

(5) At least a six-year financing plan component, updated as necessary to maintain at least a six-year forecast period, for financing needed school facilities within projected funding levels, and identifying sources of financing for such purposes, including bond issues authorized by the voters and projected bond issues not yet authorized by the voters;

(6) Any other long-range projects planned by the district;

(7) The current capacity of the district’s school facilities based on the district’s adopted standard of service, and a plan to eliminate existing deficiencies, if any, without the use of impact fees; and 

(8) An inventory showing the location and capacity of existing school facilities.

“Cattery” means a place where adult cats are temporarily boarded for compensation, whether or not for training. An adult cat is of either sex, altered or unaltered, that has reached the age of six months.

“Charging levels” means the standardized indicators of electrical force, or voltage, at which an electric vehicle’s battery is recharged. The terms 1, 2, and 3 are the most common EV charging levels, and include the following specifications:

(1) Level 1 is considered slow charging.

(2) Level 2 is considered medium charging.

(3) Level 3 is considered fast or rapid charging.

“Church, synagogue or temple” means a place where religious services are conducted and including accessory uses in the primary or accessory buildings such as religious education, reading rooms, assembly rooms, and residences for nuns and clergy, but excluding facilities for training of religious orders; including uses located in NAICS Industry No. 81311.

“City Tree Official” means the Development Services Director or his/her designees responsible for implementing the Community Urban Forestry Plan and Regulations. The City Tree Official shall use the expertise of a certified arborist, under contract by the City, for technical advice on decisions related to the community urban forest.

“Civic center” means a building or group of buildings containing administrative offices for the operations of local government that is: (1) owned and operated by the City of Woodinville, and (2) used predominantly for office and meeting space for local government and/or for community activities.

“Classrooms, school” means educational facilities of the district required to house students for its basic educational program. The classrooms are those facilities the district determines are necessary to best serve its student population. Specialized facilities as identified by the district, including but not limited to gymnasiums, cafeterias, libraries, administrative offices, and child care centers, shall not be counted as classrooms.

“Clearing” means the limbing, pruning, trimming, topping, cutting or removal of vegetation or other organic plant matter by physical, mechanical, chemical or other means.

“Clustered development” means a method of locating residences close to each other on small lots. The purpose of clustering residences is to preserve tracts of open space including critical areas and to limit the location, cost and coverage of land by roads and utilities.

“Cogeneration” means the sequential generation of energy and useful heat from the same primary source or fuel for industrial, commercial, or residential heating or cooling purposes.

“Collectable shop” means an establishment engaged in the selling of used merchandise that is at least 25 years old or older excluding motor vehicles, motor vehicle parts, tires, recreational vehicles (RVs) and mobile homes.

“Co-location” means the common use of a single antenna support structure alternative support structure or by two or more personal wireless service providers.

Communication Facility, Major. “Major communication facility” means a communication facility for transmission and reception of: 

(1) UHF and VHF television signals; or 

(2) FM or AM radio signals.

Communication Facility, Minor. “Minor communication facility” means an unstaffed facility for the transmission and/or reception of wireless communication services, usually consisting of antennas, equipment enclosures, transmission cables, and a support structure. A “minor communication facility” is used for the transmission and/or reception of:

(1) Two-way and/or citizen band (CB) radio signals;

(2) Point-to-point microwave signals;

(3) Signals through FM radio translators; and

(4) Signals through FM radio boosters under 10 watts effective radiated power (ERP).

“Community center” means a building or other enclosed structure open to the general public that is owned and operated by the City of Woodinville, another public agency, or a nonprofit organization, and that is used predominantly for cultural, educational, recreational, or social purposes.

“Community residential facility (CRF)” means living quarters meeting applicable Federal and State standards that function as a single housekeeping unit and provide supportive services, including but not limited to counseling, rehabilitation and medical supervision, excluding drug and alcohol detoxification; which is classified in WMC 21.21.030 as group residences, if staffed by nonresident staff, each 24 staff hours per day equals one full-time residing staff member. The number of occupants shall not exceed the occupant load of the structure calculated as provided in the 2003 International Building Code, Section 1002, or as hereafter amended.

“Compensatory storage” means new, excavated storage volume equivalent to any flood storage which is eliminated by building, filling or grading within the floodplain. For the purpose of this definition, equivalent flood storage capacity is that which is replaced by equal volume between corresponding one-foot contour intervals which are hydraulically connected to the floodway through their entire depth.

“Concealment” means fully hidden from view. For example, a personal wireless service facility is concealed when it is completely hidden or contained within a structure, such as a building, wall, or roof.

“Conditional use permit” means permit granted by the City to locate a permitted use on a particular property subject to conditions placed on the permitted use to ensure compatibility with nearby land uses in accordance with WMC 21.80.060.

“Condominium” means a type of property ownership consisting of an individual interest in an apartment or commercial building, and an undivided common interest in common areas such as parking area, elevators, etc.

“Conference center” means an establishment developed primarily as a meeting facility; including facilities for recreation and related activities provided for conference participants, excluding overnight lodging.

“Confinement area” means any open land area in which livestock are kept where the forage does not meet the definition of a grazing area.

“Consolidation” means the relocation to a consolidated transmission structure of the main transmit antennas of two or more FCC broadcast licensees which prior to such relocation utilized transmission structures located within a 1,500-foot radius of the center of the consolidated transmission structure to support their main transmit antennas.

“Construction cost per student, school” means the estimated cost of construction of a permanent school facility in the district for the grade span of school to be provided, as a function of the district’s facilities standard per grade span and taking into account the requirements of students with special needs.

“Critical aquifer recharge area (CARA)” means areas that have a critical recharging effect on aquifers used for potable water as described in WAC 365-190-100. Due to soil infiltration conditions of these CARAs, they contribute significantly to the replenishment of ground water, and often have a high potential for contamination of ground water resources.

“Critical areas” means any of those areas in the City of Woodinville which are subject to natural hazards or those land features which support unique, fragile or valuable natural resources including fishes, wildlife and other organisms and their habitat and such resources which carry, hold or purify water in their natural state. Critical areas include critical aquifer recharge areas, geologically sensitive areas, frequently flooded areas, fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas, wetlands, and their associated buffers.

“Critical facility” means a facility necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare and which is defined under the occupancy categories of “essential facilities,” “hazardous facilities,” and “special occupancy structures” in the International Building Code. These facilities include, but are not limited to, schools, hospitals, nursing homes and police stations, fire departments and other emergency response facilities. Critical facilities also include nursing homes, public roadway bridges and sites for hazardous substance storage or production, not including the temporary storage of consumer products containing hazardous substances intended for household use or for retail sale on the site.

“Critical root zone” means the area surrounding a tree at a distance from the trunk, which is equal to one foot for every inch of tree diameter-at-breast-height or otherwise determined by a qualified tree professional.

“Crown” means the area of a tree containing leaf- or needle-bearing branches. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.11.060 D.

“Daycare” means an establishment for group care of nonresident adults or children.

(1) Daycare shall include, but not be limited to, NAICS Industry No. 624411 – Child daycare services, NAICS Industry No. 62412 – Adult daycare centers, and the following:

(a) Adult daycare, such as adult day health centers or social daycare as defined by the Washington State Department of Social and Health Services;

(b) Nursery schools for children under minimum age for education in public schools;

(c) Kindergartens or prekindergartens when not a part of a public or private school; and

(d) Programs covering after-school care for school children.

(2) Daycare establishments are subclassified as follows:

(a) Daycare I – a maximum of 12 adults or children in any 24-hour period; and

(b) Daycare II – over 12 adults or children in any 24-hour period.

“Deciduous” means a plant species with foliage that is shed annually.

“Dedication” means the deliberate appropriation of land by an owner for any general and public uses, reserving to himself no other rights than such as are compatible with the full exercise and enjoyment of the public uses to which the property has been devoted. The intention to dedicate shall be evidenced by the owner by the presentment for filing of a final plan or short plat showing the dedication thereon; and in the acceptance by the public shall be evidenced by the approval of such plat.

“Department” means the City of Woodinville Department of Community Development.

“Department and variety store” means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of a variety of lines of merchandise, such as dry goods, apparel and accessories, home furnishings, housewares, and including uses located in NAICS Major Group and Industry Nos.:

(1) 452 – General merchandise; 

(2) 45322 – Gift, novelty, and souvenir shops; and 

(3) 44832 – Luggage and leather goods stores.

“Design standard, school” means the space required, by grade span and taking into account the requirements of students with special needs, which is needed in order to fulfill the educational goals of the school district as identified in the district’s capital facilities plan.

“Destination resort” means an establishment for resource-based recreation and intended to utilize outdoor recreational opportunities, including related services, which may include food, overnight lodging, equipment rentals, entertainment and other conveniences for guests of the resort.

“Developer” means the person or entity who owns or holds purchase options or other development control over property for which development activity is proposed.

“Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.

“Development activity” means any construction or expansion of a building, structure or use, any change in use of a building or structure, or any change in the use of land that creates additional demand for school facilities.

“Development agreement” means an agreement between the City and a person who owns or controls real property regarding the development, use and mitigation of development of that property.

“Development proposal” means any activities requiring a permit or other approval from the City of Woodinville relative to the use or development of land.

“Development proposal site” means the legal boundaries of the parcel or parcels of land for which an applicant has or should have applied for authority from the City of Woodinville to carry out a development proposal.

“Development Services Director” means the Manager of the City of Woodinville’s Development Services Department or his or her designee.

“Diameter-at-breast-height” means tree measurement guideline that is the measure in inches of the trunk diameter of each protected or preserved tree four and one-half feet above the ground line.

“Director” means the Director of Planning and Community Development or his/her designees unless another department or agency is in charge of the project permit in which case it refers to the chief administrative officer of that department or agency.

“Dormitory” means a residential building that provides sleeping quarters, but not separate dwelling units, and may include common dining, cooking and recreation or bathing facilities.

“Dripline” means the distance from the tree trunk that is equal to the furthest extent of the tree’s crown.

“Driveway” means a vehicle entrance which serves a lot, structure or parking area.

“Drug store” means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of prescription drugs, nonprescription medicines, cosmetics and related supplies, including uses located in NAICS Industry Group and Industry Nos.:

(1) 44611 – Drug stores and proprietary stores; 

(2) 453991 – Tobacco stores and stands; and 

(3) 44612 – Cosmetics stores.

“Dwelling unit” means one or more rooms designed for occupancy by a person or family for living and sleeping purposes, containing kitchen facilities and rooms with internal accessibility, for use solely by the dwelling’s occupant; including but not limited to bachelor, efficiency and studio apartments, factory-built housing and mobile homes.

“Dwelling unit, accessory” means a separate, complete dwelling unit attached to or contained within the structure of the primary dwelling; or contained within a separate structure that is accessory to the primary dwelling unit on the premises.

“Dwelling unit, apartment” means a building containing two or more dwelling units which may be stacked on one or more dwellings or nonresidential uses.

“Dwelling unit, duplex” means a building containing two separate, complete, attached dwellings.

“Dwelling unit, senior citizen assisted” means a building containing two or more dwelling units restricted to occupancy by senior citizens, and including but not limited to the following support services, as deemed necessary: 

(1) Food preparation and dining areas;

(2) Group activity areas; 

(3) Medical supervision; and 

(4) Similar activities.

“Dwelling unit, single detached” means a detached building containing one dwelling unit.

“Dwelling unit, townhome” means a building containing one dwelling unit that occupies space from the ground to the roof, and is attached to one or more other townhome dwellings by common walls that may be located on lot lines. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.11.070 E.

“Earth station” means a communication facility which transmits and/or receives signals to and from an orbiting satellite using satellite dish antennas.

“Eaves” means the lower border of a roof that overhangs the wall.

“Effective radiated power” means the product of the antenna power input and the numerical antenna power gain.

“Elderly” means a person 62 years of age or older.

“Electric vehicle” means any vehicle that operates, either partially or exclusively, on electrical energy from the grid, or an off-board source, that is stored on-board for motive purpose. Electric vehicle includes: (1) a battery electric vehicle; (2) a plug-in hybrid electric vehicle; (3) a neighborhood electric vehicle; and (4) a medium-speed electric vehicle.

“Electric vehicle charging station” means a public or private parking space that is served by battery charging station equipment that has as its primary purpose the transfer of electric energy (by conductive or inductive means) to a battery or other energy storage device in an electric vehicle. An electric vehicle charging station equipped with Level 1 or Level 2 charging equipment is permitted outright as an accessory use to any principal use.

“Electric vehicle charging station – restricted” means an electric vehicle charging station that is (1) privately owned and restricted access (e.g., single-family home, executive parking, designated employee parking) or (2) publicly owned and restricted (e.g., fleet parking with no access to the general public).

“Electric vehicle infrastructure” means structures, machinery, and equipment necessary and integral to support an electric vehicle, including battery charging stations, rapid charging stations, and battery exchange stations.

“Electric vehicle parking space” means any marked parking space that identifies the use to be exclusively for the parking of an electric vehicle.

“Energy resource recovery facility” means an establishment for recovery of energy in a usable form from mass burning or refuse-derived fuel incineration, pyrolysis or any other means of using the heat of combustion of solid waste.

“Engineering geologist” means a practicing engineering geologist licensed in the State of Washington.

“Enhancement, critical area” means an action which increases the functions and values of a stream, wetland or other critical area or buffer.

Equipment Enclosure, Wireless Service Facility. “Wireless service facility equipment enclosure” means a small structure, shelter, cabinet, box or vault designed for and used to house and protect the electronic equipment necessary and/or desirable for processing personal wireless service signals and data, including any provisions for air conditioning, ventilation, or auxiliary electric generators.

“Equipment, heavy” means high-capacity mechanical devices for moving earth or other materials, and mobile power units including, but not limited to: 

(1) Carryalls; 

(2) Graders;

(3) Loading and unloading devices;

(4) Cranes;

(5) Drag lines;

(6) Trench diggers; 

(7) Tractors;

(8) Augers;

(9) Bulldozers; 

(10) Concrete mixers and conveyers;

(11) Harvesters;

(12) Combines; or 

(13) Other major agricultural equipment and similar devices operated by mechanical power as distinguished from manpower.

“Erosion” means the process by which soil particles are mobilized and transported by natural agents such as wind, rain splash, frost action or surface water flow.

“Erosion hazard areas” means those areas in City of Woodinville underlain by soils, which are subject to severe erosion when disturbed. Such soils include but are not limited to those classified as having a severe to very severe erosion hazard according to the USDA Natural Resource Conservation Service (NRCS), the 1973 King County Soils Survey or any subsequent revisions or addition by or to these sources. These soils include, but are not limited to, any occurrence of river wash (Rh) and the following when they occur on slopes 15 percent or steeper:

(1) The Alderwood gravelly sandy loam (AgD);

(2) The Alderwood and Kitsap soils (AkF);

(3) The Beausite gravelly sandy loam (BeD and BeF);

(4) The Kitsap silt loam (KpD);

(5) The Ovall gravelly loam (OvD and OvF);

(6) The Ragnar fine sandy loam (RaD); and

(7) The Ragnar-Indianola Association (RdE).

“Essential public facility (EPF)” means a facility that is typically difficult to site, such as airports, State education facilities, State or regional transportation facilities as defined by RCW 47.06.140, State or local correctional facilities, solid waste handling facilities, in-patient facilities, including substance abuse, mental health, or group home facilities, and secure community transition facilities as defined by RCW 71.09.020. The term “essential public facility” includes, but is not necessarily limited to, all facilities referenced in RCW 36.70A.200, all facilities enumerated on the list maintained by the State Office of Financial Management pursuant to RCW 36.70A.200(4), all facilities categorized as essential public facilities in the City’s Comprehensive Plan or this title, and all facilities enumerated on the essential public facility list maintained by the City pursuant to the City’s Comprehensive Plan.

“Essential public facility, local” means an EPF that is owned, operated, or sponsored by the City of Woodinville, a special purpose district, King County (for facilities that do not provide service to the County-wide population), or another unit of local government. An EPF is “sponsored” by a local government when it will be owned or operated by a nongovernmental entity pursuant to a contract with the local government to provide the EPF.

“Essential public facility, regional” means an EPF that is owned, operated, or sponsored by King County or a regional agency whose boundaries encompass the City and which serves a substantial portion of the County-wide population or a geographic area that is greater than the County. An EPF is “sponsored” by the County or a regional agency when it will be owned or operated by a nongovernmental entity pursuant to a contract with the County or regional agency to provide the EPF.

“Essential public facility, State” means an EPF that is owned, operated, or sponsored by the State of Washington, including any department or agency thereof. An EPF is “sponsored” by the State when it will be owned or operated by a nongovernmental entity pursuant to a contract with the State to provide the EPF.

“Evergreen” means a plant species with foliage that persists and remains green year-round.

“Exotic animal” means any of the following: 

(1) Venomous species of snakes capable of inflicting serious physical harm or death to human beings;

(2) Nonhuman primates and prosimians;

(3) Bears;

(4) Nondomesticated species of felines;

(5) Nondomesticated species of canines and their hybrids, including wolf and coyote hybrids; and

(6) The order Crocodilia, including alligators, crocodiles, caimans and gavials. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.11.080 F.

“Fabric shop” means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of sewing supplies and accessories, including uses located in NAICS Industry Nos.: 

(1) 45113 – Sewing, supply stores; and 

(2) Awning shops, banner shops, and flag shops found in 453998.

“Facilities, public” include streets, roads, highways, sidewalks, street and road lighting systems, traffic signals, domestic water systems, stormwater management systems, sewage disposal systems, parks, and recreation facilities and schools directly controlled by a public authority.

“Fairground” means a site permanently designated and improved for holding a County fair, as provided in Chapters 15.76 and 36.37 RCW, or for holding similar events, including, but not limited to:

(1) Carnivals;

(2) Circuses;

(3) Expositions;

(4) Animal shows; and 

(5) Exhibitions and/or demonstrations of farm and home products with accompanying entertainment and amusements.

“Family” means an individual or individuals domiciled together in one dwelling unit whose relationship is of a domestic character and who are cooking and living together as a single housekeeping unit, but the number of individuals occupying the dwelling unit shall not exceed the occupant load of the structure, calculated as provided in the 1994 International Building Code, Section 1002, or as may hereafter be amended.

“FCC” means the Federal Communications Commission.

“Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot at any point. Designation appears as cross-hatched area within the AE zone on FIRM maps.

“Fence” means a barrier for the purpose of enclosing space or separating lots, composed of:

(1) Masonry or concrete walls, excluding retaining walls; or

(2) Wood, metal or concrete posts connected by boards, rails, panels, wire or mesh.

“Final plat” means the final drawing of the subdivision and dedication prepared for filing for record with the King County Department of Records and Elections, and containing all elements and requirements set forth in this title.

“Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas” means those areas necessary for maintaining species in suitable habitats within their natural geographic distribution so that isolated subpopulations are not created as designated by WAC 365-190-130. These areas include:

(1) Areas with which State or Federally designated endangered, threatened, and sensitive species have a primary association;

(2) State priority habitat and species identified by the Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife;

(3) Habitat and species of local importance;

(4) Streams and watercourses;

(5) Naturally occurring ponds under 20 acres and their submerged aquatic beds that provide fish or wildlife habitat, including those artificial ponds intentionally created from dry areas in order to mitigate impacts to ponds;

(6) Waters of the State, including lakes, rivers, ponds, streams, inland waters, underground waters, and all other surface waters and watercourses within the jurisdiction of the State of Washington;

(7) Areas of rare plant species and high quality ecosystems as identified by the Washington State Department of Natural Resources through the Natural Heritage Program; and

(8) Native growth protection areas and other areas designated by the City.

“Flag” means a piece of cloth of distinctive color or design that is used as a signal, emblem, or symbol of a nation, state, or public or private institution.

“Flood fringe” means that portion of the floodplain outside of the zero-rise floodway which is covered by floodwaters during the base flood, generally associated with standing water rather than rapidly flowing water.

“Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)” means the official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.

“Flood insurance study for King County” means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration which includes flood profiles and the flood insurance rate map.

“Flood protection elevation” means an elevation which is one foot above the base flood elevation.

“Floodplain” means the total area subject to inundation by the base flood as defined herein.

“Floodproofing” means adaptations which will make a structure that is below the flood protection elevation substantially impermeable to the passage of water and resistant to hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads including the impacts of buoyancy.

“Floodway, zero-rise” means the channel of a stream and that portion of the adjoining floodplain which is necessary to contain and discharge the base flood flow without any measurable increase in flood height. A measurable increase in base flood height means a calculated upward rise in the base flood elevation, equal to or greater than 0.01 foot, resulting from a comparison of existing conditions and changed conditions directly attributable to development in the floodplain. This definition is broader than that of the FEMA floodway, but always includes the FEMA floodway. The boundaries of the 100-year floodplain, as shown on the flood insurance study for King County, are considered the boundaries of the zero-rise floodway unless otherwise delineated by a critical area special study.

“Floor area ratio (FAR)” means the floor area intended for human occupation, exclusive of vehicle parking areas and mechanical areas, divided by the net developable lot area of the development site.

“Florist shop” means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of flowers and plants, including uses located in NAICS Industry Nos.: 

(1) 45311 – Florists; and 

(2) 453998 – Limited to artificial flowers retail.

“Flush mounted” means attached to the face of the support structure or building such that no portion of the antenna extends above the height of the support structure or building. Where a maximum flush mounting distance is given, that distance shall be measured from the outside edge of the support structure or building to the outside edge of the antenna.

“Forest product sales” means the sale of goods produced, extracted, consumed, gathered or harvested from a forest including, but not limited to: 

(1) Trees; 

(2) Wood chips; 

(3) Logs;

(4) Fuelwood;

(5) Cones;

(6) Christmas trees; 

(7) Berries;

(8) Herbs; or

(9) Mushrooms.

“Forest research” means the performance of scientific studies relating to botany, hydrology, silviculture, biology and other branches of science in relation to management of forest lands, including but not limited to NAICS Industry Nos.:

(1) 54171 – Physical and biological research;

(2) 54171 – Noncommercial research organizations; and

(3) 54171 – Testing laboratories.

“Frequency, radio” means the number of times the current from a given source of non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation changes from a maximum positive level through a maximum negative level and back to a minimum positive level in one second; measured in cycles per second or Hertz (“Hz”).

“Frequently flooded areas” means those areas in the City of Woodinville subject to inundation by the base flood including, but not limited to, streams, lakes, wetlands and closed depressions. Frequently flooded areas shall include the floodplain, flood fringe, zero-rise floodway, and FEMA floodway.

“Furniture and home furnishings store” means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of household furniture and furnishings for the home, including uses located in NAICS Major Group and Industry Nos.:

(1) 442 – Furniture and home furnishings stores; and 

(2) Baby carriages, cake decorating supplies, hot tubs, picture frames (ready-made), swimming pools (above ground, not site-built), telephone stores and typewriter stores found in 443112 and 453998, respectively. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.11.090 G.

“General business service” means an establishment engaged in providing services to businesses or individuals, with no outdoor storage or fabrication, including uses located in NAICS Major Group Nos.: 

(1) 522 – Depository and nondepository institutions;

(2) 523 – Security and commodity brokers, dealers, exchanges, and services;

(3) 5241 – Insurance carriers;

(4) 531 – Real estate; 

(5) 551 – Holding and other investment offices;

(6) 541, 561, 323 – Business services, except Industry Group and Industry No. 54185 – Outdoor advertising services; and

(7) 813 – Membership organizations, including administrative offices of organized religions found in 81311, but excluding churches and places of worship.

“Geologically sensitive areas” are those areas susceptible to erosion, sliding, earthquake, or other geological events. Geologically sensitive areas pose a risk to the health and safety of citizens when incompatible development is located in areas of significant hazard. Geologically sensitive areas shall include erosion hazard, landslide hazard, seismic hazard, and other geologic hazard areas.

“Geologist” means a person licensed as a geologist in the State of Washington.

“Geotechnical engineer” means a practicing geotechnical/civil engineer licensed as a professional civil engineer by the State of Washington.

“Gift shop” means a retail establishment, limited to 3,000 square feet, engaged in the sale of gifts and other small items, such as gift-wrapping materials, greeting cards, and related items.

“Golf facility” means a recreational facility, under public or private ownership, designed and developed primarily for use as a golf course, and may include the following accessory uses:

(1) Pro shops;

(2) Caddy-shack buildings;

(3) Restaurants;

(4) Office and meeting rooms; and

(5) Related storage facilities.

“Grade span, school” means the categories into which a district groups its grades of students; i.e., elementary, middle or junior high school, and high school.

“Grading” means any excavation, filling, removing the duff layer or any combination thereof.

“Grazing area” means any open land area used to pasture livestock in which the forage is maintained over 80 percent of the area at all times of the year.

“Gross square footage” means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the floors of a building or buildings, measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls and from the centerline of division walls, and including basement space, garage space, elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor, mechanical equipment rooms and attic spaces with a headroom of more than seven feet, interior balconies, mezzanines and enclosed porches.

“Groundcover” means living plants designed to grow low to the ground (generally one foot or less) and intended to stabilize soils and protect against erosion.

“Grove” means a group of three or more significant trees with overlapping or touching crowns. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.11.100 H.

“Hard surface” means any impervious surface or permeable pavement.

“Hazard tree” means a tree with a combination of structural defects and/or disease that makes it subject to a high probability of failure; the part with high probability of failure is in proximity to moderate-high frequency of persons or property; and the hazard condition of the tree cannot be lessened with reasonable and proper arboricultural practices nor can the persons or property be moved.

“Hazardous household substance” means a substance as defined in RCW 70.105.010.

“Hazardous materials or substance” means any hazardous waste, hazardous substance, dangerous waste, or extremely hazardous waste that is a physical or health hazard as defined and classified in Chapter 70.105 RCW and Chapter 173-303 WAC, whether the materials are in usable or waste condition.

“Hearing Examiner” means the zoning and subdivision examiner as established by Chapter 2.27 WMC.

“Heavy equipment repair” means the repair and maintenance of self-powered, self-propelled or towed mechanical devices, and equipment and vehicles used for commercial purposes: 

(1) Including:

(a) Tandem axle trucks;

(b) Graders;

(c) Backhoes;

(d) Tractor trailers;

(e) Cranes; and

(f) Lifts; but

(2) Excluding:

(a) Automobiles;

(b) Recreational vehicles; and

(c) Boats and their trailers.

Height, Wireless Service Facilities. For personal wireless service facilities, “height” means the vertical distance measured from existing unaltered ground level to the highest point on the communication facility, including the antenna or antenna array.

“Helistop” means an area on a roof or on the ground used for the takeoff and landing of helicopters for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or cargo but not including fueling service, hangars, maintenance or overhaul facilities.

“Heritage tree” means a tree or stand of trees that is particularly desirable because it has valued, unique characteristics that set it apart from other similar trees. Valued, unique characteristics include uncommon genus, species, form, size, location, historic significance or other desirable feature(s).

“Hobby, toy, and game shop” means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of toys, games, hobby and craft kits, including uses located in NAICS Industry Nos.:

(1) 45112 – Hobby, toy and game shops; and 

(2) 453998 – Limited to collectors’ items (e.g., autograph, coin, card and stamp shops).

“Home industry” means a limited-scale sales, service or fabrication activity undertaken for financial gain, which occurs in a dwelling unit or residential accessory building, or in a barn or other resource accessory building and is subordinate to the primary use of the premises as a residence or farm.

“Home occupation” means a limited-scale service or fabrication activity undertaken for financial gain, which occurs in a dwelling unit and is subordinate to the primary use of the premises as a residence.

“Household pets” means small animals that are kept within a dwelling unit.

“Hydroelectric generation facility” means an establishment for the generation of electricity using water sources. (Ord. 634 § 23, 2016; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016; Ord. 589 § 3, 2016)


21.11.110 I.

“Impervious surface” means any nonvertical surface artificially covered or hardened so as to prevent or impede the percolation of water into the soil mantle including, but not limited to: roof tops, swimming pools, paved or graveled roads or parking areas.

“Improved public right-of-way” means public road rights-of-way that have been improved with at least two travel lanes and are maintained by either City of Woodinville or the State of Washington.

“Individual transportation and taxi” means an establishment engaged in furnishing individual or small group transportation by motor vehicle, including uses located in NAICS Industry Group and Industry Nos.:

(1) 48531 – Taxicabs; and

(2) 48532, 485991, 485999, 48711, 62191 – Local passenger transportation, not elsewhere classified.

“Indoor batting cage facility” means a participant sports or recreational baseball facility within an enclosed structure that is used for baseball training and entertainment purposes where spectators are incidental and not primary to the activities. The facility houses one or more batting cages installed in accordance with the licensed manufacturer’s recommendations and is designed and developed for uses limited to batting practice, pitching practice, and other related baseball skill development activities.

“Indoor go-cart racing facility” means a participant sports or training facility within a fully enclosed structure that is used for training and entertainment purposes where spectators are incidental and not primary to the activities. The facility is designed and developed to accommodate the safe operation of propane, gas, or electric-powered go-carts, with a maximum engine size of 10 horse power, within a defined track.

“Interim recycling facility” means a site or establishment engaged in collection or treatment of recyclable materials, which is not the final disposal site, and including:

(1) Drop boxes;

(2) Source-separated, organic waste processing facilities; and

(3) Collection, separation and shipment of glass, metal, paper or other recyclables to others who will reuse them or use them to manufacture new products. (Ord. 634 § 24, 2016; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.11.120 J. 

“Jail” means a facility operated by a governmental agency, designed, staffed and used for the incarceration of persons for the purposes of punishment, correction and rehabilitation following conviction of an offense. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.11.130 K.

“Kennel” means a place where adult dogs are temporarily boarded for compensation, whether or not for training. An adult dog is one of either sex, altered or unaltered, that has reached the age of six months. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.11.140 L. 

Land Use Decision. This term shall have the meaning provided in RCW 36.70C.020 and shall include, but not be limited to, a final decision by the City approving, granting, issuing or denying an application for any of the following: conditional use permits, home occupation and home industry permits, temporary use permits, special use permits, variances, and any other “project permit” as that term is defined in RCW 36.70B.020(4).

“Landfill” means a disposal site or part of a site at which refuse is deposited.

“Landing field” means a runway or landing area which is designed, used or intended to be used by private aircraft; including necessary taxiways, storage and tie-down areas.

“Landscape coverage” means the area of a site that is covered by live vegetative material and topsoils, or vegetated stormwater facilities, including, but not limited to, required perimeter landscaping, required interior landscaping, native vegetation protection areas, and optional areas of landscaping. Landscaping coverage does not include any permeable pavements.

“Landscaping” means live vegetative materials included in the development of a site. Said materials provided along the boundaries of a development site are referred to as perimeter landscaping. Landscaping provided on the remainder of the site is referred to as interior landscaping.

“Landslide” means episodic downslope movement of a mass including, but not limited to, soil, rock or snow.

“Landslide hazard areas” means those areas susceptible to landslides based on a combination of geologic, topographic, and hydrologic factors. They include areas susceptible because of any combination of bedrock, soil, slope (gradient), slope aspect, structure, hydrology, or other factors. Examples of these may include, but are not limited to, the following:

(1) Areas of historic failures, such as areas designated as quaternary slumps, earthflows, mudflows, lahars, or landslides on maps published by the U.S. Geologic Survey or Washington Department of Natural Resources, and/or other research meeting the best available science criteria in WAC 365-195-915;

(2) Areas with all three of the following characteristics:

(a) Slopes steeper than 15 percent;

(b) Hillsides intersecting geologic contacts with a relatively permeable sediment overlying a relatively impermeable sediment or bedrock; and

(c) Springs or ground water seepage;

(3) Areas that have shown movement during the Holocene epoch (from 11,700 years ago to the present) or that are underlain or covered by mass wastage debris from that epoch;

(4) Areas potentially unstable due to rapid stream incision, stream bank erosion, or undercutting by wave action;

(5) Areas located in a ravine, canyon or on an active alluvial fan, presently or potentially subject to inundation by debris flows or catastrophic flooding; and

(6) Any area with a slope of 40 percent or steeper and with a vertical relief of 10 or more feet except areas composed of consolidated rock. A slope is delineated by establishing its toe and top and measured by averaging the inclination over at least 10 feet of vertical relief.

“Level of service (LOS)” means a measure of traffic congestion along a roadway or at an intersection identified by a letter scale from A to F as calculated by a methodology endorsed by the Institute of Transportation Engineers.

“LID best management practices” means distributed stormwater management practices, integrated into a project design, that emphasize predisturbance hydrologic processes of infiltration, filtration, storage, evaporation and transpiration. LID BMPs include, but are not limited to, bioretention, permeable pavements, roof downspout controls, dispersion, soil quality and depth, and minimal excavation foundations.

“Light equipment” means hand-held tools and construction equipment, such as chain saws, wheelbarrows and post-hole diggers.

“Limit of disturbance, tree” means the boundary between the area of minimum protection around a tree and the allowable site disturbance as determined by a qualified tree professional.

“Line, property” means the line defining the extent of a lot in a given direction.

“Line, setback” means a line beyond which, toward a property line, no structure may extend or be placed except as permitted by the regulations of this title.

“Livestock” means grazing animals kept either in open fields or structures for training, boarding, home use, sales, or breeding and production, including but not limited to:

(1) Cattle;

(2) Riding and draft horses;

(3) Hogs excluding pigs under 120 pounds and standing 20 inches or less at the shoulder, which are kept as pets or small animals;

(4) Sheep; and

(5) Goats.

“Livestock, large” means cattle, horses, llamas, alpaca, and other livestock generally weighing over 500 pounds.

“Livestock, small” means hogs (excluding pigs under 120 pounds and standing 20 inches or less at the shoulder which are kept as household pets or small animals), sheep, goats, miniature horses, llamas, alpaca and other livestock generally weighing under 500 pounds.

“Loading space” means a space for the temporary parking of a vehicle while loading or unloading cargo or passengers.

“Log storage” means a facility for the open or enclosed storage of logs which may include repair facilities for equipment used on site or operations offices.

“Lot” means a specifically described parcel of land with lines defining the extent of the lot in a given direction which is intended to be conveyed in its entirety. A lot may be a lot of record, more than one lot of record or portion of a lot of record.

“Lot” means a physically separate and distinct parcel of property, which has been created pursuant to the City of Woodinville Subdivision Code or otherwise legally established.

“Lot line, interior” means lot lines that delineate property boundaries along those portions of the property which do not abut a street.

“Lot of record” means a lot created by a recorded subdivision or short subdivision or a lot that is otherwise legally created on March 31, 1993, the effective date of the Woodinville Municipal Code (WMC).

“Lot, panhandle” means an irregularly shaped lot, also known as a “flag lot” or “pipestem lot,” where the main body of the lot connects to a street through an access corridor.

“Lot width at street” means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured along a line:

(1) Parallel to the front lot line; or

(2) If the front lot line is a curve, parallel to the tangent thereof, and at a distance from the front lot line equal to the depth of the required front yard.

“Low impact development (LID)” means a stormwater and land use management strategy that strives to mimic predisturbance hydrologic processes of infiltration, filtration, storage, evaporation and transpiration by emphasizing conservation, use of on-site natural features, site planning, and distributed stormwater management practices that are integrated into a project design. (Ord. 634 § 25, 2016; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.11.150 M. 

“Manufactured home” means a single-family dwelling built according to the Department of Housing and Urban Development Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act, which is a national, preemptive building code. A manufactured home also includes plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems; is built on a permanent chassis; and can be transported in one or more sections with each section at least eight feet wide and 40 feet long when transported; or, when installed on the site, is 320 square feet or greater. The term “manufactured home” does not include a recreational vehicle.

“Marijuana” means all parts of the plant cannabis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. The term includes marijuana-infused products, but does not include:

(1) The mature stalks of the plant;

(2) Fiber produced from the mature stalks of the plant;

(3) Oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant;

(4) Any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake; or

(5) The sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination.

“Marina” means an establishment providing docking, moorage space and related activities limited to the provisioning or minor repair of pleasure boats and yachts; and personal services including, but not limited to:

(1) Showers;

(2) Toilets; and 

(3) Self-service laundries.

“Medium-speed electric vehicle” means a self-propelled, electrically powered four-wheeled motor vehicle, equipped with a roll cage or crush-proof body design, whose speed attainable in one mile is more than 25 miles per hour but not more than 35 miles per hour and otherwise meets or exceeds the federal regulations set forth in 49 CFR 571.500.

“Microwave” means electromagnetic waves with a frequency of 890 megahertz (mhz) or greater.

“Mitigation” means the use of any or all of the following actions listed in descending order of preference:

(1) Avoiding the impact by not taking a certain action;

(2) Minimizing the impact by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action by using appropriate technology or by taking affirmative steps to avoid or reduce the impact;

(3) Rectifying the impact by repairing, rehabilitating or restoring the affected area; or

(4) Reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation or maintenance operations during the life of the development proposal;

(5) Compensating for the impact by replacing, enhancing or providing substitute; and 

(6) Monitoring the impact and taking appropriate corrective measures.

“Mobile home” means a factory-built dwelling built prior to June 15, 1976, to standards other than the Department of Housing and Urban Development Code, and acceptable under applicable State codes in effect at the time of construction or introduction of the home into the State. Mobile homes have not been built since the introduction of the HUD Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act. For the purposes of this chapter, references to manufactured homes include mobile homes.

“Mobile home park” means a development with two or more improved pads or spaces designed to accommodate mobile homes.

“Mobile vendor” means an itinerant business or person who engages in selling goods, services, or food from a temporary structure, vehicle, or other conveyance.

“Monitoring” means evaluating the impacts of development proposals on natural or manmade systems and assessing the performance of required mitigation through the collection and analysis of data for the purpose of understanding and documenting changes in the natural or manmade systems, functions and features including, but not limited to, gathering baseline data.

“Monuments, tombstones, and gravestones sales” means the retail sale of custom stonework products including uses located in NAICS Industry No. 327991 – Monuments, finished to custom order, tombstones and gravestones finished.

“Motor vehicle and bicycle manufacturing” means fabricating or assembling complete passenger automobiles, trucks, commercial cars and buses, motorcycles, and bicycles, including uses located in NAICS Industry Group Nos.:

(1) 3362 – Motor vehicles and motor vehicle equipment; and 

(2) 336991 – Motorcycles, bicycles, and parts.

“Motor vehicle, boat and mobile home dealer” means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of new and/or used automobiles, motor homes, motorcycles, trailers, boats or mobile homes, including uses located in NAICS Major Group and Industry Group Nos.:

(1) 4411 – Automotive dealers and gasoline service stations except:

(a) 4413 – Auto and home supply stores;

(b) 4471 – Gasoline service stations; and 

(2) Aircraft dealers found in 441229: 

(a) 45393 – Mobile home dealers; and

(b) Yacht brokers found in 441222.

“Mount” means any mounting device or bracket which is used to attach an antenna or antenna array to an antenna support structure or alternative antenna support structure.

“Municipal water production” means the collection and processing of surface water through means of dams or other methods of impoundment for municipal water systems. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.11.160 N.

“Native growth protection area (NGPA)” means an area where native vegetation is preserved for the purpose of preventing harm to property and the environment, including, but not limited to, controlling surface water runoff and erosion, maintaining slope stability, buffering and protecting plants and animal habitat.

“Native vegetation” means vegetation comprised of plant species, other than noxious weeds, which are indigenous to the coastal region of the Pacific Northwest and which reasonably could have been expected to naturally occur on the site.

“Naturalized species” means nonnative species of vegetation that are adaptable to the climatic conditions of the coastal region of the Pacific Northwest.

“Neighborhood electric vehicle” means a self-propelled, electrically powered four-wheeled motor vehicle whose speed attainable in one mile is more than 20 miles per hour and not more than 25 miles per hour and conforms to federal regulations under 49 CFR 571.500.

“Nonconformance” means any use, improvement or structure established in conformance with City of Woodinville or County rules and regulations in effect at the time of establishment that no longer conforms to the range of uses, improvements, critical area and critical area buffer requirements permitted in the site’s current zone or to the current development standards of the code due to changes in the code or its application to the subject property.

“Nonhydroelectric generation facility” means an establishment for the generation of electricity by nuclear reaction, burning fossil fuels, or other electricity generation methods.

“Noxious weed” means any plant which is highly destructive, competitive or difficult to control by cultural or chemical practices, limited to those plants on the State noxious weed list contained in Chapter 16-750 WAC.

“Nuisance tree” means a tree that causes physical damage to private or public structures; has been damaged by past maintenance practices that cannot be corrected; is chronically diseased or infested; overplanted or overcrowded; part of a dense grove creating safety concerns or excessively obstructing sunlight. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016; Ord. 589 § 4, 2016)


21.11.170 O.

“Open space” means open land for conservation of natural features, provision of visual amenity and for recreational use. It is land which is retained in or restored to a condition where nature predominates, and is substantially free of structures, impervious surface, and other land altering activities of man’s built environment.

“Open-work fence” means a fence in which the solid portions are evenly distributed and constitute no more than 50 percent of the total surface area.

“Ordinary high water mark” means the mark found by examining the bed and banks of a stream or lake and ascertaining where the presence and action of waters are so common and long maintained in ordinary years as to mark upon the soil a vegetative character distinct from that of the abutting upland. In any area where the ordinary high water mark cannot be found, the line of mean high water shall substitute. In any area where neither can be found, the top of the channel bank shall substitute. In braided channels and alluvial fans, the ordinary high water mark or line of mean high water shall be measured so as to include the entire stream feature.

“Outdoor performance center” means establishment for the performing arts with open-air seating for audiences. Such establishments may include related services such as food and beverage sales and other concessions. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.11.180 P. 

“Park” means a site designed or developed for recreational use by the public including, but not limited to:

(1) Indoor facilities, such as:

(a) Gymnasiums;

(b) Swimming pools; or

(c) Activity centers; and 

(2) Outdoor facilities, such as: 

(a) Playfields;

(b) Fishing areas; or 

(c) Picnic and related outdoor activity areas; and

(3) Areas and trails for: 

(a) Hikers;

(b) Equestrians;

(c) Bicyclists; or 

(d) Off-road recreational vehicle users.

“Parking lot aisle” means that portion of the off-street parking area used exclusively for the maneuvering and circulation of motor vehicles and in which parking is prohibited.

“Parking lot unit depth” means the linear distance within which one parking aisle is flanked by accessible rows of parking stalls as measured perpendicular to the parking aisle.

“Parking space” means an area accessible to vehicles, improved, maintained and used for the sole purpose of parking a motor vehicle.

“Parking space angle” means the angle measured from a reference line, generally the property line or center line of an aisle, at which motor vehicles are to be parked.

“Parking, structured” means any underground or above ground parking that is contained within a structure that also contains other levels of parking, and/or residential, and/or commercial uses.

“Parks and Recreation Director” means the manager of the City of Woodinville’s Parks and Recreation Department, or his or her designee.

“Party of record (POR)” means a person who has submitted written comments, testified, asked to be notified or is the sponsor of a petition entered as part of the official City record on a specific development proposal.

“Peak hour” means the hour during the morning or afternoon when the most critical level of service occurs for a particular roadway or intersection.

“Permanent school facilities” means facilities of a school district with a fixed foundation which are not relocatable facilities.

“Permeable pavement” means pervious concrete, porous asphalt, permeable pavers or other forms of pervious or porous paving material intended to allow passage of water through the pavement section. It often includes an aggregate base that provides structural support and acts as a stormwater reservoir.

“Personal medical supply store” means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of eyeglasses, contact lenses, hearing aids, and artificial limbs, including uses located in NAICS Industry Nos.: 

(1) 44613 – Optical goods stores; and 

(2) 44619 – Hearing aids and orthopedic and artificial limb stores.

“Pet shop” means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of pets, small animals, pet supplies, or grooming of pets, including uses located in NAICS Industry No. 45391 – Pet shops.

“Photographic and electronic shop” means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of cameras and photographic supplies, and a variety of household electronic equipment, including uses located in NAICS Industry Nos.: 

(1) 44313 – Camera and photographic supply stores;

(2) 453998 – Limited to binoculars and telescopes;

(3) 443112 – Radio, television, and consumer electronics stores; and

(4) 44312 – Computer and computer software stores.

“Planning Department” means the City of Woodinville Department of Planning and Community Development.

“Planning Director” means the manager of the City of Woodinville’s Development Services Department or his or her designee.

“Plant associations of infrequent occurrence” means one or more plant species of a landform type which does not often occur in the City of Woodinville because of the rarity of the habitat and/or the species involved or for other botanical or environmental reasons.

“Plat” means a map or representation of a subdivision, showing thereon the division of a tract or parcel of land into lots, blocks, streets and alleys or other divisions and dedications.

“Preliminary plat” means a neat and approximate drawing of a proposed subdivision showing the general layout of streets and alleys, lots, blocks, and other elements of a subdivision consistent with the requirements of the WMC. The preliminary plat shall be the basis for the approval or disapproval of the general layout of a subdivision.

“Primary association” means use of a habitat area by a species for breeding, nesting, rearing young, roosting, feeding, or foraging on a regular basis.

“Priority habitat” means habitat type or elements with unique or significant value to one or more species as classified by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife. A priority habitat may consist of a unique vegetation type of dominant plant species, a described successional stage, or a specific structural element.

“Private” means solely or primarily for the use of residents or occupants of the premises; e.g., a noncommercial garage used solely by residents or their guests is a private garage.

“Private stormwater management facility” means a surface water control structure installed by a project proponent to retain, detain or otherwise limit runoff from an individual or group of developed sites specifically served by such structure.

“Professional office” means an office used as a place of business by licensed professionals, or persons in other generally recognized professions, which use training or knowledge of a technical, scientific or other academic discipline as opposed to manual skills, and which does not involve outside storage or fabrication, or on-site sale or transfer of commodities; including the following NAICS Major Group and Industry Nos.:

(1) 5242 – Insurance agents, brokers and service;

(2) 53121 – Real estate agents and managers;

(3) 541213 – Income tax return preparation services;

(4) 54111 – Legal services;

(5) 54133 – Engineering, architectural and surveying services;

(6) 54121 – Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping services;

(7) 541611 – Administrative management and general management consulting services; and

(8) 54182 – Public relations services.

“Public agency” means any agency, political subdivision or unit of local government of this State including, but not limited to, municipal corporations, special purpose districts and local service districts, any agency of the State of Washington, the United States or any State thereof or any Indian tribe recognized as such by the Federal government.

“Public agency animal control facility” means a facility for the impoundment and disposal of stray or abandoned small animals.

“Public agency archive” means facilities for the enclosed storage of public agency documents or related materials, excluding storage of vehicles, equipment, or similar materials.

“Public agency or utility office” means an office for the administration of any governmental activity or program, with no outdoor storage and including, but not limited to, uses located in NAICS Major Group, Industry Group and Industry Nos.:

(1) 9211 – Executive, legislative, and general government, except finance;

(2) 92113 – Public finance, taxation, and monetary policy;

(3) 9231 – Administration of human resource programs; 

(4) 9241 – Administration of environmental quality and housing program;

(5) 92611 – Administration of economic programs; 

(6) 92812 – International affairs;

(7) 92213 – Legal counsel and prosecution; and 

(8) 92219 – Public order and safety.

“Public agency or utility yard” means a facility for open or enclosed storage, repair, and maintenance of vehicles, equipment, or related materials, excluding document storage.

“Public agency training facility” means an establishment or school for training State and local law enforcement, fire safety, National Guard or transit personnel and facilities including but not limited to:

(1) Dining and overnight accommodations;

(2) Classrooms;

(3) Shooting ranges;

(4) Auto test tracks; and

(5) Fire suppression simulations.

“Public Works Director” means the manager of the City of Woodinville’s Public Works Department, or his or her designee. (Ord. 634 § 26, 2016; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.11.190 Q.

“Qualified tree professional” means an individual with relevant education and training in arboriculture or urban forestry. The individual must be an arborist certified by the International Society of Arboriculture or a registered consulting arborist from the American Society of Consulting Arborists. A qualified tree professional must be certified at tree risk assessments and prescribe appropriate measures necessary for the preservation of trees during land development. For Forest Management Plans, the qualified tree professional must have the ability to assess wooded sites and prescribe measures for forest health and safety. A qualified tree professional that makes determinations on hazard or nuisance trees is required to have certification as a tree risk assessor. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.11.200 R.

“Rapid charging stations” means an industrial grade outlet that allows for faster charging of electrical vehicle batteries through higher power levels and that meets or exceeds any standard, codes, or regulations set forth by Chapter 19.28 RCW and consistent with rules adopted under RCW 19.27.540.

“Recreational vehicle (RV)” means a vehicle designed primarily for recreational camping, travel or seasonal use which has its own motive power or is mounted on or towed by another vehicle, including but not limited to:

(1) Travel trailer;

(2) Folding camping trailer;

(3) Park trailer;

(4) Truck camper;

(5) Park trailer;

(6) Motor home; and

(7) Multi-use vehicle.

“Recreational vehicle parks” means the use of land upon which two or more recreational vehicle sites, including hook-up facilities, are located for occupancy by the general public of recreational vehicles as temporary living quarters for recreation or vacation purposes.

“Recyclable material” means a nontoxic, recoverable substance that can be reprocessed for the manufacture of new products.

“Regional utility corridor” means a right-of-way tract or easement which contains transmission lines or pipelines for utility companies, excluding distribution lines contained within street rights-of-way or lines serving individual lots or developments.

“Relocatable facility, school” means any factory-built structure, transportable in one or more sections, that is designed to be used as an education space and is needed to prevent the overbuilding of school facilities, to meet the needs of service areas within a district or to cover the gap between the time that families move into new residential developments and the date that construction is completed on permanent school facilities.

“Relocatable facilities cost per student” means the estimated cost of purchasing and siting a relocatable facility in a school district for the grade span of school to be provided, as a function of the district’s design standard per grade span and taking into account the requirements of students with special needs.

“Restoration, critical area” means returning a stream, wetland, other critical area or any associated buffer to a state in which its stability and functions approach its unaltered state as closely as possible.

“Retail, comparison” means for the sale of comparison goods and services and is centrally located in the community or region.

“Retail, convenience” means provides for daily living goods, is easy to access and use and is close to residential neighborhoods.

“Retention/detention facility” means a type of drainage facility designed either to hold water for a considerable length of time and then to release it by evaporation, plant transpiration and/or infiltration into the ground or to hold run-off for a short period of time and then to release it to the surface and stormwater management system.

“Right-of-way” means the land owned by a public agency and used or planned to be used as a public thoroughfare. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.11.210 S.

“Salmonid” means a species of fish of the Salmonidae family, including salmon, trout, char, whitefishes, and graylings. The species of the Salmonidae family found within the City of Woodinville include, but are not limited to, the following:

(1) Oncorhynchus clarkii – Cutthroat trout.

(2) Oncorhynchus gorbuscha – Pink salmon.

(3) Oncorhynchus keta – Keta or chum salmon.

(4) Oncorhynchus kisutch – Coho salmon.

(5) Oncorhynchus nerka – Sockeye and kokanee salmon.

(6) Oncorhynchus tshawytscha – Chinook salmon.

(7) Oncorhynchus mykiss – Rainbow and steelhead trout.

(8) Salvelinus confluentus – Bull trout and Dolly Varden.

“School bus base” means an establishment for the storage, dispatch, repair and maintenance of coaches and other vehicles of a school transit system.

“School district” means any school district whose boundaries include an area of the City.

“School district support facility” means uses (excluding schools and bus bases) that are required for the operation of a school district. This term includes school district administrative offices, centralized kitchens, and maintenance or storage facilities.

“Schools, elementary, and middle/junior high” means institutions of learning offering instruction in the several branches of learning and study required by the Education Code of the State of Washington in grades kindergarten through nine, including associated meeting rooms, auditoriums and athletic facilities.

“Schools, preschool” means establishments providing exclusively educational programs for prekindergarten or preschool children (ages two through five), but excluding daycare as defined by WMC 21.11.060.

“Schools, secondary or high school” means institutions of learning offering instruction in the several branches of learning and study required by the Education Code of the State of Washington in grades nine through 12, including associated meeting rooms, auditoriums and athletic facilities.

“Secondhand/used merchandise shop” means an establishment engaged in retailing used merchandise and secondhand goods excluding motor vehicles, such as automobiles, recreational vehicles (RVs), motorcycles, and boats; motor vehicle parts; tires; and mobile homes.

“Secure community transition facilities” means smaller housing units required by the Federal court to provide a community-based treatment setting for SCC sex offenders who have progressed successfully through multiple levels of treatment over several years.

“Seismic hazard areas” means those areas subject to severe risk of damage as a result of earthquake-induced ground shaking, slope failure, settlement, surface rupture, or soil liquefaction.

“Self-service storage facility” means an establishment containing separate storage spaces that are leased or rented as individual units.

“Setback” means the minimum required distance between a structure and a lot line, access easement boundary, sensitive buffer or other buffer line that is required to remain free of structures.

Setback, Interior. “Interior setback” means the setback extending from the interior lot line to a line parallel to and measured perpendicularly from the interior lot lines at the depth prescribed for each zone.

Setback, Street. “Street setback” means the setback required between a structure and a street, measured pursuant to WMC 21.22.050 at the depth prescribed for each zone.

“Sewer, public” means a sewage disposal system directly controlled by public authority.

Sexually Oriented Business. See WMC 21.25.030 for the definition of sexually oriented business. It shall not include any play, opera, musical or other dramatic works that are not obscene; classes, seminars or lectures held for serious, scientific or educational purposes that are not obscene; or exhibitors, performances, expressions or dances that are not obscene.

“Shooting range” means a facility designed to provide a confined space for safe target practice with firearms, archery equipment, or other weapons.

“Short plat” means the map or representation of a short subdivision.

“Short subdivision” means the division or redivision of land, creating four or fewer lots.

“Shrub” means a self-supporting woody perennial plant characterized by several stems, with a potential at maturity for a diameter-at-breast-height of less than two inches and a height less than 10 feet.

“Sign” means any device, structure, fixture, or placard that is visible from a public right-of-way or surrounding properties and uses graphics, symbols, logos, or written copy for the purpose of advertising or identifying any establishment, product, goods, service or event.

“Sign, animated” means any sign that includes action or motion or the optical illusion of action or motion or color changes of all or any part of the sign.

“Sign, building” means any sign that is painted on, or attached directly to or supported by, an exterior building wall, fence, or gate; including facade signs, awning signs, canopy signs, and marquees, but excluding window signs. Signs that are located at the entrance to an outdoor eating and drinking area or outdoor garden merchandise area shall be treated as a building sign.

“Sign, changing message center” means an electrically controlled sign that contains messages for date, time, and temperature only which changes at intervals of one minute or less.

“Sign, community bulletin board” means a permanent sign used to notify the public of community events, public services, or jobs, and which contains no commercial advertising.

“Sign, directional” means a sign designed to guide or direct pedestrian or vehicular traffic to an area, place or convenience, and may include incidental graphics such as trade names and trademarks.

“Sign frame” means an enclosing structure or case around or supporting a sign.

“Sign, freestanding” means a sign standing directly upon the ground or having one or more supports standing directly upon the ground, and being detached from any building or similar structure.

“Sign, fuel price” means a sign utilized to advertise the price of gasoline and/or diesel fuel.

“Sign, human held” means a sign held, worn, or waved by humans.

“Sign, incidental” means a sign, emblem or decal designed to inform the public of goods, facilities, or services available on the premises, and may include, but not be limited to, signs designating:

(1) Restrooms;

(2) Hours of operation;

(3) Acceptable credit cards;

(4) Property ownership or management;

(5) Phone booths;

(6) Recycling containers;

(7) ATM machines; and

(8) Employment signs.

“Sign, indirectly illuminated” means a sign that is illuminated entirely from an external artificial source.

“Sign, monument” means a freestanding sign that is above ground level and is anchored to the ground by a solid base, with no open space between the sign and the ground.

“Sign mounting” means a support, backing, or setting for a sign.

“Sign, nonconforming” means any existing permanent, legally erected, on-premises sign which does not comply with the current requirements of Chapter 21.35 WMC.

“Sign, off-premises directional” means a sign which contains no advertising of a commercial nature which is used to direct pedestrian or vehicular traffic circulation to a facility, service or business located on other premises within 660 feet of the sign.

“Sign, on-premises” means a sign which displays a message which is incidental to and directly associated with the use of the property on which it is located.

“Sign, permanent residential development identification” means a permanent, freestanding sign identifying the residential development upon which the sign is located.

“Sign, political” means a sign which solely and exclusively advertises a candidate, an elective or appointive office, a political party, or promotes a position on a public, social or ballot issue.

“Sign, portable” means a sign which is capable of being moved and is not permanently affixed to the ground, a structure or building, such as an A-frame sign.

“Sign, projecting” means any sign, other than a flat wall sign, which is attached to and projects vertically more than one foot from the wall of a building or other structure.

“Sign, reader board” means a sign face consisting of tracks to hold readily changeable letters, allowing frequent changes of copy manually.

“Sign, recommended face background colors” means colors recommended by the City for use on the sign face background of freestanding signs and building signs. Sign, recommended face background colors, are defined using the Pantone color system as a reference, as follows:

	Red	Pantone Nos. 181, 188, 194, 202, 208, 216, 222, 229, 235, 242, 262, 478, 483, 506, 518 or darker or duller (more black or green added to the color).

	Yellow/ Brown	Pantone Nos. 133, 140, 147, 154, 161, 168, 174, 464, 469, 478, 491, 499 or darker or duller (more black or violet added to the color).

	Blue	Pantone Nos. 269, 276, 281, 289, 296, 302, 309, 533, 540, 548 or darker or duller (more black or orange added to the color).

	Green	Pantone Nos. 316, 322, 329, 336, 343, 554, 562, 567, 574 or darker or duller (more black or red added to the color).

	Gray	Pantone Nos. 404, 409, 416, 425, 431, 437, 444, 450 or darker or duller (more black added to the color).

“Sign, required frame colors” means colors required by the City for use on the frames of freestanding signs. Required frame colors include white and cream or are defined using the Pantone color system as a reference, as follows:

	Red	Pantone Nos. 181, 188, 194, 202, 208, 216, 222, 229, 235, 242, 262, 478, 483, 506, 518 or darker or duller (more black or green added to the color).

	Yellow/ Brown	Pantone Nos. 133, 140, 147, 154, 161, 168, 174, 464, 469, 478, 491, 499 or darker or duller (more black or violet added to the color).

	Blue	Pantone Nos. 269, 276, 281, 289, 296, 302, 309, 533, 540, 548 or darker or duller (more black or orange added to the color).

	Green	Pantone Nos. 316, 322, 329, 336, 343, 554, 562, 567, 574 or darker or duller (more black or red added to the color).

	Gray	Pantone Nos. 404, 409, 416, 425, 431, 437, 444, 450 or darker or duller (more black added to the color).

“Sign, wayfinding” means an off-premises sign that is part of a City-sponsored and coordinated program for the purpose of facilitating vehicular tourist transit to local tourist destinations as designated and recognized by the City’s Wayfinding Sign Program.

“Sign, window” means any sign located inside or on, affixed to, or located within three feet of a window of a building, whether temporary or permanent, lighted or unlighted, which may be viewed from the exterior of the building. Merchandise located within three feet of a window is not included in the definition unless the merchandise blocks more than one third of the window.

“Significant tree” means an existing healthy tree which has a minimum diameter-at-breast-height of six inches, as measured according to the most current published edition of the International Society of Arboriculture’s “Guide for Plant Appraisal.”

“Signs or displays of limited duration” means any sign, banner, pennant, or advertising display intended to be displayed for a limited time period. Easily removed signs attached to windows are considered temporary signs. Signs of limited duration can be manually removed without the use of tools or equipment.

“Site cost per student” means the estimated cost of a site in the district for the grade span of school to be provided, as a function of the district’s design standard per grade span and taking into account the requirements of students with special needs.

“Snag or wildlife tree” means the remaining trunk of a tree that is intentionally reduced in height and intended to provide habitat value. 

“Soil recycling/incineration facility” means an establishment engaged in the collection, storage and treatment of contaminated soils to remove and reuse organic contaminants.

“Special event” means any event meeting the definition of special event found in WMC 8.12.020(1). Special events may include, but are not limited to: fun runs, races on foot, bicycle, or rollerskates, other athletic events, fundraising events, auctions, bike-a-thons, parades, political demonstrations, carnivals, shows or exhibitions, film-making, circuses, block parties and fairs.

“Special use permit” means a permit granted by the City to locate an essential public facility or a regional land use at a particular location, subject to conditions placed on the proposed use to ensure compatibility with adjacent land uses.

“Specialized instruction school” means establishments engaged in providing specialized instruction in a designated field of study, rather than a full range of courses in unrelated areas, including, but not limited to: 

(1) Art;

(2) Dance; 

(3) Music; 

(4) Cooking; 

(5) Driving; and

(6) Pet obedience training.

Species, Endangered. “Endangered species” means any fish or wildlife species that is threatened with extinction throughout all or a significant portion of its range and is listed by the State or Federal government as an endangered species.

“Species of local importance” means those species of local concern due to their population status or their sensitivity to habitat manipulation.

Species, Threatened. “Threatened species” means any fish or wildlife species that is likely to become an endangered species within the foreseeable future throughout a significant portion of its range without cooperative management or removal of threats, and is listed by the State or Federal government as a threatened species.

“Specified sexual activities” means human genitalia in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; or erotic fondling, touching or display of human genitalia, pubic region, buttock, or female breast.

“Specimen tree” means a viable tree that is considered in very good to excellent health and free of major defects, as determined by the City’s Tree Official.

“Sporting goods store” means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of sporting goods and equipment, including uses located in NAICS Industry Nos.: 

(1) 451110 – Sporting goods stores and bicycle shops; and 

(2) 453998 – Limited to trophy shops.

“Sports club” means an establishment engaged in operating physical fitness facilities and sports and recreation clubs, including uses located in NAICS Industry Nos.:

(1) 71394 – Physical fitness facilities; and 

(2) 7139 – Membership sports and recreation clubs.

“Stable” means a structure or facility in which horses or other livestock are kept for:

(1) Boarding;

(2) Training;

(3) Riding lessons;

(4) Breeding;

(5) Rental; or

(6) Personal use.

“Standard of service, school” means the standard adopted by each school district which identifies the program year, the class size by grade span and taking into account the requirements of students with special needs, the number of classrooms, the types of facilities the district believes will best serve its student population, and other factors as identified by the school district. The district’s standard of service shall not be adjusted for any portion of the classrooms housed in relocatable facilities which are used as transitional facilities or for any specialized facilities housed in relocatable facilities. Except as otherwise defined by the school board pursuant to a board resolution, transitional facilities shall mean those facilities that are used to cover the time required for the construction of permanent facilities; provided, that the “necessary financial commitments” as defined in Chapter 21.81 WMC are in place to complete the permanent facilities called for in the capital plan.

“Stream functions” means natural processes performed by streams including functions which are important in facilitating food chain production, providing habitat for nesting, rearing and resting sites for aquatic, terrestrial and avian species, maintaining the availability and quality of water, such as purifying water, acting as recharge and discharge areas for groundwater aquifers, moderating surface and stormwater flows and maintaining the free flowing conveyance of water, sediments and other organic matter.

“Streams” means those areas in the City of Woodinville where surface waters produce a defined channel or bed, not including irrigation ditches, canals, storm or surface water run-off devices or other entirely artificial watercourses, unless they are used by salmonids or are used to convey streams naturally occurring prior to construction in such watercourses. For the purpose of this definition, a defined channel or bed is an area which demonstrates clear evidence of the passage of water and includes, but is not limited to, bedrock channels, gravel beds, sand and silt beds and defined-channel swales. The channel or bed need not contain water year-round.

“Street” means a public or recorded private thoroughfare providing the main pedestrian and vehicular access through neighborhoods and communities and to abutting property.

“Street banner” means a temporary sign without mechanical or electrical devices made of cloth or similar nonrigid materials suspended with rope or cable over the public street right-of-way.

“Street frontage” means any portion of a lot or combination of lots which directly abut a public right-of-way.

“Street/utility pole” means telephone, utility/electric, cable television, or street light poles located within a public right-of-way.

“Structure” means anything permanently constructed in or on the ground, or over the water; including rockeries and retaining walls over four feet and signs, but excluding fences less than six feet in height and decks less than 18 inches above grade; or paved areas, and excluding structural or nonstructural fill.

“Student factor” means the number derived by a school district to describe how many students of each grade span are expected to be generated by a dwelling unit. Student factors shall be based on district records of average actual student generated rates for new developments constructed over a period of not more than five years prior to the date of the fee calculation; if such information is not available in the district, data from adjacent districts, districts with similar demographics, or County-wide averages must be used. Student factors must be separately determined for single-family and multifamily dwelling units, and for grade spans.

“Subdivision” means the division of land, creating five or more lots.

“Submerged land” means any land at or below the ordinary high water mark.

“Substantial improvement” means any maintenance, repair, structural modification, addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either before the maintenance, repair, modification or addition is started or before the damage occurred, if the structure has been damaged and is being restored. (Ord. 622 § 3, 2016; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016; Ord. 589 § 5, 2016)


21.11.220 T.

“Tasting room” means an establishment that allows customers to taste samples of wine, beer or spirits and has a State of Washington issued liquor license as a tasting room. A tasting room may also include wine, beer, or spirits and related items sales, marketing events, special events, entertainment, and/or food service. Establishments that are classified by the State Liquor Board as bars, nightclubs, taverns or restaurants are not included in this classification.

“Temporary shelter” means a dormitory set up by an institution or nonprofit agency for the protection of homeless people on a temporary basis.

“Temporary use permit” means permit to allow a use of limited duration and/or frequency, or to allow multiple related events over a specified period.

“Tightline to a sewer” means a sewer trunk line designed and intended specifically to serve only a particular facility or place, and whose pipe diameter should be sized appropriately to ensure service only to that facility or place. It may occur outside the local service area for sewers, but does not amend the local service area.

“Traffic impact, direct” means any increase in vehicle traffic generated by a proposed development which equals or exceeds 10 peak hour, peak direction vehicle trips on any roadway or intersection.

“Trails” means manmade pathways designed and intended for use by pedestrians, bicyclists, equestrians, and/or recreational users.

“Transfer station” means a staffed collection and transportation facility used by private individuals and route collection vehicles to deposit solid waste collected off site into larger transfer vehicles for transport to permanent disposal sites, and may also include recycling facilities involving collection or processing for shipment.

“Transit base” means an establishment for the storage, dispatch, repair and maintenance of coaches, light rail trains, and other vehicles of a public transit system.

“Transit-oriented housing development” means a public or public/private land use development which:

(1) Directly supports mass transit use through an on-site public park-and-ride at an existing public park-and-ride facility owned, leased, and/or operated by a public transit service provider;

(2) Facilitates pedestrian and bicycle access to the site through direct connections to nonmotorized transportation networks and surrounding pedestrian facilities;

(3) Contains both ownership and rental residential dwellings;

(4) Contains commercial uses; and

(5) Includes a portion of its dwelling units as below market rate housing.

“Transit park-and-ride lot” means vehicle parking specifically for the purpose of access to a public transit system.

“Transmission equipment, electronic” means equipment, such as antennas and satellites, or point-to-point microwave dishes, that transmits or receives radio signals.

“Transmission structure” means a structure intended to support transmission equipment or function as an antenna for AM radio or an earth station satellite dish antenna. The term does not include brackets, platforms, or other apparatus which mount transmission equipment onto transmission structures, buildings or other structures.

“Tree” means a self-supporting woody perennial plant characterized by one main trunk, or for certain species, multiple trunks, with a potential at maturity for a diameter-at-breast-height of at least two inches and a height of at least 10 feet.

“Tree grove” means a cluster or stand of at least five trees of any size or species, whose driplines touch. 

“Tree removal” means the removal of a tree, through either direct or indirect actions, including but not limited to: (1) clearing, damaging or poisoning resulting in an unhealthy or dead tree; (2) removal of at least half of the live crown; or (3) damage to roots or trunk that is likely to destroy the tree’s structural integrity. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016; Ord. 589 § 6, 2016)


21.11.230 U.

“Ultimate roadway section” means a designation by the City of Woodinville that the maximum roadway or intersection capacity has been reached and further right-of-way acquisition and/or improvements are not feasible to increase peak hour vehicle capacity.

“Understory” means the layer formed by grasses, shrubs, and small trees under the canopy of larger trees and plants.

“Use” means activity or function carried out on an area of land, or in a building or structure located thereon. Any use comprising the sole or main use on the site is considered the primary use of the site. Any use subordinate or incidental to the primary use on a site is considered an accessory use.

Use, Reasonable. “Reasonable use” means the minimum use to which a property owner is entitled under applicable State and Federal constitutional provisions in order to avoid a taking and/or violation of substantive due process. “Reasonable use” shall be liberally construed to protect the constitutional property rights of the applicant. For example, the minimum reasonable use of a residential lot which meets or exceeds minimum bulk requirements is usually use for one single-family residential structure. Determination of “reasonable use” shall not include consideration of factors personal to the owner such as a desire to make a more profitable use of the site.

“Utility facility” means a facility for the distribution or transmission of services to an area, requiring location in the area to be served, including, but not limited to:

(1) Telephone exchanges;

(2) Water pumping or treatment stations;

(3) Electrical switching substations;

(4) Water storage reservoirs or tanks;

(5) Municipal ground water well-fields;

(6) Regional stormwater management facilities;

(7) Natural gas gate stations and limiting stations;

(8) Propane, compressed natural gas and liquified natural gas storage tanks serving multiple lots or uses from which fuel is distributed directly to individual users; and

(9) Sewer lift stations. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.11.240 V.

“Variance” means an adjustment in the application of standards of a zoning code to a particular property.

“Vegetation” means any and all plant life growing at, below or above the soil surface.

“Veterinary clinic” means a licensed clinic, hospital, or doctor’s office providing veterinary care to pets, small animals, and livestock.

“Viable tree” means a significant tree that a qualified tree professional has determined to be in good health, not classified as a hazard or nuisance tree, with a low risk of failure due to structural defects, and is a species suitable for its location.

“Vocational school” means establishments offering training in a skill or trade to be pursued as a career, including uses located in NAICS Industry Group Nos.:

(1) 61151 – Apprenticeship training; and

(2) 61121 – Junior colleges. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016; Ord. 589 § 7, 2016)


21.11.250 W.

“Warehousing and wholesale trade” means establishments involved in the storage and/or sale of bulk goods for resale or assembly, excluding establishments offering the sale of bulk goods to the general public which is classified as a retail use in WMC 21.21.080. These establishments shall include NAICS Major Group Nos. 421, 444, 422, 454 and NAICS Industry Group Nos. 4931 and 48848.

“Wastewater treatment facility” means a plant for collection, decontamination and disposal of sewage, including residential, commercial, industrial and agricultural liquid wastes, and including any physical improvement within the scope of the definition of “water pollution control facility” set forth in WAC 173-90-015(4) as amended.

“Wet meadows, grazed” means palustrine emergent wetlands typically having up to six inches of standing water during the wet season and dominated under normal conditions by meadow emergents such as reed canary grass, spike rushes, bulrushes, sedges and rushes. During the growing season, the soil is often saturated but not covered with water. These meadows frequently have been or are being used for livestock activities.

“Wetland” means area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. Wetlands do not include those artificial wetlands intentionally created from nonwetland sites, including, but not limited to, irrigation and drainage ditches, grass-lined swales, canals, detention facilities, wastewater treatment facilities, farm ponds, and landscape amenities, or those wetlands created after July 1, 1990, that were unintentionally created as a result of the construction of a road, street, or highway. Wetlands may include those artificial wetlands intentionally created from nonwetland areas created to mitigate conversion of wetlands.

“Wetland classes” means descriptive classes of the wetlands taxonomic classification system of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (Cowardin et al., 1979).

“Wildlife shelter” means a facility for the temporary housing of sick or wounded or displaced wildlife.

“Windfirm” means a condition of a tree in which it can withstand moderate storm winds.

“Wireless service facilities” means any unstaffed facility for the transmission and/or reception of wireless services as defined by Section 704(a)(7)(c)(i) of the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, including cellular, PCS, enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR), specialized mobile radio (SMR), paging, 800 MHz and other similar technologies covered by the aforementioned section.

“Wireless service facility, temporary” means a nonpermanent facility installed on a short-term basis, for the purpose of evaluating the technical feasibility of a particular site for placement of a wireless service facility or for providing emergency communications during a natural disaster or other emergency. Examples of temporary wireless service facilities include, but are not limited to, placement of an antenna upon a fully extended bucket truck, crane, or other device capable of reaching the height necessary to evaluate the site for placement of a wireless service facility.

“Work release facility” means a facility which allows the opportunity for convicted persons to be employed outside of the facility, but requires confinement within the facility when not in the place of employment. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.11.260 Y.

“Yard waste processing facility” means a site where yard and garden wastes, including wood and land clearing debris, are processed into new products, which include but are not limited to soil amendments and wood chips.

“Youth hostel” means a registered indoor facility providing board and other necessities for the temporary housing of travelers. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.11.270 Z.

“Zone” means a specifically designated area or district within which uniform regulations and requirements govern the use, placement, spacing and size of land and buildings. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


Chapter 21.12 ENFORCEMENT

Sections:

21.12.010    Scope of unlawful activity.

21.12.020    Authority and application.

21.12.030    Violations and enforcement.

21.12.040    Permit modification, suspension, or revocation.

21.12.050    Repealed.


21.12.010 Scope of unlawful activity. 

(1) This title shall be enforced for the benefit of the health, safety, and welfare of the general public, and not for the benefit of any particular person or class of persons.

(2) It shall be a violation for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, repair, move, remove, convert, demolish, use, occupy, or maintain any structure or use of land, or any portion, contrary to or inconsistent with the provisions of this title. The violation shall exist until the unlawful act and/or unlawful use has been remedied or abated.

(3) It shall be a violation for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, repair, move, remove, convert, demolish, use, occupy, or maintain any structure or use of land within the City of Woodinville in any manner contrary to or inconsistent with the terms or conditions of any permit, approved plans or authorization; provided, that the terms or conditions are explicitly stated on the permit, approved plans or authorization.

(4) It shall be a violation for any person, firm or corporation to establish a use or activity without complying with applicable development standards set forth in other titles, ordinances, rules or other laws, including but not limited to road construction, surface water management, the fire code and rules of the County Department of Health;

(5) It shall be a violation for any person, firm or corporation failing to maintain site improvements, such as landscaping, parking or drainage control facilities as required by this code or other City of Woodinville ordinances. (Ord. 685 § 16, 2019; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.12.020 Authority and application. 

The Development Services Director is authorized to enforce the provisions of this code, any implementing administrative rules, and approval conditions attached to any land use approval, through revocation or modification of permits, or through the enforcement, penalty and abatement provisions of the Woodinville Municipal Code. (Ord. 685 § 17, 2019; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.12.030 Violations and enforcement.

Violation of any provision of this title shall constitute a civil or criminal violation subject to the enforcement provisions set forth in Chapter 1.06 WMC. (Ord. 685 § 18, 2019; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.12.040 Permit modification, suspension, or revocation.

(1) Modification of Permits. The Director may modify an issued or approved permit issued by the City under any ordinance for any of the following reasons:

(a) Approval was obtained by fraud; or

(b) Other reasons as allowed by law.

(2) Suspension of Permits. The Director may temporarily suspend any permit issued by the City under any ordinance for failure of the holder or the holder’s contractor or agent to comply with the requirements of an issued permit, an associated notice of violation or citation, or an associated stop work order or emergency order.

(3) Revocation of Permits. The Director may permanently revoke any permit issued by the City under any ordinance for any of the following reasons:

(a) Approval was obtained by fraud;

(b) Failure of the holder or holder’s contractors or agents to comply with the requirements of the permit or acting beyond the scope of work or activity authorized by the permit; 

(c) Failure of the holder or holder’s contractors or agents to comply with a notice of violation issued pursuant to Chapter 1.06 WMC related to the permit; or

(d) Interference with the Code Enforcement Officer in the performance of official duties related to the permit; or

(e) Other reasons as allowed by law.

(4) Such permit modification, suspension or revocation shall be carried out by the notice of violation provisions set forth in Chapter 1.06 WMC, and the modification, suspension or revocation shall be effective upon service of the notice of violation on the holder or holder’s contractors or agents. The holder or holder’s contractors or agents may appeal such suspension as provided in Chapter 1.06 WMC for a notice of violation.

(5) Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, whenever the Director finds that a violation of any City ordinance, or rules and regulations adopted hereunder, has created, or is creating, an unsanitary, dangerous or other condition which is deemed to constitute an immediate and irreparable hazard, suspension and termination of operations under the permit may be required immediately without service of a written notice of violation. (Ord. 685 § 20, 2019)


21.12.050 Initiation of revocation or modification proceedings. 

Repealed by Ord. 685. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


Chapter 21.20 ZONES, MAPS AND DESIGNATIONS

Sections:

21.20.010    Zones and map designations established.

21.20.020    Zone and map designation purpose.

21.20.030    Public/Institutional zone.

21.20.040    Residential zones.

21.20.050    Neighborhood Business zone.

21.20.060    Tourist Business zone.

21.20.070    General Business zone.

21.20.080    Central Business District.

21.20.090    Office zone.

21.20.100    Industrial zone.

21.20.110    Park.

21.20.120    Map designation – Special district overlay.

21.20.130    Map designation – Newly annexed territory.

21.20.140    Map designation – Undesignated property.

21.20.150    Zoning maps and boundaries.


21.20.010 Zones and map designations established.

In order to accomplish the purposes of this title the following zoning designations and zoning map symbols are established:

	Zoning Designations	Map Symbol

	Public/Institutional	P/I

	Residential 	R (base density in dwellings per acre)

	Neighborhood Business	NB

	Tourist Business	TB

	General Business	GB

	Central Business District	CBD

	Office	O

	Industrial	I

	Park	P

	Special District Overlay	Pattern applied to affected area

(Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.20.020 Zone and map designation purpose.

The purpose statements for each zone and map designation set forth in the following sections shall be used to guide the application of the zones and designations to all lands in the City of Woodinville. The purpose statements also shall guide interpretation and application of land use regulations within the zones and designations, and any changes to the range of permitted uses within each zone through amendments to this title. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.20.030 Public/Institutional zone.

(1) The purpose of the Public/Institutional zone (P/I) is to provide and protect properties devoted to public and semi-public uses and uses providing social and physical services to the Woodinville community. This purpose is accomplished by:

(a) Providing a zone in which uses serving public needs may be located;

(b) Limiting residential and privately owned operations; and 

(c) Protecting adjacent properties from potential impacts of public uses.

(2) Use of this zone is appropriate on properties designated by the Comprehensive Plan to be public and/or institutional, such as schools, government facilities, social services, hospitals, libraries, utilities, parks and recreational facilities, etc. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.20.040 Residential zones.

(1) The purpose of the Urban Residential zones (R) is to implement Comprehensive Plan goals and policies for housing quality, diversity and affordability, and to efficiently use residential land, public services and energy. These purposes are accomplished by:

(a) Providing, in the low density zones (R-1 through R-4), for predominantly single-family detached dwelling units. Other development types, such as duplexes and accessory units, are allowed under special circumstances. Developments with densities less than R-4 are allowed only if adequate services cannot be provided;

(b) Providing, in the moderate density zones (R-5 through R-8), for a mix of predominantly single-family attached and detached dwelling units. Other development types, such as apartments, duplexes, and townhomes, would be allowed so long as they contribute to Woodinville’s small town atmosphere as articulated in the vision statement found in the City’s Comprehensive Plan and conform to all applicable regulations;

(c) Providing, in the medium density zones (R-9 through R-18), for duplexes, multifamily apartments, and townhomes, at densities supportive of transit and providing a transition to lower density areas; and

(d) Providing, in the high density zones (R-19 through R-48), for the highest residential densities, consisting of duplexes and multistory apartments. Developments have access to transit, pedestrian and nearby commercial facilities, and provide a transition to high intensity commercial uses.

(2) Use of this zone is appropriate in residential areas designated by the Comprehensive Plan as follows:

(a) The R-1 zone on or adjacent to lands with area-wide environmental constraints, or in well-established subdivisions of the same density, which are served at the time of development by public or private facilities and services adequate to support planned densities;

(b) The R-4 through R-8 zones on urban lands that are predominantly environmentally unconstrained and are served at the time of development by adequate public sewers, water supply, roads and other needed public facilities and services; and

(c) The R-12 through R-48 zones in appropriate areas of the City that are served at the time of development by adequate public sewers, water supply, roads and other needed public facilities and services. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.20.050 Neighborhood Business zone.

(1) The purpose and intent of the Neighborhood Business zone (NB) is to provide for small-scale, convenience retail shopping and office facilities at the neighborhood level located in accordance with the City of Woodinville Comprehensive Plan and encourage the compatible integration of small-scale shopping and office centers into the neighborhood areas which it serves.

(2) Use of this zone is appropriate in neighborhood centers designated by the Comprehensive Plan which are served at the time of development by adequate public sewers, water supply, roads and other needed public facilities and services. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.20.060 Tourist Business zone.

(1) The purpose of the Tourist Business zone (TB) is to encourage tourist-related uses, to provide convenient daily retail and personal services for a limited service area, and to minimize impacts of commercial activities on nearby properties. These purposes are accomplished by:

(a) Limiting nonresidential uses to those retail or personal services which can serve the everyday needs of the tourist industry and surrounding residential area;

(b) Allowing for a mix of retail, service and residential uses; and

(c) Excluding industrial and community/regional business-scaled uses.

(2) Use of this zone is appropriate in areas designated tourist business by the Comprehensive Plan which are served at the time of development by adequate public sewers, water supply, roads and other needed public facilities and services. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.20.070 General Business zone.

(1) The purpose of the General Business zone (GB) is to provide auto-oriented retail and services for local and regional service areas that exceed the daily convenience needs of residential neighborhoods but that cannot be served conveniently by the Central Business District, and to provide retail and business services in locations within the City that are appropriate for extensive outdoor storage and auto-related and commercial uses, and to provide space for offices as primary uses and for hotels and motels. These purposes are accomplished by:

(a) Providing a wider and more diverse range of the retail, recreation, office and business services than are found in neighborhood business areas;

(b) Allowing for commercial uses with extensive outdoor storage or auto-related and industrial uses; and

(c) Limiting residential, institutional and personal services to those necessary to directly support commercial activity.

(2) Use of this zone is appropriate in commercial areas that are designated by the Comprehensive Plan and are served at the time of development by adequate public sewers, water supply, roads and other needed public facilities and services.

(3) Subject to the requirements of WMC 21.21.080(B), the location and operation of sexually oriented businesses within the General Business zone is consistent with the purposes of that zone. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.20.080 Central Business District.

(1) The purpose of the Central Business District (CBD) zone is to provide for the broadest mix of comparison retail, higher density residential (R-12 through R-48), service and recreation/cultural uses with compatible storage and fabrication uses, serving regional market areas and offering significant employment and housing opportunities. These purposes are accomplished by:

(a) Encouraging compact development that is supportive of transit and pedestrian travel, through higher nonresidential building heights and floor area ratios than those found in other business areas;

(b) Allowing for outdoor sales and storage, regional shopping areas and limited fabrication uses; and

(c) Concentrating large scale commercial and office uses to facilitate the efficient provision of public facilities and services.

(2) Use of this zone is appropriate in the urban center as designated by the Comprehensive Plan that is served at the time of development by adequate public sewers, water supply, roads and other needed public facilities and services. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.20.090 Office zone.

(1) The purpose of the Office zone (O) is to provide for pedestrian and transit-oriented high-density employment uses together with limited complementary retail and higher density residential development in locations where the full range of commercial activities is not desirable. These purposes are accomplished by:

(a) Allowing for uses that will take advantage of pedestrian-oriented site and street improvement standards;

(b) Providing for higher building heights and floor area ratios than those found in the GB zone;

(c) Reducing the ratio of required parking to building floor area;

(d) Allowing for on-site convenient daily retail and personal services for employees and residences; and

(e) Excluding auto-oriented, outdoor or other retail sales and services which do not provide for the daily convenience needs of on-site and nearby employees or residents.

(2) Use of this zone is appropriate in office areas designated by the Comprehensive Plan which are served at the time of development by adequate public sewers, water supply, roads and other needed public facilities and services. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.20.100 Industrial zone.

(1) The purpose of the Industrial zone (I) is to provide for the location and grouping of industrial enterprises and activities involving manufacturing, assembly, fabrication, processing, bulk handling and storage, research facilities, warehousing and heavy trucking. It is also a purpose of this zone to protect the industrial land base for industrial economic development and employment opportunities. These purposes are accomplished by:

(a) Allowing for a wide range of industrial and manufacturing uses;

(b) Establishing appropriate development standards and public review procedures for industrial activities with the greatest potential for adverse impacts; and

(c) Limiting residential, institutional, service, office and other nonindustrial uses to those necessary to directly support industrial activities.

(2) Use of this zone is appropriate in industrial areas designated by the Comprehensive Plan which are served at the time of development by adequate public sewers, water supply, roads and other needed public facilities and services.

(3) Subject to the requirements of WMC 21.21.080(B), the location and operation of sexually oriented businesses within the Industrial zone is consistent with the purposes of that zone. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.20.110 Park.

The purpose of the Park zone (P) is to provide opportunities for public parks and other recreation facilities, such as playgrounds, trails, publicly accessible open space, or as meet the definition of parks in WMC 21.11.180. Only facilities providing such public recreation shall be allowed to locate in the Park zones. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.20.120 Map designation – Special district overlay.

(1) The purpose of the special district overlay designation is to carry out Comprehensive Plan policies that identify special opportunities for achieving public benefits by allowing or requiring alternative uses and development standards that differ from the general provisions of this title. Special district overlays are generally applied to a group of individual properties or entire planning subareas.

(2) The purposes of special district overlays are to provide for alternative development standards to address unique site characteristics, and to address development opportunities which can exceed the quality of standard developments, by:

(a) Establishing authority to adopt property-specific development standards for increasing minimum requirements of the code on individual sites;

(b) Establishing special district overlays with alternative standards for special areas designated by master or neighborhood plans; and

(c) Establishing authority to approve alternative development standards for specific areas through a development agreement; provided, that nothing in this chapter shall be construed as requiring the City to approve or otherwise execute any development agreement regarding a particular property or properties. The City expressly reserves full discretion in determining whether to approve, condition and/or reject any proposed development agreement.

(3) This section authorizes the City of Woodinville to increase development standards or limit uses on specific properties beyond the general requirements of the code through property-specific development standards, and to carry out Comprehensive Plan policies through special overlay districts which supplement or modify standard zones through different uses, design or density standards or review processes;

(4) Property-specific development standards shall be applied to specific properties through reclassification of individual properties as provided in Chapter 21.80 WMC; and

(5) Special district overlays shall be applied to specific properties or areas containing several properties through zoning reclassification as provided in Chapter 21.80 WMC; or

(6) Property-specific development standards may be applied to a specific property or properties through a development agreement approved by the City Council and consistent with Chapter 36.70B RCW, as the same now exists or may be amended, and as provided in Chapter 21.82 WMC. 

(7) Special district overlays shall be designated on the City zoning map as follows:

(a) Designation of an overlay district shall include policies that prescribe the purposes and location of the overlay;

(b) The special district overlays set forth in this chapter are the only overlays authorized by the code. New or amended overlays to carry out new or different goals or policies shall be adopted as part of this chapter;

(c) The special district overlays set forth in this chapter may expand the range of permitted uses and development standards established by the code for any use or underlying zone; and

(d) Unless they are specifically modified by the provisions of this chapter, the standard requirements of the code and other City ordinances and regulations govern all development and land uses within special district overlays. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.20.130 Map designation – Newly annexed territory.

Unless preannexation zoning is approved, all newly annexed territory shall be designated R-1 until the zoning map is amended pursuant to WMC 21.20.150 and the annexed territory is classified in conformance with the City of Woodinville Comprehensive Plan. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.20.140 Map designation – Undesignated property.

All property not designated by the zoning map shall be designated R-1. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.20.150 Zoning maps and boundaries.

(1) The location and boundaries of the zones defined by this chapter shall be shown and delineated on a zoning map adopted by ordinance.

(2) Changes in the boundaries of the zones shall be made by ordinance adopting or amending the zoning map. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


Chapter 21.21 PERMITTED USES

Sections:

21.21.010    Establishment of uses.

21.21.020    Interpretation of land use tables.

21.21.030    Residential land uses.

21.21.040    Recreational/cultural land uses.

21.21.050    General services land uses.

21.21.060    Institutional land uses.

21.21.070    Business services land uses.

21.21.080    Retail/wholesale land uses.

21.21.090    Manufacturing land uses.

21.21.100    Resource land uses.

21.21.110    Regional land uses.


21.21.010 Establishment of uses.

The use of a property is defined by the activity for which the building or lot is intended, designed, arranged, occupied, or maintained. The use is considered permanently established when that use will or has been in continuous operation for a period exceeding 60 days. A use which will operate for less than 60 days is considered a temporary use, and subject to the requirements of Chapter 21.36 WMC. All applicable requirements of this code, or other applicable State or Federal requirements, shall govern a use located in the City of Woodinville. By way of example, see WMC 21.10.040 clarifying that the growing, production, processing and sale of marijuana are prohibited in all zoning districts of the City of Woodinville whether it is grown, produced, processed or sold for medical or recreational use, and nothing in this title should be construed differently. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.21.020 Interpretation of land use tables. 

(1) The land use tables in this chapter determine whether a specific use is allowed in a zone district. The zone district is located on the vertical column and the specific use is located on the horizontal row of these tables.

(2) If no symbol appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the use is not allowed in that district, except for certain temporary uses.

(3) If the letter “P” appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the use is allowed in that district subject to the review procedures specified in Chapters 21.80 through 21.89 WMC and the general requirements of the code.

(4) If the letter “C” appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the use is allowed subject to the conditional use review procedures specified in Chapters 21.80 through 21.89 WMC and the general requirements of the code.

(5) If the letter “S” appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the regional use is permitted subject to the special use permit review procedures specified in Chapters 21.80 through 21.89 WMC and the general requirements of the code.

(6) If a number appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the use may be allowed subject to the appropriate review process indicated above, the general requirements of the code and the specific conditions indicated in the development condition with the corresponding number immediately following the land use table.

(7) If more than one letter-number combination appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the use is allowed in that zone subject to different sets of limitations or conditions depending on the review process indicated by the letter, the general requirements of the code and the specific conditions indicated in the development condition with the corresponding number immediately following the table.

(8) All applicable requirements shall govern a use whether or not they are cross-referenced in a section.

(9) Only public parks or recreational facilities shall be allowed to locate in the Park zone (P).

(10) Where there is a *, for the definition of this specific land use, see Chapter 21.11 WMC. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.21.030 Residential land uses.

	A. RESIDENTIAL LAND USES

	NAICS#	SPECIFIC LAND USE	R1 – 4	R5 – 8	R9 – 18	R19+	NB	TB	GB	CBD	O	I	P/I

	 	DWELLING UNITS, TYPES:	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	*	Single detached	P, C19	P, C19	P	 	 	 	 	P23	 	 	 

	*	Duplex	P10	P10	P10	P10	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	*	Townhome	C10, 12	C7, 10, 12	P	P	 	P20	 	P1, 21, 22	P18	 	 

	*	Apartment	 	P11	P	P	 	P20	 	P1, 21, 22	P18	 	 

	*	Mobile home park	 	P	P	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	623311, 623312	Senior citizen assisted (See WMC 21.11.060 for definition)	 	P11	P	P	 	 	 	P1, 21	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	GROUP RESIDENCES:	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	*	Community residential facility	C15	C15	P15	P15	 	 	 	P1, 15, 21	 	 	P15

	721310	Dormitory	C2	C2	P2	P2	 	 	 	P1, 2, 4, 21	 	P2	P13

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	ACCESSORY USES:	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	*	Residential accessory uses	P3	P3	P3	P3	 	 	 	P	 	 	P16

	*	Home occupation (8)	P	P	P	P	 	 	 	P	 	 	 

	*	Home industry (9)	C	C	C	C	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

B. Development Conditions.

(1) Except as provided in this section, residential dwelling units are not permitted on the ground floor or below grade abutting a public street. Foyers or lobbies providing access to dwelling units may front onto a public street.

(2) Only as an accessory to a school, college/university, church, or fire station.

(3)(a) Accessory dwelling units:

(i) Only one accessory dwelling per lot;

(ii) The primary residence or the accessory dwelling unit shall be owner occupied;

(iii) If the accessory dwelling unit is a separate structure, the accessory dwelling unit shall not be larger than 50 percent of the living area of the primary residence;

(iv) One additional off-street parking space is provided; and

(v) The accessory dwelling unit shall be converted to another permitted use or shall be removed if one of the dwelling units ceases to be owner occupied.

(b) Accessory Aircraft. One single- or twin-engine general aviation aircraft shall be permitted only on lots which abut, or have a legal access which is not a public right-of-way to, a waterbody or landing field, provided:

(i) No aircraft sales, service, repair, charter or rental;

(ii) No storage of aviation fuel except that contained in the tank or tanks of the aircraft; and

(iii) Storage hangars shall not exceed 20 feet in height above average finished grade or have a gross area exceeding 3,000 square feet.

(4) Allowed only as an accessory to another permitted use. Limited to the maximum density in the zone, pursuant to Chapter 21.22 WMC.

(5) Reserved.

(6) Reserved.

(7) A conditional use permit is not required if the townhomes are approved through subdivision review or if the project is in the R-8 zone.

(8) Home occupations are subject to the requirements and standards contained in WMC 21.31.080.

(9) Home industries are subject to the requirements and standards contained in WMC 21.31.090.

(10) Townhomes and duplexes must be compatible in design, height, color, style, and materials with existing neighborhood.

(11) Permitted only in the R-8 zone.

(12) Permitted only in the R-4 and R-6 zones, on parcels where protection of critical areas prohibits traditional single-family development.

(13) Only as an accessory to a public school.

(14) Reserved.

(15) The number of occupants shall not exceed the occupant load of the structure, calculated as provided in Chapter 15.04 WMC, Building Codes, or as may be hereafter amended.

(16) Only as an accessory to a permitted use.

(17) Reserved.

(18) Limited to current location. No new townhomes or apartments are permitted in the office zone except on the site currently containing townhomes or apartments on January 1, 2002.

(19) A conditional use permit is required for a single-family structure exceeding 8,500 gross square feet in the R-1 through R-6 zones.

(20) Residential development is permitted only if the following conditions are satisfied:

(a) A development agreement is obtained pursuant to Chapter 21.82 WMC establishing the terms under which the residential development may be allowed; 

(b) The residential development is integrated into the overall development in a manner that supports the vision and goals of the Tourist District Master Plan; 

(c) Dwelling units on the ground floor or below grade are prohibited, except where:

(i) Authorized by a development agreement; and 

(ii) No ground floor dwelling units are within 100 feet from the property lines abutting 148th Avenue NE, NE 145th Street, or Woodinville-Redmond Road, unless such dwelling units are screened from 148th Avenue NE, NE 145th Street, or Woodinville-Redmond Road by commercial building spaces; and

(iii) Excluding all parking structures, the total ground floor building footprint of dwelling units and other floor areas associated with residential uses shall not exceed 50 percent of the total ground floor building footprint of all nonresidential uses; and

(iv) The height of a building having ground floor dwelling units shall not exceed 38 feet;

(d) No direct dwelling unit entrances or exits are permitted onto 148th Avenue NE, NE 145th Street, or Woodinville-Redmond Road;

(e) Public benefits are provided of which the composition shall be agreed to in the development agreement and the City having the option to require studies to evaluate the reasonableness of the public benefit in exchange for the residential development; and 

(f) For purposes of this condition, public benefits may include but are not limited to:

(i) Affordable housing units that are sold or rented at rates below market agreed to in the development agreement; 

(ii) Public art such as fountains, sculptures, paintings, murals, etc.; 

(iii) Indoor and/or outdoor public space and amenities, which are permanently reserved for use by the general public such as commons, greens, plazas, etc.; 

(iv) Payment of transportation and/or park impact fees above those required in Chapters 3.36 and 3.39 WMC; and/or

(v) Other types of public benefits not listed that are found to be acceptable by the City Council. 

(21) Residential dwelling units are not permitted within 300 feet of State Route 522.

(22) In the Pedestrian Core Design District only, residential and/or retail uses shall be required for all new development on the ground floor as shown on the map titled “Map Designating Streets for Mandatory Residential and Retail Development at Street Level – Pedestrian Core Design District.” Where retail is provided on the ground floor, it shall be a minimum of 30 feet deep and, when constructed at street corners or intersections, shall be constructed in compliance with WMC 21.40.180 and 21.40.340.

(23) No new single-family detached dwelling units are permitted except on the sites with existing single-family detached dwelling units on December 24, 2012.


[IMAGE]


(Ord. 678 § 1, 2019; Ord. 677 § 1, 2018; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.21.040 Recreational/cultural land uses.

	A. RECREATIONAL/CULTURAL LAND USES

	NAICS#	SPECIFIC LAND USE	R1 – 4	R5 – 8	R9 – 18	R19+	NB	TB	GB	CBD	O	I	P/I

	 	PARK/RECREATION:	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	*	Parks	P1	P1	P1	P1	P1	P1	P	P	 	P	P

	*	Trails	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	 	P	P

	*	Destination resorts	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	*	Marina	 	 	C4	C4	 	P5	C9	C9	 	P	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	AMUSEMENT/ENTERTAINMENT:	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	512131	Theater	 	 	 	 	 	 	P6	P6	 	 	 

	512132	Theater, drive-in	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	711110, 711130	Plays/theatrical production	 	 	 	 	 	P6	P6	P6	 	P6, 16	P6, 16

	71395	Bowling center	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	 	 	 

	71394*	Sports club	C4	C4	C4	C4	 	C	P	P	 	C	 

	71391*	Golf facility	C7	C7	C7	C7	 	 	P	 	 	 	 

	71391	Golf driving range	 	 	 	 	 	 	C17	C17	 	 	 

	*	Shooting range	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C8,10	 

	71312*	Amusement arcades	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	 	 	 

	71311	Amusement park	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	*	Outdoor performance center	 	 	 	 	 	S	S	S	 	 	 

	*	Indoor batting cage facility	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C13	 

	*	Indoor go-cart facility	 	 	 	 	 	 	P14	 	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	CULTURAL:	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	51412	Library	P11, C	P11, C	P11, C	P11, C	 	P	 	P	 	 	P3

	71211	Museums and art galleries	P11, C	P11, C	P11, C	P11, C	 	P	 	P	 	 	P3

	71213	Arboretum	P	P	P	P	 	P	 	 	 	 	P3

	81311	Churches, temples, and synagogues	P12, C	P12, C	P12, C	P12, C	 	P	P	P	 	P	P15

	*	Civic center	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

	*	Community center	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

	*	Conference center	P11, C	P11, C	P11, C	P11, C	 	 	C	C	 	 	 

B. Development Conditions.

(1) The following conditions and limitations shall apply, where appropriate:

(a) No stadiums on sites less than 10 acres;

(b) Lighting for structures and fields shall be directed away from residential areas;

(c) Structures or service yards shall maintain a minimum distance of 50 feet from property lines adjoining residential zones.

(2) Except recreational vehicle parks.

(3) Limited to publicly owned facilities.

(4) Limited to recreation facilities for residents of a specified residential development.

(5) Limited to day moorage.

(6) Adult use facilities shall be prohibited within 660 feet of any residential zones, any other adult use facility, or school-licensed daycare centers, public parks, community centers, public libraries or churches that conduct religious or educational classes for minors.

(7) Structures, driving ranges and lighted areas shall maintain a minimum distance of 50 feet from property lines adjoining residential zones.

(8) Shooting Ranges.

(a) Structures and ranges shall maintain a minimum distance of 50 feet from property lines adjoining residential zones or developments with residential uses;

(b) Ranges shall be designed to prevent stray or ricocheting projectiles or pellets, or any spent rounds or other hazardous materials, from leaving the property;

(c) Site plans shall include safety features of the range; provisions for reducing noise produced on the firing line; and elevations of the range showing target area, backdrops or butts;

(d) All activities associated with the shooting range shall not exceed the noise limitations adopted by WMC 8.08.040 and WAC 173-60-040;

(e) Shooting ranges are not permitted in the Tourist District Overlay; and

(f) Shooting ranges shall be subject to an inspection, every one to three years, or as part of a business license renewal program, as determined by the Director. The cost of the inspection shall be paid by the operator of the shooting range. The purpose of the inspection will be to confirm that operations continue in conformance with the approved permit.

(9) Limited to marina facilities for nonmotorized craft and/or for motorized crafts with engines of five horsepower or less.

(10) Only in an enclosed building.

(11) Only as accessory to a park or in a building listed on the National Register as an historic site or designated as a landmark subject to the provisions of Chapter 21.33 WMC.

(12) Only as accessory to a nonresidential use established through a discretionary permit process and limited in scale to ensure compatibility with surrounding neighborhoods.

(13) Indoor batting facilities are subject to the following conditions and limitations:

(a) Facilities open to youth under the age of 18 shall not be located in the Sexually Oriented Business Overlay District.

(b) The facility shall require the minimum safety standards as provided for a national youth baseball association such as the Little League Association.

(c) Signs regarding safety rules must be prominently displayed.

(d) Pedestrian walkways shall be clearly marked.

(e) The business owner shall provide to the City a signed statement by the building owner declaring that high hazard occupancies (Type H occupancies as defined in Chapter 15.04 WMC, Building Codes) shall not be located in any spaces adjacent to the indoor batting facility; or the facility shall be located in a single occupancy building.

(f) Retail sales at an indoor batting facility shall be limited to baseball-related items, and the retail sales area shall not exceed 500 square feet.

(g) Children under the age of 15 are not permitted on the premises without a supervising adult.

(h) On-site food preparation is prohibited.

(i) A safe pedestrian “pick-up/drop-off” area that does not interfere with local traffic shall be provided.

(14) Indoor go-cart racing facilities are subject to the following conditions and limitations:

(a) Signs regarding safety rules must be prominently displayed.

(b) Pedestrian walkways shall be clearly marked.

(c) The business owner shall provide to the City a signed statement by the building owner declaring that high hazard occupancies (Type H occupancies as defined in Chapter 15.04 WMC, Building Codes) shall not be located in any spaces adjacent to the indoor go-cart racing facility, or the facility shall be located in a single occupant building.

(d) A safe pedestrian “pick-up/drop-off” area that does not interfere with local traffic shall be provided.

(e) Until and unless the City adopts an overriding noise ordinance, the maximum noise levels (dBA) associated with the operation of any go-cart racing facility shall not exceed the following maximum dBAs:

	Receiving Property

	Residential Zones	Commercial Zones	Industrial Zones

	57*	60	65

*Reduced by 10 dBA between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.

(f) Loitering outside the facility shall be strictly controlled by the facility’s management.

(g) Prior to the opening of the facility, proof of suitable insurance is required.

(15) Permitted within a publicly owned building as part of a standard lease or other use agreement between the church, temple, or synagogue and the owner or operator of the underlying property.

(16) Only as an accessory use to another permitted use.

(17) Golf driving range uses are limited to the following:

(a) All activities must take place within an enclosed building.

(b) All activities associated with the golf driving range are only allowed as an accessory use to another permitted use, not to exceed 49 percent of gross floor area. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.21.050 General services land uses.

	A. GENERAL SERVICES LAND USES 

	NAICS#	SPECIFIC LAND USE	R1 – 4	R5 – 8	R9 – 18	R19+	NB	TB	GB	CBD	O	I	P/I

	 	PERSONAL SERVICES:	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	8121	General personal service	 	 	 	 	P20	P	P	P	P3, 23	 	P18

	81232	Dry cleaning and laundry services	 	 	 	 	P33	 	P	P	 	P	 

	812332	Industrial launderers	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 

	81221	Funeral home/crematory	 	 	 	 	 	 	P47	 	 	P	 

	81222	Cemetery, columbarium	C5, 26	C5, 26	C5, 26	C5, 26	 	 	P26, C5	 	 	 	 

	*	Daycare I	P6	P6	P6	P6	P	 	P	P	P7, 23	P7	P18

	*	Daycare II	P8	P8	P8	P8	P	 	P	P	 	P7	P18

	541940	Veterinary services	 	 	 	 	P10	 	P10	P10	 	P	 

	81111 – 81112	Automotive repair (1)	 	 	 	 	P11	 	C22	 	 	P	P

	81119	Automotive service	 	 	 	 	P11	P11	P22	C22	 	P	 

	8112, 8114	Miscellaneous repair	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	 	P	 

	6241 – 6243	Social services	 	 	 	 	P13	 	 	P	P23	 	P

	*	Stable	P14, C	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	812910	Pet care services (2)	C9	 	 	 	 	 	P27, 36	P27, 35	 	P27, 36	 

	 	HEALTH SERVICES:	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	6211 –6214	Medical office/outpatient clinic	 	 	 	 	P	 	P30	P30	P30	 	P18, 30

	6231 – 6232	Nursing and personal care facilities	 	 	 	 	C30	 	P30	P30	 	 	P18, 30

	62211	Hospital	 	 	 	 	 	 	P30	P30	 	 	P18, 30

	6215,

339116	Medical/dental lab	 	 	 	 	 	 	P30	P30	 	P30	P18, 30

	62199	Miscellaneous health	 	 	 	 	 	 	P30	P30	P3, 23, 37	 	P18, 30, 37

	 	EDUCATION SERVICES:	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	61111	Elementary or middle/junior high school	P16, 30

C30	P16, 30

C15, 30	P16, 30

C30	P16, 30

C30	 	 	C30, 43	C30, 43	C30, 31	C38	P30

	61111	Secondary or high school	P16, 30

C30	P16, 30

C15, 30	P16, 30

C30	P16, 30

C30	 	 	C30, 43	C30, 43	 	C38	P30

	61151*	Vocational school	 	 	 	 	 	 	P30, 43, 45	P30, 43, 45	P17, 20, 23	P30	P30

	*	Specialized instruction school	P19, 30	P19, 30	P19, 30	P19, 30	P	 	P30, 43, 45	P30, 43, 45	 	C32	P21, 30

	*	Preschool	C28, 30	C28, 30	C28, 30	C28, 30	P	 	P30, 43	P30, 43	 	 	P21, 30

	*	School district support facility	C25, 30	C25, 30	C25, 30	C25, 30	 	 	P30, 44	P30, 44	 	P30	P30

	611620	Gymnastic schools	 	 	 	 	 	 	P29, 30, 43	P29, 30, 43	 	C29, 30	 

	611620,

611691	Sports and recreational instruction	P19	P19	P19	P19	P24, 34	C	P43	P43	 	C	 

	611699	Miscellaneous schools and instruction

	 	TEMPORARY LODGING:	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	721110	Hotel/motel	 	 	 	 	 	P48, 49	P	P	 	 	 

	721191*	Bed and breakfast inns	P39	P39	P39	 	 	P48	 	 	 	 	 

	721310	Organization hotel/lodging	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	624221*	Temporary shelter	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P40	 	 	P42

	721199*	Youth hostel	 	 	 	 	 	P48	 	P41, 46	 	41	 

B. Development Conditions.

(1) Except NAICS Industry No. 326212 – Tire retreading; see manufacturing permitted use table.

(2) Excluding dog pounds.

(3) Permitted only on sites with a High Density Residential (R-48)/Office zone designation and limited to NAICS Industry Group and Industry Nos.:

(a) 81211 – Beauty shops;

(b) 81211 – Barber shops; and

(c) 81232 – Garment pressing and agents for laundries and dry cleaners.

(4) Only as an accessory to a cemetery.

(5) Structures shall maintain a minimum distance of 100 feet from property lines adjoining residential zones.

(6) Only as an accessory to residential use, provided:

(a) Outdoor play areas shall be completely enclosed by a solid wall or fence, with no openings except for gates, and have a minimum height of six feet;

(b) Outdoor play equipment shall maintain a minimum distance of 20 feet from property lines adjoining residential zones; and

(c) Only two nonresident staff are present on site at any one time.

(7) Permitted as an accessory use, see commercial/industrial accessory uses, WMC 21.21.070(A).

(8) Only as a reuse of a public school facility subject to the provisions of WMC 21.22.210 and 21.22.220, an accessory use to a school or church, provided:

(a) Outdoor play areas shall be completely enclosed by a solid wall or fence, with no openings except for gates, and have a minimum height of six feet;

(b) Outdoor play equipment shall maintain a minimum distance of 20 feet from property lines adjoining residential zones;

(c) Direct access to a developed arterial street shall be required in any residential zone; and

(d) Hours of operation may be restricted to assure compatibility with surrounding development.

(9) Only as an accessory to a residential use, provided:

(a) No more than 20 percent of the area of the residential use is dedicated to pet care services.

(b) The portion of the building in which animals are kept shall be soundproof.

(c) No exotic animal is permitted at any time.

(10)(a) No burning of refuse or dead animals is allowed;

(b) The portion of the building or structure in which animals are kept or treated shall be soundproofed. All run areas, excluding confinement areas for livestock, shall be surrounded by an eight-foot solid wall and surfaced with concrete or other impervious material; and

(c) The provisions of Chapter 21.31 WMC relative to animal keeping are met.

(11) Only as an accessory to a gasoline service station; see retail and wholesale permitted use table (WMC 21.21.080(A)).

(12) Only as a reuse of a public school facility subject to the provisions of WMC 21.22.210 and 21.22.220.

(13) Only as a reuse of surplus nonresidential facility subject to WMC 21.22.210 and 21.22.220.

(14) Covered riding arenas shall not exceed 20,000 square feet; stabling areas, whether attached or detached, shall not be counted in this calculation and are subject to the provisions of WMC 21.31.030.

(15) Limited to projects which do not require or result in an expansion of the sewer local service area (LSA), unless a finding is made that no cost-effective alternative technologies are feasible, in which case a tightline to a sewer sized only to meet the needs of the school may be used.

(16) Only as a reuse of a public school facility subject to the provisions of Chapter 21.34 or 21.36 WMC. An expansion of such school facility shall be subject to approval of a conditional use permit and the expansion shall not require or result in an extension of the sewer local service area (LSA), unless a finding is made that no cost-effective alternative technologies are feasible, in which case a tightline to a sewer sized only to meet the needs of the school may be used.

(17) All instruction must be within an enclosed structure.

(18) Only as an accessory to a hospital or other permitted institutional use.

(19) Only as an accessory to residential use, provided:

(a) Students are limited to 12 students in any 24-hour period;

(b) All instruction must be within an enclosed structure; 

(c) Structures used for the school shall maintain a distance of 25 feet from property lines of adjoining residential zones; and

(d) Hours of operation may be restricted to assure compatibility with surrounding development.

(20) Nail salons and similar uses designated as NAICS No. 812113 are permitted only if the business is connected to a public sewer.

(21) Limited to publicly owned facilities.

(22) Services and other business and commercial activities shall only be provided in an enclosed building.

(23) Not permitted on sites contiguous to property designated Low Density Residential or less by the City of Woodinville adopted Comprehensive Plan. This limitation also applies to sites in unincorporated King County with equivalent designations.

(24) Limited to martial arts instruction, yoga instruction and fitness instruction and training.

(25) Only when adjacent to an existing or proposed school.

(26) Limited to columbariums accessory to a church; provided, that existing required landscaping and parking are not reduced.

(27)(a) The portion of the building in which animals are kept shall be soundproof.

(b) All run areas and confinement areas shall be within the building.

(c) No exotic animal is permitted at any time.

(28) Operation limited to the hours between 8:30 a.m. and 3:30 p.m., Monday through Friday. A maximum of 12 children at any one time may be present, with no more than 24 children permitted in a 24-hour period.

(29) Gymnastics schools are allowed, subject to the following conditions:

(a) A gymnastic school shall be a member in good standing of the United States Gymnastics Federation.

(b) A gymnastic school shall demonstrate conformance to guidelines of the United States Gymnastics Federation for equipment used for gymnastics instruction.

(c) A safe student “pick-up/drop-off” area that does not interfere with local traffic shall be provided.

(d) Retail sales at a gymnastic school shall be limited to gymnastic-related items, and the retail sales area shall not exceed 500 square feet.

(30) If use abuts an agriculturally zoned property, the following conditions apply:

(a) Buildings and parking areas must be set back 50 feet from the property line abutting an agriculturally zoned parcel;

(b) Fifty feet of Type II landscaping is required in the setback; and

(c) Nonemergency access through or to the agriculturally zoned parcel is prohibited.

(31) Elementary/junior high schools are allowed in Office zones that are adjacent to the Urban Growth Area Boundary.

(32) Limited to dance instruction and subject to the following conditions:

(a) Pedestrian walkways shall be clearly marked.

(b) The business owner shall provide to the City a signed statement by the building owner declaring that high hazard occupancies (Type H occupancies as defined in Chapter 15.04 WMC, Building Codes) shall not be located in any spaces adjacent to the dance instruction facility; or the facility shall be located in a single occupancy building.

(c) Retail sales shall be limited to dance-related items, and the total retail sales area shall not exceed 500 square feet.

(d) On-site food preparation is prohibited.

(e) A safe pedestrian “pick-up/drop-off” area that does not interfere with local traffic shall be provided.

(33) Service limited to:

(a) Drop-off and pick-up only;

(b) Gross floor area of 1,800 square feet; and

(c) The cleaning technology used at the off-site laundry cleaning process facility to clean clothing delivered for pick-up is restricted to certified nontoxic products and chemicals. Proof of compliance with this requirement shall be provided to the Director of Development Services or his designee upon request on a form approved by the Director.

(34) These facilities may not provide shower and bathing facilities, hot tubs, spas, swimming pools, or other uses that use a large volume of water. 

(35) Only grooming and training services are permitted.

(36) No burning of refuse or dead animals is allowed.

(37) Excepting “cannabis dispensaries” and “cannabis collective gardens” as those terms are defined or described in this code and/or under State law, which facilities or uses are prohibited in all zoning districts of the City.

(38) Limited to junior high/secondary schools grades seven through 12 and subject to the following conditions:

(a) Pedestrian walkways shall be clearly marked.

(b) The business owner shall provide to the City a signed statement by the building owner declaring that high hazard occupancies (Type H occupancies as defined in Chapter 15.04 WMC, Building Codes) shall not be located in any spaces adjacent to the school; or the facility shall be located in a single occupancy building.

(c) A safe pedestrian “pick-up/drop-off” area that does not interfere with local traffic shall be provided.

(d) Schools shall be located 330 feet from any adult entertainment facility.

(e) A parking plan is required to assure enough available parking is on site.

(f) The school will be a closed campus where students will remain on site during operation hours.

(g) Class size shall be limited to the occupancy load permitted by the certificate of occupancy. 

(39) Only as an accessory use to the permanent residence of the operator, provided:

(a) Serving meals to paying guests shall be limited to breakfast;

(b) The number of guest rooms shall not exceed three; and

(c) The fee owner of the residence serving as a bed and breakfast must reside on the premises.

(40) Only as an accessory use to an institution, school, public agency, church, synagogue, temple, or nonprofit community organization.

(41) Also permitted in the Tourist District. See WMC 21.26.010.

(42) Only as an accessory use to an institution, school, or public agency.

(43) Limited to a maximum of 25,000 square feet of gross floor area.

(44) Limited to school district administrative offices.

(45) Indoor classroom instruction only. No outdoor or manufacturing instruction shall be conducted.

(46) Limited to a maximum of 25,000 square feet of gross floor area.

(47) Limited to funeral homes. Crematory services not permitted.

(48) See WMC 21.26.010, Special district overlay – Tourist District.

(49) Hotels/motels in the TB District shall be a permitted use not subject to requirements of WMC 21.26.010(2)(f); however, the style of the structure may fit one of the following styles: country inn, bed and breakfast, Victorian, woodland lodge, or other style defined in the Tourist District Master Plan and approved by the Planning Commission Design Review Subcommittee. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.21.060 Institutional land uses.

	A. INSTITUTIONAL LAND USES

	NAICS#	SPECIFIC LAND USE	R1 – 4	R5 – 8	R9 – 18	R19+	NB	TB	GB	CBD	O	I	P/I

	*	Public agency or utility office	P1, 9,

C2, 9	P1, 9,

C2, 9	P1, 9,

C2, 9	P1, 9,

C2, 9	 	 	P9	P9, 15	P9	 	P9

	*	Public agency or utility yard	P3, 9	P3, 9	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P9	P9

	*	Public agency archives	 	 	 	 	 	 	P9	P9, 13	P14	P9	P9

	92211	Court	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P9, 13	 	 	P9

	92212	Police facility	 	 	 	 	P5	 	P9	P9, 13	 	P9	P9

	92216	Fire facility	C4, 9	C4, 9	C4, 9	C4, 9	 	P9, C4	P9	P9, 13	 	P9	P9

	*	Utility facility	P9	P9	P9	P9	 	P9	P9, 16, C	P9, 16, C	 	P9	P9

	*	Minor communication facility (6)	C9	C9	C9	C9	 	C9	P9	P9	P9, 14	P9	C9, 12

	*	Private stormwater management facility	P7, 9	P7, 9	P7, 9	P7, 9	 	P8, 9	P8, 9	P8, 9	P8, 9, 14	P8, 9	P9

	*	Interim recycling facility	P9, 10, 11	P9, 10, 11	P9, 10, 11	P9, 10, 11	P10	 	P9, 17	P9, 13, 17	 	P9	P9, 12

B. Development Conditions.

(1) Only as a reuse of a public school facility subject to the provisions of WMC 21.22.210 and 21.22.220.

(2) Only as a reuse of a surplus nonresidential facility subject to WMC 21.22.210.

(3) Limited to material storage for road maintenance facilities.

(4)    (a) All buildings and structures shall maintain a minimum distance of 20 feet from property lines adjoining Residential zones;

(b) Any buildings from which fire-fighting equipment emerges onto a street shall maintain a distance of 35 feet from such street; and

(c) No outdoor storage.

(5) Limited to police substation facilities.

(6) Minor communication facilities shall be regulated relative to setback and height pursuant to Chapter 21.22 WMC.

(7) Such facilities shall be located on the same lot that they are designed to serve except in subdivisions that set aside a separate tract for such facilities.

(8) Such facilities which are not located on the lot they are designed to serve shall be located on a lot with the same or more intensive zoning designation.

(9) If use abuts an agriculturally zoned property, the following conditions apply:

(a) Buildings and parking areas must be set back 50 feet from the property line abutting an agriculturally zoned parcel;

(b) Fifty feet of Type II landscaping is required in the setback; and

(c) Nonemergency access through or to the agriculturally zoned parcel is prohibited.

(10) Limited to drop box facilities accessory to a public or community use such as a school, fire station, or community center.

(11) All processing and storage of material shall be within enclosed buildings and excluding yard waste processing.

(12) Limited to publicly owned facilities.

(13) Not permitted in the Pedestrian Core Design District; see WMC 21.40.030.

(14) Not permitted on sites contiguous to property designated Low Density Residential or less by the City of Woodinville adopted Comprehensive Plan. This limitation also applies to sites in unincorporated King County with equivalent designations. 

(15) No outdoor storage or display. All activity associated with permitted use shall take place within an enclosed building. 

(16) Utility facilities that are accessory to another permitted use are permitted outright. All other utility facilities require a conditional use permit.

(17) Only drop box facilities are allowed as accessory use to another permitted use. Drop box facilities shall be within an enclosed building or within a structure that meets the City’s design standards. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.21.070 Business services land uses.

	A. BUSINESS SERVICES LAND USES

	NAICS#	SPECIFIC LAND USE	R1 – 4	R5 – 8	R9 – 18	R19+	NB	TB	GB	CBD	O	I	P/I

	236 – 238	Construction and trade	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P7, 10	P	 

	*	Individual transportation and taxi base	 	 	 	 	 	 	18	18	 	 	 

	4841-2, 492	Trucking and courier service	 	 	 	 	 	 	C29	 	P7, 13	P	 

	493	Warehousing (1)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 

	53113*	Self-service storage	 	 	C14	C14	 	 	 	 	P7, 11	P	 

	49313,

49312	Farm product warehousing, refrigeration and storage	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 

	*	Log storage	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 

	4882, 48849, 488991	Transportation service	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	 	P	 

	48851	Freight and cargo service	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P7, 10	P	 

	5615	Passenger transportation service	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P20	P7	 	 

	51322	Communication offices	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P7	P	 

	5133	Telegraph and other communications	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P7	P	 

	*	General business service	 	 	 	 	P8	P	P	P	P	P16	 

	*	Professional office	 	 	 	 	P	P26, 27	P	P	P	P16	P3

	54185	Outdoor advertising service	 	 	 	 	 	 	P17, 30	P17, 30	P7, 17	P	 

	323114,

561439	Photocopying and duplicating service	 	 	 	 	P15, 28	P	P	P	P	P16	 

	53212,

5322-3	Miscellaneous equipment rental	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P17, 21	 	P	P4

	5324	Machinery and equipment rental	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 

	53211	Automotive rental and leasing	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P17	 	 	 

	81293	Automotive parking	P19	P19	P19	P19	 	 	P25	P25	 	P	P5

	711211,

7113-4	Professional sport teams/promoters	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P7	 	 	 

	5415, 5112	Software development and publishing	 	 	 	 	P30	P30	P30	P30	P30	 	 

	5417	Research, development and testing	 	 	 	 	 	 	P2, 17, 31	P2, 17, 31	 	P2	P6

	8113*	Heavy equipment and truck repair	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	 	P	 

	*	Commercial/industrial accessory uses	 	P22	 	 	 	P22	P	P	P7	P	 

	561431	Mailbox rental services	 	 	 	 	P15, 28	P	P	P	P	P16	 

	*	Helistop (emergency landings excluded from permitting requirements)	 	 	 	 	C23	C23	C24, 32	C24, 32	C7, 23	C24	C24

B. Development Conditions.

(1) Except self-service storage.

(2) Except NAICS Industry No. 54172 – Commercial, economic, sociological, and educational research. See general business services/office.

(3) Only as a government, public agency, community service, or nonprofit use, or as an accessory to a permitted use.

(4) Only as an accessory to a permitted use. 

(5) Only as an accessory to a permitted use and as a facility fully accessible to the public.

(6) Only as a medical research and development facility associated with a hospital or other medical service provider.

(7) Not permitted on sites contiguous to property designated Low Density Residential or less by the City of Woodinville adopted Comprehensive Plan. This limitation also applies to sites in unincorporated King County with equivalent designations.

(8) Except for NAICS Major Group Nos. 541, 561 and 323.

(9) No outdoor storage of materials.

(10) Limited to office uses. No storage of nonoffice equipment, tools, machinery, supplies or commercial vehicles exceeding one-ton capacity.

(11) Limited to current location. No new self-storage land uses are permitted in the Office zone as of January 1, 2003.

(12) Limited to self-service household moving truck or trailer rental accessory to a gasoline service station and NAICS Industry No. 49211 – Courier services, except by air.

(13) Limited to NAICS Industry No. 49211 – Courier services, except by air.

(14) Accessory to an apartment development of at least 12 units, provided:

(a) The gross floor area in self-service storage shall not exceed 50 percent of the total gross floor area of the apartment dwellings on the site;

(b) All outdoor lights shall be deflected, shaded and focused away from all adjoining property;

(c) The use of the facility shall be limited to dead storage of household goods;

(d) No servicing or repair of motor vehicles, boats, trailers, lawn mowers or similar equipment; 

(e) No outdoor storage or storage of flammable liquids, highly combustible or explosive materials or hazardous chemicals;

(f) No residential occupancy of the storage units;

(g) No business activity other than the rental of storage units to the apartment dwellings on the site; and

(h) A resident manager shall be required on the site and shall be responsible for maintaining the operation of the facility in conformance with the conditions of approval.

(15) Service limited to the use of dry-ink toner copying only, and toxic chemical usage for any of the processing equipment, either as part of the process or for cleaning and maintenance of equipment, is prohibited.

(16) Only as an accessory use to another permitted use, not to exceed 49 percent of gross floor area.

(17) No outdoor storage or display. All activity associated with permitted use shall take place within an enclosed building.

(18) Individual transportation and taxi services are permitted.

(19) Limited to commuter parking facilities for users of transit, carpools or ride-share programs, provided:

(a) They are located on existing parking lots for churches, schools, or other permitted nonresidential uses which have excess capacity available during commuting hours; and

(b) The site is adjacent to a designated arterial that has been improved to a standard acceptable to the Public Works Department.

(20) Not permitted in the Pedestrian Core Design District or Civic/Gateway Design District; see WMC 21.40.030.

(21) Limited to NAICS 5322, Consumer goods rental.

(22) Storage limited to accessory storage of commodities sold at retail on the premises or materials used in the fabrication of commodities sold on the premises.

(23) Limited to emergency medical evacuation sites in conjunction with police, fire or health service facility.

(24) Allowed as accessory to an allowed use; or limited to emergency evacuation sites in conjunction with police, fire or health service facility.

(25) Parking lots that are intended as a primary use must be completely within an enclosed structure. All parking lots and garages shall conform to the City’s adopted design standards in Chapter 21.40 WMC. 

(26) Permitted professional office uses shall be limited to the following NAICS Major Group and Industry Numbers:

(a) 5242 – Insurance agents, brokers and service;

(b) 53121 – Real estate agents and managers;

(c) 54111 – Legal services;

(d) 541330 – Engineering services;

(e) 541611 – Administrative management and general management consulting services; and

(f) 54182 – Public relations services.

(27) A maximum of 20 percent of the gross square footage of the ground floor of any building may be used for professional office uses, and up to 40 percent of gross square footage of floors above the ground floor for the entire development may be used for professional office uses.

(28) Services such as photographic processing, photo printing or other types of photo processing that employ wet chemical processes are prohibited. 

(29) Reserved.

(30) Office, service and sales uses are permitted. Manufacturing uses are not permitted.

(31) Research, development and testing uses may not use biohazardous, radioactive, nuclear, or fissile materials.

(32) Limited to rooftop helistops. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.21.080 Retail/wholesale land uses.

	A. RETAIL/WHOLESALE LAND USES

	NAICS#	SPECIFIC LAND USE	R1 – 4	R5 – 8	R9 – 18	R19+	NB	TB	GB	CBD	O	I	P/I

	423	Wholesale trade (34)	 	 	 	 	P34	P34	P34	P34	P34	P	P34

	*	Building, hardware and garden materials	 	 	 	 	P2	P	P	P4, 28	 	 	 

	*	Forest products sales	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 

	*	Department and variety stores	 	 	 	 	 	P5	P	P	 	 	 

	445	Food stores	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P29	 	 	 

	*	Agricultural crop sales	P3, 7	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	*	Motor vehicle and boat dealers	 	 	 	 	 	 	P31, 32	P8, 27, 30, 31	 	 	 

	4413	Auto supply stores	 	 	 	 	 	 	P9	P9, 30	 	P	 

	4471	Gasoline service stations	 	 	 	 	P	P	C12, 33	C12, 27, 33	 	P	 

	448	Apparel, jewelry and accessory stores	 	 	 	 	P	P	 	P	 	 	 

	44311*	Furniture and home furnishings stores	 	 	 	 	 	P21	P	P	 	 	 

	722	Eating and drinking places	 	 	 	 	P10, 16	P10, 16	P	P12	P17	P6	P1

	*	Tasting room	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P12	P26

C25	 

	*	Drug stores	 	 	 	 	P23	P	P	P	P18, 19	 	P13

	44531	Liquor stores	 	 	 	 	P24	 	P	P	 	 	 

	45331	Antique/collectable shops	 	 	 	 	P	P4	P	P	 	 	 

	*	Collectable shops	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	P	 	 	 

	*	Secondhand/used merchandise shops	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	P22	 	 	 

	*	Sporting goods and related stores	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P	 	 	 

	*	Book, stationery, video and art supply stores	 	 	 	 	P	P11	P11	P11	 	 	 

	*	Monuments, tombstones, and gravestones	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	 	P	 

	*	Hobby, toy, game shops	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P	 	 	 

	*	Photographic and electronic shops	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P	 	 	 

	*	Fabric shops	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P	 	 	 

	45431	Fuel dealers	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 

	*	Florist shops	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P	 	 	P13

	*	Personal medical supply stores	 	 	 	 	C	 	P	P	 	 	 

	*	Pet shops	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P	 	 	 

	*	Bulk retail	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P12	 	 	 

	*	Auction houses	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P1	 	P	 

	4412	Truck and motorhome dealers (14)	 	 		 	 	 	C12, 30	 	 	P	 

	*	Auto parts yard	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P20	 

	*	Sexually oriented businesses (15)	 	 	 	 	 	 	P11	 	 	P11	 

	*	Gift shops	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P	 	 	P13

B. Development Conditions.

(1) Only as an accessory to a permitted use.

(2) Only hardware and garden materials stores shall be permitted.

(3)    (a) Limited to products produced on site; and

(b) Covered sales areas shall not exceed a total area of 500 square feet.

(4) Excludes used building material stores and pawnshops.

(5) Limited to NAICS Industry No. 45299 – Variety stores, and further limited to a maximum of 2,000 square feet of gross floor area.

(6) Permitted in conjunction with an on-site food processing facility; otherwise permitted only in multi-tenant building and limited to a maximum of 2,000 square feet of gross floor area.

(7)    (a) The floor area devoted to retail sales shall not exceed 2,500 square feet;

(b) Sales shall be limited to agricultural produce and plants;

(c) Storage areas for produce may be included in a farm store structure or in any accessory building;

(d) Hours of operation shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. during the months of May through September and 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. during the months of October through April. Outside lighting is permitted; provided, no off-site glare is allowed; and

(e) Noncontiguous lands within the City of Woodinville may be assembled by an individual farmer or group of farmers for the purposes of establishing a source of local products to be sold in a farm store on one of the properties.

(8) Excluding retail sale of trucks exceeding one-ton capacity.

(9) Only the sale of new or reconditioned automobile supplies is permitted.

(10) Excluding NAICS Industry No. 72241 – Drinking places.

(11) Sexually oriented businesses shall be prohibited within:

(a) Six hundred sixty feet of the perimeter of the building or point of access in which any other sexually oriented business is located; or

(b) Three hundred thirty feet from any Office zone or Residential zone, except the Single-Family Residential zoned areas to the west and east of the North Industrial Neighborhood Sexually Oriented Business Overlay District; or

(c) Three hundred thirty feet of any school, licensed daycare, public park, community center, public library, sports club with children’s activities, or church which conducts religious or educational classes for minors.

(12) Subject to the City’s adopted commercial design standards.

(13) Only as an accessory to a hospital or other medical facility.

(14) Includes wholesale and retail sale of trucks exceeding one-ton capacity.

(15) See Chapter 21.25 WMC for regulations governing a sexually oriented business. See the zoning map for regulations governing the location of sexually oriented businesses.

(16) No drive-through window restaurants, except drive-through kiosks with a footprint of less than 200 square feet that serve beverages and preprepared, prepackaged food items to be consumed off site.

(17) Permitted only on sites with a High Density Residential (R-48)/Office zone designation.

(18) Except NAICS 453991 – Tobacco stores and stands, which are not permitted.

(19) Drug stores are limited to 25 percent of total office building square footage.

(20) The perimeter of all areas used for the storage of inoperable vehicles or vehicle parts must be screened with a six-foot sight-obscuring fence and a 10-foot width of Type I landscaping.

(21) Limited to culinary-related uses under the following NAICS categories:

(a) 443111 – Household appliance stores; and

(b) 44229 – Other home furnishings stores.

These uses are only permitted as part of a development that integrates residential with tourist-oriented business development on the property and is conditioned through a development agreement with the City that ensures the proposed mixed use development meets the vision and goals of the Tourist District Master Plan. 

(22) Limited to a maximum of 10,000 square feet of gross floor area.

(23) Gross floor area of drug stores shall not exceed 3,500 square feet.

(24) Beverage sales limited to beer and wine. 

(25) Tasting rooms are only permitted on those properties that have sufficient parking, vehicular access to the site, and pedestrian access to the business entrance as determined by the Director. Tasting rooms are required to undergo review for traffic impacts pursuant to Chapter 3.39 WMC and the infrastructure standards as adopted under Chapter 12.09 WMC. A parking study will be required to determine the number of spaces needed to meet the needs of a tasting room. All facilities shall provide or obtain: ADA compliant facilities; current State liquor license as a tasting room; direct pedestrian access from the business entrance to a public street or other public trail.

(26) Permitted as an accessory to an on-site wine, beer or spirits production facility. 

(27) Not permitted in the Pedestrian Core Design District or Civic/Gateway Design District; see WMC 21.40.030.

(28) Limited to a maximum of 24,000 square feet of gross floor area in the Pedestrian Core District; see WMC 21.40.030.

(29) Limited to a maximum of 10,000 square feet of gross floor area in the Pedestrian Core Design District or Civic/Gateway Design District; see WMC 21.40.030.

(30) No outdoor storage or display. All activity associated with permitted use shall take place within an enclosed building. 

(31) No direct vehicle access to a public right-of-way.

(32) Outdoor storage or display shall comply with the outdoor sales lot design standards in WMC 21.40.150. All other activity associated with permitted use shall take place within an enclosed building.

(33) Gasoline service stations shall comply with the gasoline service station design standards in WMC 21.40.160.

(34) Wholesale trade is limited to:

(a) An accessory use to another permitted retail use, and subject to the same development conditions as that retail use; or

(b) An accessory use to a use where items are items manufactured, warehoused, or assembled on site. Retail area is limited to 10 percent of the gross floor area, not to exceed 3,000 square feet, regardless of gross floor area of the principal use. 

(35) Not permitted in the Pedestrian Core Design District; see WMC 21.40.030. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.21.090 Manufacturing land uses.

	A. MANUFACTURING LAND USES

	NAICS#	SPECIFIC LAND USE	R1 – 4	R5 – 8	R9 – 18	R19+	NB	TB	GB	CBD	O	I	P/I

	311	Food and kindred products	 	 	 	 	 	 	C1	C1, 3	 	P2	 

	31212, 31213,

31214	Winery/brewery/distillery	 	 	 	 	 	P	C1	C1, 3	 	P	 

	313	Textile mill products	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 

	315	Apparel and other textile products	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	 	 	P	 

	321	Wood products, except furniture	 	 	 	 	 	 	C6	 	 	P	 

	337	Furniture and fixtures	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	 	 	P	 

	322	Paper and allied products	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 

	511	Printing and publishing	 	 	 	 	P7	P7	P7	P7	 	P	 

	325	Chemicals and allied products	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 

	32411	Petroleum refining and related industries	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	 

	3261, 3262	Plastics and rubber products manufacturing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 

	326212	Tire retreading	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	 

	316	Leather and leather goods	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	 	 	P	 

	3271 – 3279	Stone, clay, glass and concrete products	 	 	 	 	 	 	P4, 9	 	 	P	 

	331	Primary metal industries	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	 

	332	Fabricated metal products	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 

	333	Industrial and commercial machinery, heavy machinery and equipment	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P, C	 

	334	Computer and office equipment, measuring and controlling instruments	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	 	 	P	 

	335	Electronic and other electric equipment and appliances	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	 	 	P	 

	336	Transportation equipment manufacturing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	 

	339	Miscellaneous light manufacturing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 

	*	Motor vehicle and bicycle manufacturing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	 

	*	Aircraft, ship and boat building	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P10, C	 

	51211	Movie production/distribution	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 

	*	Accessory use, commercial/industrial	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P12, 13	 

B. Development Conditions.

(1) Permitted upon the Hearing Examiner’s determination that appropriate mitigation measures will be implemented sufficient to mitigate the anticipated impacts of the use. Such mitigation measures may include, but are not necessarily limited to, the following:

(a) Odor control.

(b) Noise control.

(c) Operating hour limitations.

(d) Facility size limitations.

(2) Except slaughterhouses.

(3) Production facilities are limited to a maximum of 10,000 square feet of gross floor area. When the production facility is in conjunction with a retail use, the square footage of the retail use shall not be included in this limitation.

(4) Permitted only as part of a permitted artist’s studio.

(5) Reserved.

(6) Limited to uses found in NAICS Industry No. 33711 – Wood kitchen cabinets, and No. 32191 – Millwork (excluding planing mills).

(7) Limited to photocopying and printing services offered to the general public.

(8) Reserved.

(9) Only within enclosed buildings.

(10) Limited to boat building of craft not exceeding 48 feet in length and aircraft parts.

(11) Reserved.

(12) Retail activity is limited to items manufactured or assembled on site.

(13) Retail area is limited to 10 percent of the gross floor area not to exceed 3,000 square feet regardless of gross floor area of the principal manufacturing use.

(14) Food and kindred products manufacturing is permitted outright in conjunction with on-site retail sales of the products manufactured on site. Otherwise, a conditional use permit is required.

(15) Wineries, breweries and distilleries shall be permitted outright: (a) in conjunction with on-site tasting and/or retail sales of the products manufactured on site; and (b) up to the following production limits: for wineries, up to 250,000 liters per year; for breweries, up to 60,000 barrels per year; and for distilleries, up to 60,000 gallons per year. Otherwise, a conditional use permit is required. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.21.100 Resource land uses.

	A. RESOURCE LAND USES

	NAICS#	SPECIFIC LAND USE	R1 – 4	R5 – 8	R9 – 18	R19+	NB	TB	GB	CBD	O	I	P/I

	 	AGRICULTURAL:	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	111	Growing and harvesting crops	P	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 

	112	Raising livestock and small animals	P6	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	FORESTRY:	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	113	Growing and harvesting forest products	P	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 

	541710*	Forest research	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P2, 3	P	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT:	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	11251	Hatchery/fish preserve and aquaculture (1)	C	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 

	*	Wildlife shelters	C	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	MINERAL:	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	21232	Mineral extraction	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	327	Processing of minerals	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 

	32412	Asphalt paving, roofing and saturated materials manufacturing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	RESOURCE ACCESSORY USES:	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	*	Resource accessory uses	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P4	 

B. Development Conditions.

(1) May be further subject to the provisions of City of Woodinville Shoreline Management Program.

(2) Only forest research conducted within an enclosed building.

(3) Not permitted on sites contiguous to property designated Low Density Residential or less by the City of Woodinville adopted Comprehensive Plan. This limitation also applies to sites in unincorporated King County with equivalent designations.

(4) Excluding housing for agricultural workers.

(5) Reserved.

(6) Only allowed in the R-1 zone. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.21.110 Regional land uses.

	A. REGIONAL LAND USES

	NAICS#	SPECIFIC LAND USE	R1 – 4	R5 – 8	R9 – 18	R19+	NB	TB	GB	CBD	O	I	P/I

	*	Jail (26)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S11, 25	S11

	*	Secure community transition facility (26)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S16, 25	 

	*	Work release facility (26)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S11, 25	 

	*	Public agency animal control facility	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P11	S11

	*	Public agency training facility (26)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S4, 11	S11

	*	Hydroelectric generation facility (26)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S11	 

	*	Nonhydroelectric generation facility (26)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S11, 12, 15	S11, 12	 

	*	Major communication facility	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S6c, 11	 

	*	Personal wireless facilities (14)	14	14	14	14	14	14	14	14	14, 15	14	14

	*	Electric vehicle (EV) charging station (20)	P19, 21, 23	P19, 21, 23	P19, 21, 23	P19, 21, 23	P	P	P	P	P	P	P

	*	Rapid charging station (22)	P23	P23	P23	P23	P	P	P	P	P	P	P

	*	Battery exchange station	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P24	 

	21111	Oil and gas extraction (26)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S11, 15	S11	 

	*	Energy resource recovery facility	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S11	 

	*	Soil recycling/incineration facility	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C11	 

	*	Landfill	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S11	S8, 11

	*	Transfer station	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S17	 

	*	Wastewater treatment facility (26)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S11	S11

	*	Municipal water production (26)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S11	S11

	*	Airport/heliport (26)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S11	S8, 11

	*	Landing field	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S11	S8, 11

	*	Transit base (26)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S11	S11

	*	Transit park and ride lot (26)	 	 	 	 	 	 	S11	S11, 5	 	S11	S11

	*	School bus base (26)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S11	S8, 11

	711212	Racetrack	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	*	Fairground (26)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S11	S8, 11

	71213,

71219	Zoo/wildlife exhibit (2) (26)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S8, 11

	71131	Stadium/arena (26)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S11	S8, 11

	6113

6112	Junior college

College/university (26)	 	 	 	 	 	 	S11, 27	S11, 27	 	S11	S11

B. Development Conditions.

(1) Except technical institutions. See vocational schools on general services land use table, WMC 21.21.050.

(2) Except arboretum. See WMC 21.21.040, recreation/cultural land use table.

(3) Except weapons armories and outdoor shooting ranges.

(4) Except outdoor shooting range.

(5) Not permitted in the Pedestrian Core District or Civic/Gateway District; see WMC 21.40.030.

(6)(a) Limited to one receive-only satellite parabolic antenna not exceeding one meter in diameter in a Residential zone and not exceeding two meters in diameter in all other zones.

(b) Limited to no more than three satellite parabolic antennas not exceeding one meter in diameter in a Residential zone and not exceeding two meters in diameter in all other zones.

(c) Limited to tower consolidations.

(7) Except racing of motorized vehicles.

(8) Only as an accessory to a permitted use or if operated by a public agency.

(9) Only as a reuse of a public school facility subject to the provisions of WMC 21.22.210 and 21.22.220.

(10) Only as a reuse of surplus nonresidential facility subject to the provisions of WMC 21.22.210.

(11) If use abuts an agriculturally zoned property, the following conditions apply:

(a) Buildings and parking areas must be set back 50 feet from the property line abutting an agriculturally zoned parcel;

(b) Fifty feet of Type II landscaping is required in the setback; and

(c) Nonemergency access through or to the agriculturally zoned parcel is prohibited.

(12) Excluding impoundment of water using a dam.

(13) Limited to facilities that comply with the following provisions:

(a) Any new diversion structure shall not:

(i) Exceed a height of eight feet as measured from the streambed; or

(ii) Impound more than three surface acres of water at the normal maximum surface level.

(b) There shall be no active storage.

(c) The maximum water surface area at any existing dam or diversion shall not be increased.

(d) An exceedance flow of no greater than 50 percent in mainstream reach shall be maintained.

(e) Any transmission line shall be limited to a:

(i) Right-of-way of five miles or less; and

(ii) Capacity of 230 KV or less.

(f) Any new, permanent access road shall be limited to five miles or less.

(g) The facility shall be located above an anadromous fish barrier.

(14) Personal wireless service facilities shall be regulated pursuant to Chapter 21.37 WMC.

(15) Not permitted on sites contiguous to property designated Low Density Residential or less by the City of Woodinville adopted Comprehensive Plan. This limitation also applies to sites in unincorporated King County with equivalent designations.

(16) Secure community transition facilities (SCTF) shall in no case be sited adjacent to, immediately across a street or parking lot from, or within the line of sight of risk potential facilities defined in the law as schools, school bus stops, preschool facilities, daycare facilities, public parks, publicly dedicated trails, sports fields, recreational and community centers, churches, synagogues, temples, mosques or public libraries.

(17) Permitted only (i) within the North Industrial Neighborhood as illustrated by Figure 1-2 of the Woodinville Comprehensive Plan, (ii) upon approval of a special use permit, and (iii) upon the Hearing Examiner’s determination that appropriate measures have been or, prior to operation of the transfer station, will be implemented sufficient to mitigate the anticipated impacts of the transfer station. Such mitigation measures may include, but are not necessarily limited to, the following:

(a) Odor control.

(b) Vector control.

(c) Waste residency durational limitations.

(d) Containment and/or covering of waste transport vehicles.

(e) Operating hour limitations.

(f) Facility size limitations.

(g) Maximum weight limitations for waste transport vehicles.

(h) Noise control.

(i) Truck tip limitations. 

(18) Fuel source limited to a renewable resource (i.e., solar or wind).

(19) Level 1 and Level 2 charging stations only.

(20) Level 1 and Level 2 charging stations are permitted in critical aquifer recharge areas and in other critical areas when serving an existing use.

(21) Allowed only as an accessory use to a primary permitted use or permitted conditional use.

(22) The term rapid is used interchangeably with Level 3 and rapid charging.

(23) Only as an electrical vehicle charging station – restricted.

(24) The battery exchange station work or service shall only be performed in an enclosed building, and no outdoor storage of materials.

(25) Not permitted within the Tourist District Overlay; see WMC 21.26.010.

(26) Only allowed through the essential public facilities regulations; see Chapter 21.32 WMC.

(27) Limited to a maximum of 15,000 square feet of gross floor area. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


Chapter 21.22 DENSITY AND DIMENSIONS

Sections:

21.22.010    Purpose.

21.22.020    Interpretation of tables.

21.22.030    Densities and dimensions – Residential zones.

21.22.040    Densities and dimensions – Public and Commercial/Industrial zones.

21.22.050    Measurement methods.

21.22.060    Minimum urban residential density.

21.22.070    Calculations – Allowable dwelling units or floor area.

21.22.080    Calculations – Site area used for density calculations.

21.22.090    Lot area – Prohibited reduction.

21.22.100    Lot area – Minimum lot area for construction.

21.22.110    Setbacks – Specific building or use.

21.22.120    Setbacks – Modifications.

21.22.130    Setbacks – From alley.

21.22.140    Setbacks – Adjoining half-street or designated arterial.

21.22.150    Setbacks – Projections allowed.

21.22.160    Height – Exceptions to limits.

21.22.170    Lot size averaging.

21.22.180    Lot divided by zone boundary.

21.22.190    Sight distance requirements.

21.22.200    Nonresidential land uses in Residential zones.

21.22.210    Reuse of facilities – General standards.

21.22.220    Reuse of facilities – Reestablishment of closed public school facilities.


21.22.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish requirements for development relative to residential density and basic dimensional standards as well as specific rules for general application. The standards and rules are established to provide flexibility in project design, provide solar access, and maintain privacy between adjacent uses. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.22.020 Interpretation of tables.

(1) WMC 21.22.030 and 21.22.040 contain general density and dimension standards for the various zones and limitations specific to a particular zone(s). Additional rules, exceptions, and methodology are set forth in Chapters 21.23 through 21.27 WMC.

(2) The density and dimension tables are arranged in a matrix format on two separate tables and are delineated into two general land use categories:

(a) Residential; and 

(b) Resource and commercial/industrial.

(3) Development standards are listed down the left side of both tables, and the zones are listed across the top. Each cell contains the minimum or maximum requirement of the zone. Numbers in parentheses identify specific requirements found in the development conditions that follow the matrix. A blank box indicates that there are no specific requirements. If more than one standard appears in a cell, each standard will be subject to any applicable development condition as noted.

(4) Property-specific development standards may be applied to specific properties or areas containing several properties through a development agreement consistent with Chapter 36.70B RCW, and approved by the City Council. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.22.030 
Densities and dimensions – 
Zone standards
Regulation	R-1	R-4	R-6	R-8	R-12	R-18	R-24	R-48

	
Maximum density (du/ac) 1  4  6  8  12  18  24  48 
Minimum density (% of base density) 75% 75% 85% 80% 75% 70% 	
Minimum Lot Area 35,000 sf	9,000 sf	6,000 sf	5,000 sf	 	 	 	 

	
Minimum Lot Width (3)	100 ft/75 ft (7) (12)	60 ft	50 ft	30 ft	30 ft	30 ft	30 ft	30 ft

	
Minimum Lot Width at Street (9)	100 ft/75 ft (12)	60 ft	50 ft	30 ft	 	 	 	 

	
Minimum Street Setback (3)	10 ft (8)	10 ft (8)	10 ft (8)	10 ft (8)	10 ft (8)(17)	10 ft (8)	10 ft (8)	10 ft (8)

	
Minimum Interior Setback (3)	10 ft (7)	5 ft (10)	5 ft (10)	5 ft (10)	5 ft (10)(17)	5 ft (10)	5 ft (10)	5 ft (10)

	
Base Height	35 ft	35 ft	35 ft	35 ft	35 ft (17)	45 ft	45 ft	45 ft

	
Maximum Building Coverage:

Percentage (5) (16)	15%  (11) (14)	35%	50%	55%	60%	60%	70%	70%

	
Minimum Landscape Coverage:

Percentage (5) (16)	75% (15)	50%	25%	20%	10% (17)	10%	10%	10%

B. 

Notes:
Development Conditions.

(1) Except as modified by WMC 21.22.170 and 21.51.080.

(2) Also see WMC 21.22.060.

(3) These standards may be modified under the provisions for zero-lot-line and townhome developments.

(4) Reserved.

(5) Applies to each individual lot. Building coverage and minimum landscaping coverage standards for:

(a) Regional uses shall be established at the time of permit review; or

(b) Nonresidential uses in Residential zones shall comply with WMC 21.22.200.

(6) Reserved.

(7) The standards of the R-4 zone shall apply if a lot is less than 15,000 square feet in area.

(8) At least 20 linear feet of driveway shall be provided between any garage, carport, or other fenced parking area and the street property line. The linear distance shall be measured along the centerline of the driveway from the access point to such garage, carport or fenced area to the street property line or pedestrian walkway, sidewalk, or easement access road(s), whichever is closest to the garage, carport or fenced parking area.

(9) Panhandle Lots. Panhandle lots shall be allowed subject to the following requirements:

(a) Panhandle lots shall be allowed in cul-de-sacs, where critical areas do not allow the normal frontage required by the underlying zone, and/or where a private road is not practical.

(b) The width of the access corridor shall be 20 feet between the street and the main body of the lot.

(c) The other density and dimension standards in this section shall be determined using only the main body of the lot, and excluding the access corridor, including: minimum lot area, minimum lot width, setbacks, maximum building coverage and minimum landscaping coverage.

(d) The access corridor shall maintain a minimum height clearance of 12 feet, and shall be designed to meet the driveway requirements in the City’s infrastructure standards.

(e) There shall not be two or more contiguous panhandle lots. In cases where multiple contiguous panhandle lots are proposed, a private road shall be required instead.

(f) The access corridor shall provide direct access to a paved public or private street.

(g) The access corridor must be part of the lot, and be under the same ownership as the main body of the lot.

(h) All requirements of the fire code shall be met, including access and sprinkler requirements.

(10) For townhomes or apartment development, the setback shall be the greater of:

(a) Twenty feet along any property line abutting R-4 through R-8 zones; or

(b) The average setback of the R-4 through R-8 zoned single-family detached dwelling units from the common property line separating said dwelling units from the adjacent townhome or apartment development, provided the required setback applied to said development shall not exceed 60 feet. The setback shall be measured from said property line to the closest point of each single-family detached dwelling unit, excluding projections allowed per WMC 21.22.150 and accessory structures existing at the time the townhome or apartment development receives conditional use permit approval by the City.

(c) See also landscaping requirements under WMC 21.43.060(2).

(11) On any lot over one acre in area, an additional five percent may be used for buildings related to agricultural or forestry practices.

(12) For the R-1 zone only, the minimum lot width at street shall be 100 feet at the street; except that the minimum lot width at street on cul-de-sacs shall be 75 feet at the street.

(13) Reserved.

(14) Maximum Building Coverage Percentage.

	Lot Size	Max. Percentage Allowed

	Less than 15,000 SF	35%

	15,000 to 24,999 SF	28%

	25,000 to 34,999 SF	22%

	35,000 SF or more	15%

(15) Minimum Landscaping Coverage Percentage.

	Lot Size	Min. Percentage Allowed

	Less than 15,000 SF	50%

	15,000 to 24,999 SF	58%

	25,000 to 34,999 SF	67%

	35,000 SF or more	75%

(16) New mobile home parks are exempt from this requirement.

(17) If located in the Tourist District Overlay, see WMC 21.26.010. (Ord. 634 § 27, 2016; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.22.040 Densities and dimensions – Public and Commercial/Industrial zones.

	A. STANDARDS	P/I	NB	TB	GB	CBD (27)	O	I

	Base Density:

Dwelling Unit/Acre	 	 	24 du/ac	 	36 du/ac	36 du/ac	 

	Residential Maximum Floor/Lot Ratio: Square Feet	 	 	 	 	2/1 (1) (26)	 	 

	Minimum Building Step-Back	 	 	 	10 ft (22)	10 ft (23)	 	 

	Minimum Street Setback (17)	10 ft	10 ft (5)

20 ft (11)	10 ft

(2) (5) (14)	10 ft (5)

25 ft (15)	10 ft (5) (10)	10 ft	25 ft

10 ft (9) (14) (15)

	Minimum Interior Setback (13) 	20 ft

(7) (16)	10 ft	20 ft

(7) (14)	25 ft

(7) (15)	20 ft

(7)	20 ft (7)	20 ft (7) (14) (15)

50 ft (8) (14)

	Base Height (10) 	45 ft (4)	35 ft 	35 ft (14) (20)	39 ft (18)	39 ft (6) 

35 ft (12)	45 ft (4)	45 ft (14)

	Maximum Height with Incentives	 	 	 	51 ft (24)	51 ft (24)	 	 

	Maximum Height with Structured Parking	 	 	 	60 ft (25)	57 ft (25)	 	 

	Maximum Building Coverage: Percentage	 	 	25% (28)	 	 	 	 

	Commercial/Industrial Maximum Floor/Lot Ratio: Square Feet 	4/1	1/1	1/1	2/1 (19)	2.5/1	4/1	3/1

	Minimum Landscape Coverage: Percentage 	10%	20%	15% (14)	10%	10%	20%	10% (14)

	Maximum Building Square Footage	 	10,000	 	(21)	(21)	 	 

B. Development Conditions.

(1) A transit-oriented housing development, as defined in WMC 21.11.220 and meeting the criteria contained in WMC 21.27.010(2), may use alternative development standards in WMC 21.27.010(3) as a method of calculating allowable dwelling units.

(2) Ten-foot setback may not be required on those sites abutting a designated pedestrian-oriented street pursuant to City of Woodinville Design Standards, or as may hereafter be amended.

(3) Reserved.

(4) Height is limited to 35 feet when development abuts a Low or Moderate Residential zoned property.

(5) Gas station pump islands shall be placed no closer than 25 feet to street front lines.

(6) Mixed use developments that include a minimum of 25 percent of the total area as office space may increase height limits to a maximum of 45 feet.

(7) A 20-foot Type I landscaped setback only required along property lines adjoining single-family residential zones, otherwise no specific setback requirement.

(8) Fifty-foot setback only required along property lines adjoining Residential zones for industrial uses established by conditional use permits, otherwise no specific interior setback requirement.

(9) Ten-foot setback permitted only on those sites not abutting a designated arterial street.

(10) Height limits may be increased when portions of the structure or building which exceed the base height limit provide one additional foot of street and interior setback beyond the required setback for each foot above the base height limit, provided the maximum height may not exceed 45 feet.

(11) Twenty-foot setback required only along property lines adjoining the Woodinville-Duvall Road right-of-way.

(12) Height is limited to 35 feet in the Civic Gateway Design District only when development abuts a Low or Moderate Residential zoned property.

(13) See WMC 21.43.050, Perimeter landscaping, street frontages and interior lot lines.

(14) If located in the Tourist District, see WMC 21.26.010.

(15) Reserved.

(16) Fifty-foot setback required along property lines abutting agriculturally zoned parcels.

(17) Does not apply to signage. For applicable sign setbacks, see Chapter 21.35 WMC.

(18) Height limit may be increased to a maximum of 45 feet when a multistory building is designed and used entirely for either office or mixed office and retail uses.

(19) Maximum floor/lot area ratio percentage may be increased to 4/1 when a multistory building is designed and used entirely for office or mixed office and retail uses.

(20) Height may be increased to 67 feet if the following requirements are satisfied: 

(a) The increase in height is authorized by a development agreement pursuant to Chapter 21.82 WMC; 

(b) Structured parking to house required off-street parking is provided;

(c) City-approved public open space is provided and either Gold or a higher level of Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) rating pursuant to the U.S. Green Building Council rating system is achieved for all buildings over 45 feet in height, or two or more of the following City-approved incentives are provided: 

(i) Exceptional design (see WMC 21.40.380) in architectural features of structures and/or site layout;

(ii) LEED Certification pursuant to the U.S. Green Building Council rating system for all buildings over 45 feet in height; or

(iii) Private open space specified in a development agreement and acceptable to the City;

(d) The total footprint of all parts of the building over the height of 57 feet cannot exceed 25 percent of the total footprint of the building or 3,000 square feet, whichever is less; 

(e) All parts of the building over 57 feet in height are set back a minimum of five feet from the outer edges of the exterior walls of the building directly below; and

(f) All parts of the building over 57 feet in height are located in a manner that minimizes obstruction of views of a substantial number of properties within a half-mile radius of the building using a visual and viewshed analysis containing the following: 

(i) Diagrams and maps showing the viewshed from various site plan perspectives; and 

(ii) Computer simulations and photographs with graphics depicting the views and appearance to and from various perspectives and nearby lots before and after the building’s construction; and 

(iii) Such simulations and depictions shall be mutually agreed upon by the director and the applicant.

(21) In the design districts pursuant to WMC 21.40.030 and in the CBD zoned area west of the Sammamish River hereby designated as the Old Town District, a retail establishment in a single building may not exceed the gross square footage (GSF) in the aggregate as follows:

(a) Little Bear Creek Corridor Design District retail GSF limit: 80,000 square feet;

(b) Civic/Gateway Design District retail GSF limit: 25,000 square feet;

(c) Pedestrian Core Design District retail GSF limit: 30,000 square feet;

(d) East Frame Design District retail GSF limit: 150,000 square feet;

(e) Transition Area Design District retail GSF limit: 75,000 square feet;

(f) Old Town District retail GSF limit: 35,000 square feet.

“Gross square footage (GSF)” is measured according to WMC 21.11.090. “Retail establishment” means a business engaged in the selling of goods or merchandise from a fixed location for direct purchase by the consumer, including services incidental to the sale of such goods. The GSF of abutting retail establishments shall be aggregated in cases where the establishments: (i) are engaged in the selling of similar or related goods, wares, or merchandise and operate under common ownership or management; or (ii) share checkout stands, a warehouse, or a distribution facility; or (iii) otherwise operate as associated, integrated or cooperative business enterprises.

(22) Building elevation fronting a street shall step back a minimum of 10 feet after the first 30 feet of building height. “Street” does not include SR 522.

(23) Building elevation fronting a street shall step back a minimum of 10 feet after the first 28 feet of building height or other building modulations as approved through design review approval pursuant to Chapter 21.40 WMC. 

(24) A maximum height of 51 feet with no more than four floors may be obtained through the provision of City-approved public open space and at least two or more City-approved incentives intended to mitigate the impacts of taller buildings and/or provide a public benefit pursuant to WMC 21.40.330(2)(c).

(25) Developments that provide structured parking for all required on-site parking may build to a maximum of 57 feet in the CBD zone and 60 feet in the GB zone, so long as they also include City-approved public open space and at least two or more City-approved incentives intended to mitigate the impacts of taller buildings and/or provide a public benefit pursuant to WMC 21.40.330(2)(c).

(26) Residential density for residential developments and residential/commercial mixed use developments located in the CBD zone may be determined by the use of a floor area ratio of 2.0 that provides for mitigation or public benefits that exceed those required under standard regulations. Said mitigation and public benefits shall include individual exceptional design in architectural features of structure and/or site design which features shall include at least two items from each category as listed below and as may be further defined: 

	Mitigation and Public Benefits for Residential FAR

	Category I	Category II

	Water Features

Pedestrian and Bicycle Facilities

Kiosks (limited to one per 300 feet of street frontage)

Street Furniture

Enhanced Weather Canopies

Public Art	Courtyards

Public Open Space

Transit Facilities

Exceptional Design

Affordable Housing (10% of the total units to be affordable)

LEED Certified Structures (minimum Silver) or equivalent

(27) For all new residential development within the CBD zone, individual unit clothes washer and dryer connections are required for each new residential unit. 

(28) The 25 percent maximum building coverage is calculated using only the residential development covering the lot. When adjoining lots are grouped under a binding site plan pursuant to WMC 21.61.070, the maximum building coverage for residential development may be calculated using the net developable area of the entire binding site plan. (Ord. 688 § 1, 2019; Ord. 678 § 2, 2019; Ord. 656 § 1, 2018; Ord. 634 § 28, 2016; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.22.050 Measurement methods.

The following provisions shall be used to determine compliance with this title:

(1) Street setbacks shall be measured as follows:

(a) Where existing or planned street and sidewalk improvements are both located on a public right-of-way, the street setback shall extend perpendicularly from the lot line;

(b) Where existing or planned street improvements are located on a public right-of-way and the City has obtained a public access easement for placement of existing or planned sidewalk improvements, the street setback shall extend perpendicularly from the lot line and may overlap the public easement;

(c) Where the existing street improvements are on private property and consist of a separate tract, the street setback shall extend perpendicularly from the lot line; and

(d) Where the existing street improvements are located over a private access easement, the street setback shall extend perpendicularly from the edge of the easement closest to the structure;

(2) Lot widths shall be measured by scaling a circle of the applicable diameter within the boundaries of the lot; provided, that an access easement shall not be included within the circle;

(3) Building height shall be measured from the average finished grade measured six feet away from the building to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or the average height of the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof. The average finished grade shall be determined by first delineating the smallest square or rectangle which can enclose the building and then averaging the elevations taken at the midpoint of each side of the square or rectangle; provided, that the measured elevations do not include berms;

(4) Lot area shall be the total horizontal land area contained within the boundaries of a lot;

(5) Impervious surface calculations shall not include areas of turf, landscaping, natural vegetation, five-foot (or less) wide pedestrian walkways, or surface water retention/detention facilities; and

(6) The square footage of buildings and other structures shall be measured from the outside walls and shall include all spaces in between said walls. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.22.060 Minimum urban residential density.

Minimum density for residential development in the urban areas designated by the Comprehensive Plan shall be based on the tables in WMC 21.22.030, adjusted as provided for in WMC 21.22.070 and 21.22.080.

(1) A proposal may be phased, when compliance with the minimum density requirement results in noncompliance with the standards of Chapter 21.81 WMC; provided the overall density of the proposal is consistent with this section.

(2) Minimum density requirements may be waived by City of Woodinville if the applicant demonstrates one or more of the following:

(a) The proposed layout of the lots in a subdivision or the buildings in a multiple dwelling development will not preclude future residential development consistent with the minimum density of the zone.

(b) The nonsensitive area of the parcel is of a size or configuration that results in lots which cannot meet the minimum dimensional requirements of the zone.

(c) In the R-12 through R-48 zones, the area of the parcel required to accommodate stormwater facilities exceeds 10 percent of the area of the site.

(d) The site contains a national, State or County historic landmark.

(3) The minimum density requirements of WMC 21.22.030 shall be adjusted for the proportion of sensitive areas on the site, as follows:

	Percentage of Site in Sensitive Area and/or Buffer	Percentage Minimum Density

	 1 – 20%	90%

	21 – 40%	80%

	41 – 60%	60%

	61 – 80%	40%

	81 – 99%	20%

	 

	 	Total dwelling units allowed by base density

	x	Minimum density (WMC 21.22.030)

	x	Percentage of minimum density

	=	Adjusted minimum density

(Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.22.070 Calculations – Allowable dwelling units or floor area.

Permitted number of units or floor area shall be determined as follows:

(1) Unless subject to WMC 21.22.040(B)(1), the maximum allowed number of dwelling units shall be computed by multiplying the site area (in acres) by the applicable residential density, subject to WMC 21.22.080;

(2) The allowed floor area which excludes structured or underground parking areas and mechanical equipment shall be computed by multiplying the project site area by the applicable floor/lot area ratio (FAR); and 

(3) When calculations result in a fraction, the fraction shall be rounded to the nearest whole number as follows:

(a) Fractions of 0.50 or above shall be rounded up; and

(b) Fractions below 0.50 shall be rounded down. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.22.080 Calculations – Site area used for density calculations.

All areas of a site used in the calculation of allowed residential density or project floor area shall exclude from the site area all submerged lands, including Lake Leota. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.22.090 Lot area – Prohibited reduction.

Any portion of a lot that was required to calculate and ensure compliance with the standards and regulations of this title shall not be subsequently subdivided or segregated from such lot. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.22.100 Lot area – Minimum lot area for construction.

Except as provided for nonconformances by Chapter 21.34 WMC, in the R zones no construction shall be permitted on a lot that contains an area of less than 2,500 square feet or that does not comply with the applicable minimum lot width, except for townhome developments or zero lot line subdivisions. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.22.110 Setbacks – Specific building or use.

When a building or use is required to maintain a specific setback from a property line or other building, such setback shall apply only to the specified building or use. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.22.120 Setbacks – Modifications. 

The following setback modifications are permitted:

(1) When the common property line of two lots is covered by a building(s), the setbacks required by this chapter shall not apply along the common property line; and

(2) When a lot is located between lots having nonconforming street setbacks, the required street setback for such lot may be the average of the two nonconforming setbacks or 60 percent of the required street setback, whichever results in the greater street setback. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.22.130 Setbacks – From alley.

(1) Structures may be built to the property line abutting an alley, except as provided in subsection (2) of this section.

(2) Vehicle access points from garages, carports or fenced parking areas shall be set back from the alley property line to provide a straight line length of at least 26 feet from the access point to the opposite edge of the alley. No portion of the garage or the door in motion may cross the property line. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.22.140 Setbacks – Adjoining half-street or designated arterial.

In addition to providing the standard street setback, a lot adjoining a half-street or designated arterial shall provide an additional width of street setback sufficient to accommodate construction of the planned half-street or arterial. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.22.150 Setbacks – Projections allowed.

Projections may extend into required setbacks as follows:

(1) Fireplace structures, bay or garden windows, enclosed stair landings, closets, or similar structures may project into any setback; provided such projections are:

(a) Limited to two per facade,

(b) Not wider than 10 feet, and

(c) Not more than 24 inches into an interior setback or 30 inches into a street setback; 

(2) Porches and decks which exceed 18 inches above the finished grade may project:

(a) Eighteen inches into interior setbacks, and

(b) Five feet into the street setback;

(3) Uncovered porches and decks not exceeding 18 inches above the finished grade may project to the property line; 

(4) Eaves may not project more than:

(a) Eighteen inches into an interior setback, 

(b) Twenty-four inches into a street setback, or

(c) Eighteen inches across a lot line in a zero lot line development; and

(5) Fences with a height of six feet or less may project into any setback; provided, that the sight distance requirements of WMC 21.22.190 are maintained. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.22.160 Height – Exceptions to limits.

The following structures may be erected above the height limits of WMC 21.22.030 through 21.22.050.

(1) Roof structures housing or screening elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or similar equipment required for building operation and maintenance; and

(2) Fire or parapet walls, skylights (not cupolas), chimneys, smoke stacks, church steeples, major or minor communication facility transmission structures, and street poles.

(3) For structures with pitched roofs, portions of the space created by the slope of the roof and not providing for human habitation shall not be included in the calculations for determining the maximum allowed height of the structure; provided, that the highest point of any such pitched roof shall not exceed the base height otherwise permissible in the underlying zone by more than 20 percent or 10 feet, whichever is greater; provided further, that the pitch of any such roof shall not be greater than a six-foot rise in a 12-foot run, unless a greater pitch is approved through the design review process. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.22.170 Lot size averaging.

Within the R-1 to R-8 zones, the lot areas in subdivisions and short plats may be reduced below the minimum lot size of the zone, provided:

(1) The total number of lots in the development shall not exceed the base density pursuant to WMC 21.22.030 for the zone.

(2) The average lot size shall not be less than that required in the zone. In computing the average lot size, no lot shall be credited with more than 1.15 times the minimum lot size. No lot shall be less than 0.85 times the minimum lot size.

(3) Corner lots shall not be smaller than the required minimum lot size allowed in that zone.

(4) The provisions of WMC 21.22.100 shall also apply.

(5) All other dimensional requirements of this code must be met.

(6) Preliminary plats approved utilizing lot size averaging shall not receive final approval by divisions unless each division individually satisfies these provisions. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.22.180 Lot divided by zone boundary.

When a lot is divided by a zone boundary, the following rules shall apply:

(1) When a lot contains both residential and nonresidential zoning, the zone boundary between the zones shall be considered a lot line for determining permitted building height and required setbacks on the site; 

(2) When a lot contains Residential zones of varying density, any residential density transfer within the lot shall only be allowed from the portion with the lesser residential density to that of the greater residential density; and 

(3) Uses on each portion of the lot shall only be those permitted in each zone pursuant to Chapter 21.21 WMC. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.22.190 Sight distance requirements.

Except for utility poles, trunks of approved street trees, and traffic control signs, the following sight distance provisions shall apply to all intersections, roadways, and site access points:

(1) A sight distance triangle area as determined by subsection (2) of this section shall contain no fence, berm, vegetation, on-site vehicle parking area, signs or other physical obstruction between 42 inches and eight feet above the existing street grade.

(2) The sight distance triangle at:

(a) A street intersection shall be determined by measuring 15 feet along both street property lines beginning at their point of intersection. The third side of the triangle shall be a line connecting the endpoints of the first two sides of the triangle; or

(b) A site access point shall be determined by measuring 15 feet along the street lines and 15 feet along the edges of the driveway beginning at the respective points of intersection. The third side of each triangle shall be a line connecting the endpoints of the first two sides of each triangle.

(3) The Development Services Director may require modification or removal of structures, landscaping or other objects located in required street setbacks, if: 

(a) Such improvements prevent adequate sight distance to drivers entering or leaving a driveway and no reasonable driveway relocation alternative for an adjoining lot is feasible; or 

(b) Clear lines of sight are obstructed by such structures, landscaping, or objects as to pose a potential public safety hazard as determined by the Development Services Director. 

(4) Any access or roadway where additional vehicle trips are expected to utilize that access or roadway as a result of a new or modified development shall conform to “A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets,” 1994 Edition (or latest edition as may be amended hereafter) by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials. Exceptions to this rule may be granted by the Public Works Director.


[IMAGE]


(Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.22.200 Nonresidential land uses in Residential zones.

Except for utility facilities and uses listed in WMC 21.21.110, all nonresidential uses located in the R zones shall be subject to the following requirements:

(1) Building coverage shall not exceed:

(a) Fifty percent of the site in the R-1 through R-8 zones.

(b) Sixty percent of the site in the R-12 through R-48 zones.

(2) Impervious surface coverage shall not exceed:

(a) Seventy percent of the site in the R-1 through R-8 zones.

(b) Eighty percent of the site in the R-12 through R-48 zones.

(3) Buildings and structures, except fences and wire or mesh backstops, shall not be closer than 30 feet to any property line, except as provided in subsection (4) of this section.

(4) Single detached dwelling allowed as accessory to a church or school shall conform to the setback requirements of the zone.

(5) Parking areas are permitted within the required setback area from property lines; provided such parking areas are located outside of the required landscape area.

(6) Sites shall abut or be accessible from at least one public street functioning at a level consistent with City of Woodinville street design standards. New high school sites shall abut or be accessible from a public street functioning as an arterial per the City of Woodinville design standards.

(7) The base height shall conform to height limitations of the zone in which the use is located. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.22.210 Reuse of facilities – General standards.

The interim or permanent reuse of surplus nonresidential facilities in Residential zoned areas shall require that no more than 50 percent of the original floor area may be demolished for either permanent or interim reuse of facilities. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.22.220 Reuse of facilities – Reestablishment of closed public school facilities. 

The reestablishment or reconversion of an interim nonschool use of school facilities back to school uses shall require a site plan and the issuance of a change of use permit. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


Chapter 21.23 OFFICE/RESEARCH PARK DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY

Sections:

21.23.010    Special district overlay – Office/Research Park Development.


21.23.010 Special district overlay – Office/Research Park Development. 

(1) The purpose of the Office/Research Park Special District Overlay is to establish an area for development to occur in a campus setting with integrated building designs, flexible grouping of commercial and industrial uses, generous landscaping and buffering treatment, and coordinated auto and pedestrian circulation plans. Office/Research Park Districts shall only be established in areas zoned GB, O, or I zones. Permitted uses shall include all uses permitted in the GB, O, and I zones, as set forth in Chapter 21.21 WMC, regardless of the classification used as the underlying zone on a particular parcel of land.

(2) The following development standards shall apply to uses locating in Office/Research Park Overlay Districts:

(a) All uses shall be conducted inside an entirely enclosed building, except that outdoor storage and loading areas may be permitted if screened from public view with Type I landscaping;

(b) An internal circulation plan shall be developed to facilitate pedestrian and vehicular traffic flow between major project phases and individual developments;

(c) The standards set forth in this section shall be applied to the development as a unified site, notwithstanding any division of the development site under a binding site plan or subdivision;

(d) All buildings shall maintain a 50-foot setback from perimeter streets and from Residential zoned areas;

(e) The minimum required landscaping coverage shall be 20 percent. Another 20 percent shall be devoted to open space. Open space may include all required landscaping, and any unbuildable environmentally sensitive areas and their associated buffers;

(f) The landscaping standards set forth in Chapter 21.43 WMC are modified as follows:

(i) Twenty-foot-wide Type II landscaping shall be provided along exterior streets, and 20-foot-wide Type III landscaping shall be provided along interior streets;

(ii) Twenty-foot-wide Type I landscaping shall be provided along property lines adjacent to Residential zoned areas;

(iii) Fifteen-foot-wide Type II landscaping shall be provided along lines adjacent to Nonresidential zoned areas; and

(iv) Type IV landscaping shall be provided within all surface parking lots as follows:

(A) Fifteen percent of the parking area, excluding required perimeter landscaping, shall be landscaped in parking lots with more than 30 parking stalls;

(B) At least one tree for every four parking stalls shall be provided, to be reasonably distributed throughout the parking lot; and

(C) No parking stall shall be more than 40 feet from some landscaping;

(v) An inventory of existing site vegetation shall be conducted pursuant to the procedures set forth in Chapter 21.50 WMC. Significant trees identified in the inventory shall be retained as set forth in Chapter 21.50 WMC for commercial and industrial developments; and

(vi) An overall landscaping plan which conforms to the requirements of this subsection shall be submitted for the entire district or each major development phase prior to the issuance of any site development, grading, or building permits;

(g) Lighting within an office/industrial park shall shield the light source from the direct view of surrounding residential areas;

(h) Refuse collection/recycling areas and loading or delivery areas shall be located at least 100 feet from residential areas and screened with a solid view-obscuring barrier;

(i) Off-street parking standards as set forth in Chapter 21.44 WMC are modified as follows:

(i) One space for every 300 square feet of floor area shall be provided for all uses, except on-site daycare, exercise facilities, eating areas for employees, archive space for tenants, and retail/service uses;

(ii) Parking for on-site daycare, exercise facilities, eating areas for employees, archive space for tenants, and retail/service uses shall be no less than one space for every 1,000 square feet of floor area and no greater than one space for every 500 square feet of floor area; and

(iii) At least 25 percent of required parking is encouraged to locate in a parking structure; and

(j) Sign standards as set forth in Chapter 21.35 WMC are modified as follows:

(i) Signs visible from the exterior of the park shall be limited to one monument office/research park identification sign at each entrance. Such signs shall not exceed an area of 64 square feet per sign;

(ii) No pole signs shall be permitted; and

(iii) All other signs shall be visible only from within the park. (Ord. 634 § 29, 2016; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


Chapter 21.24 PEDESTRIAN-ORIENTED COMMERCIAL OVERLAY

Sections:

21.24.010    Special district overlay – Pedestrian-Oriented Commercial Development.


21.24.010 Special district overlay – Pedestrian-Oriented Commercial Development.

(1) Purpose. The purpose of the Pedestrian-Oriented Mixed Use Development Special District Overlay is to provide for high-density, pedestrian-oriented housing/retail/employment uses. This overlay is also intended to promote development that:

(a) Provides adequate protection of environmental resources;

(b) Provides adequate private and public infrastructure, including but not limited to park and open space, transportation and parking facilities;

(c) Makes efficient use of land;

(d) Meets minimum requirements for development parcel size and type of development; and

(e) Is consistent with Comprehensive Plan goals for this district. This special district overlay shall only be utilized in areas zoned CBD.

(2) Findings. The City finds that the downtown area is an appropriate location for development that has a higher intensity than permitted under standard regulations; provided, that the development is adequately served by necessary infrastructure, provides adequate mitigations or public benefits, and is planned, designed and constructed in a manner that is consistent with the City’s Comprehensive Plan vision for a compact, attractive, functional and pedestrian-oriented downtown area. The City finds that higher development intensities may create greater impacts. Developments involving greater intensity must provide an increased level of mitigation and public benefit commensurate with their increased community impact. By allowing greater development intensity subject to increased mitigation and public benefits, the City desires to form productive partnerships that will further the City’s adopted goals, objectives and policies. The City finds that partnerships involving larger developments on larger parcels will most likely have a greater opportunity for accomplishing the City’s vision for downtown. The City finds that these partnerships will likely benefit the City and enhance the economic vitality of the Woodinville community in numerous ways, including, but not limited to, the following:

(a) Significantly increasing sales tax revenues and other revenues to the City;

(b) Increasing real property tax revenues;

(c) Increasing the City’s employment base;

(d) Generating substantial business and sales taxes from construction required for developments;

(e) Increasing the City’s access to goods and services;

(f) Redirecting the public’s retail expenditures to business located within the City limits;

(g) Providing amenities for public enjoyment such as trails, open public spaces and plaza areas;

(h) Creating attractive and unique condominium communities;

(i) Helping the City to accommodate its GMA residential and employment growth targets where adequate infrastructure exists, or can be provided concurrent with development;

(j) Helping to preserve and enhance the natural environment through directing growth and development to areas where environmental impacts can be adequately mitigated;

(k) Helping to provide solutions to problems or amenities that have community-wide benefits;

(l) Enhancing the vehicular and nonmotorized transportation circulation in the City’s downtown area; and

(m) Providing for development in the downtown area consistent with the City’s Downtown and Little Bear Creek Corridor Master Plan.

(3) Development involving higher intensity than permitted under standard regulations may be authorized only through the use of a development agreement with the City. Pursuant to RCW 36.70B.170 and the provisions of this chapter, any such development agreement shall include development standards, which may include but are not necessarily limited to the following:

(a) Project elements such as permitted uses, applicable residential and nonresidential densities, intensities, and/or building sizes;

(b) The amount and payment of impact fees imposed or agreed to in accordance with any applicable provisions of State law, any reimbursement provisions, other financial contributions by the property owner, inspection fees, or dedications;

(c) Mitigation measures, development conditions, and other requirements pursuant to applicable City and State regulations;

(d) Design standards such as maximum heights, setbacks, drainage and water quality requirements, landscaping, and similar development features;

(e) Affordable housing;

(f) Parks and open space preservation;

(g) Phasing;

(h) Review procedures and standards for implementing decisions;

(i) A build-out or vesting period for applicable standards; and

(j) Any other appropriate development requirement or procedure.

(4) In order to ensure a level of mitigation or public benefit proportionate to the increased impacts of the development, a development agreement authorized under this section may provide for the completion of projects and acquisition of facilities contained within adopted City plans, including, but not limited to, the following:

(a) Transportation or other improvement projects within the six-year or 20-year Comprehensive Plan Capital Improvement Plan.

(b) Nonmotorized transportation improvements within the adopted Nonmotorized Improvement Plan.

(c) Park and open space improvements within the Parks, Recreation and Open Space Plan.

(d) Environmental enhancement projects approved by the City.

(e) Repealed by Ord. 532.

(f) Other mitigation projects that the City finds will provide mitigation and/or public benefits commensurate with any development with higher intensity than permitted under standard regulations.

(5) Criteria for Use of Development Agreements. For the purposes of this section, development that contemplates approval of higher development intensity through the voluntary use of a development agreement between the City and developer is reserved for developments that are determined by the Development Services Director (Director) to meet the following criteria:

(a) The development, whether single-story or multistory, combines two or more distinct land use categories that are consistent with the City’s Comprehensive Plan.

(6) Development Potential. Except as otherwise provided herein, all development in the Pedestrian-Oriented Commercial Overlay zone shall comply with all applicable City regulations. Developments that are determined by the Director to meet the criteria as shown in subsection (5) of this section and that enter into a voluntary development agreement with the City and that provide mitigations or public benefits that exceed those required under standard regulations may receive additional development potential or incentives, as part of an approved development agreement that specifies the mitigation or public benefit and the City-provided development incentive. These development incentives may include but are not limited to the following:

(a) City cooperation in timing the construction of public infrastructure, including but not limited to streets designated on the City’s official Street Map, that will in part serve and facilitate the proposed development.

(b) Potential increased structure height limit, up to a maximum of 150 percent (52 and one-half feet) of the standard limit of 35 feet, as specified in WMC 21.22.040.

(c) Potential increased residential density, up to a maximum of 150 percent (54 du/ac) of the standard limit of 36 du/ac, as specified in WMC 21.22.040, or use a floor area ratio (FAR) of not more than two and one-half.

(d) Other alternative standards, as determined through a development agreement, consistent with the provisions of Chapter 21.82 WMC.

(7) Permitted Uses. Permitted uses in the CBD zone shall be those uses permitted in the underlying zone, excluding the following:

(a) Motor vehicle, boat and mobile home dealer;

(b) Gasoline service station;

(c) Drive-through retail and service uses;

(d) Car washes;

(e) Retail and service uses with outside storage, e.g., lumber yards, miscellaneous equipment rental or machinery sales;

(f) Wholesale uses;

(g) Recreation/cultural uses as set forth in WMC 21.21.040, except parks, sports clubs, theaters, libraries and museums;

(h) NAICS Major Group 811111 (automotive repair, services and parking) except 812930 (automobile parking, but excluding tow-in parking lots);

(i) NAICS Major Group 811 (miscellaneous repair services), except 811490 (watch, clock and jewelry repair);

(j) NAICS Major Group 51211 (motion pictures), except 512131 (theater) and 53223 (video tape rental);

(k) NAICS Major Group 621 (health services), except offices and outpatient clinics (6211 through 6213);

(l) NAICS Industry Group 484 (trucking and courier service);

(m) Public agency archives;

(n) Self-service storage;

(o) Manufacturing land uses as set forth in WMC 21.21.090, except 323 (commercial printing);

(p) Resource land uses as set forth in WMC 21.21.100;

(q) Kennel or cattery;

(r) Bulk retail (over 50,000 square feet gross floor area);

(s) Veterinary clinic;

(t) Cemetery;

(u) Columbarium;

(v) Research development and testing;

(w) Public agency utility yard;

(x) Construction and trade;

(y) Miscellaneous equipment rental;

(z) Regional land uses set forth in WMC 21.21.110, except for personal wireless facilities, transit park and ride lot, and college or university.

(8) Development Standards. The following development standards shall apply to uses locating in Pedestrian-Oriented Mixed Use Commercial Overlay District:

(a) Every use shall be subject to applicable provisions of the City’s adopted commercial design standards, and other applicable provisions of the WMC. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


Chapter 21.25 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS OVERLAY

Sections:

21.25.010    Purpose and intent.

21.25.020    Findings of fact.

21.25.030    Definitions.

21.25.040    Prohibition.

21.25.050    Regulated uses.

21.25.060    Permit required.

21.25.070    Investigation and application.

21.25.080    Issuance of permit.

21.25.090    Licenses required for sexually oriented businesses – Fees.

21.25.100    Licenses for managers, entertainers, escorts, or nude or semi-nude models – Fee.

21.25.110    Temporary licenses for managers and entertainers.

21.25.120    Due date for license fees.

21.25.130    Manager on premises.

21.25.140    License nontransferable.

21.25.150    License – Posting and display.

21.25.160    Specifications – Adult cabarets and adult theaters.

21.25.170    Standards of conduct and operation applicable to adult cabarets.

21.25.180    Regulations.

21.25.190    Regulations applicable to video stores not qualifying as sexually oriented businesses.

21.25.200    Exemptions.

21.25.210    License – Name of business and place of business.

21.25.220    Inspections.

21.25.230    Hours of operation.

21.25.240    Alcohol prohibited.

21.25.250    Recordkeeping requirements.

21.25.260    Denial, suspension or revocation of license or permit – Procedures – Appeal.

21.25.270    Suspension or revocation of license/permit – Duration.

21.25.280    Applicability to currently operating businesses.

21.25.290    Limitations of liability.

21.25.300    Penalties for violation.

21.25.310    Public nuisance – Injunctions.


21.25.010 Purpose and intent.

It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented businesses and related activities, including the activities of sexually oriented business patrons, in order to promote health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Woodinville, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location of sexually oriented businesses within the City. It is not the intent of the City that it should be the purpose or effect of this chapter to impose a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent of the City that it should be the effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the State or Federal Constitutions, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented material to their intended market. Neither is it the intent of the City that it should be the purpose or effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene materials. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.25.020 Findings of fact.

Based upon a wide range of evidence presented to the Woodinville City Council and to other jurisdictions, including but not limited to the testimony of law enforcement officers and members of the public, and on other evidence, information, publications, articles, studies, documents, case law and material submitted to and reviewed and considered by the City Council and staff, the councils of other cities within the region and in other jurisdictions, nonprofit organizations and other legislative bodies, the City Council makes the following findings:

(1) Certain conduct occurring on premises offering sexually oriented business creates secondary impacts that are detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the City, and therefore such conduct must be regulated as provided herein.

(2) Regulation of the sexually oriented business industry through permitting and/or licensing is necessary because, in the absence of such regulation, significant criminal activity has historically and regularly occurred.

(3) It is necessary to license entertainers in the sexually oriented industry to prevent the exploitation of minors; to ensure that each such entertainer is an adult; and to ensure that such entertainers have not assumed a false name, which would make regulation of the entertainer difficult or impossible.

(4) The evidence supporting the need to protect minors and families from the criminal and other unlawful activities associated with the operation of sexually oriented businesses is compelling. The provisions of this chapter are necessary to ensure that sexually oriented uses in Woodinville are conducted a reasonable distance away from places where minors regularly gather, often in large numbers.

(5) It is necessary to have a licensed manager on the premises of sexually oriented businesses at such times as such establishments are offering sexually oriented business so there will, at all necessary times, be an individual responsible for the overall operation of the establishment, including the actions of patrons, entertainers and other employees.

(6) The license fees required herein are nominal fees imposed as necessary cost recoupment measures designed to help defray the substantial expenses incurred by the City in regulating the sexually oriented businesses, and in increased police costs in enforcement.

(7) Businesses providing sexually oriented businesses are increasingly associated with ongoing prostitution, disruptive conduct and other criminal activity. Such businesses are currently not subject to effective regulation and constitute an immediate threat to the public peace, health and safety. The hours of operation of such businesses have a significant impact on the occurrence of illegal drug transactions, and other criminal activities.

(8) Due to the information presented regarding the connection of prostitution with sexually oriented businesses, there is concern over sexually transmitted diseases which is a legitimate health concern of the City and thus requires regulation of sexually oriented businesses in order to protect the health, safety and well-being of the public.

(9) Many cities, including Seattle and Tacoma, have experienced negative secondary impacts from sexually oriented business land uses. The skid row effect is one of these secondary impacts and is evident in certain parts of Seattle. Such an effect would be significantly magnified in Woodinville due to the difference in size and characteristics of the City.

(10) The City of Woodinville may rely on the experiences and studies of other cities, counties and organizations in assessing the need for regulation of sexually oriented business use, operations and licensing.

(11) The City takes notice of studies and experiences of other cities and counties in combating the specific adverse impacts of sexually oriented businesses.

(12) Regulation of sexually oriented businesses should be developed to prevent deterioration and/or degradation of the vitality of the community before the problem exists, rather than in response to an existing problem.

(13) Increased levels of criminal activities occur in the vicinity of sexually oriented businesses. Additionally, hidden ownership interests for the purpose of skimming profits, avoiding payment of taxes, and racketeering have historically occurred in sexually oriented businesses, in the absence of regulations.

(14) The City Council therefore finds that the protection and the preservation of the public health, safety and welfare requires establishment of this chapter.

(15) There are sufficient important and substantial government interests to provide a constitutional basis for reasonable regulation of time, place, and manner under which sexually oriented businesses can operate.

(16) It is not the intent of this chapter to unconstitutionally suppress any speech activities protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution or Article I, Section 5 of the Washington State Constitution but to enact content neutral chapters which address the secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses, as well as the health problems associated with such businesses.

(17) In a family community, sexually oriented businesses are not uniformly compatible with community standards, as defined during the numerous public hearings.

(18) The law enforcement resources available for responding to problems associated with or created by sexually oriented businesses are limited and are best conserved by regulating and licensing sexually oriented businesses and those associated with them.

(19) In order to assure that all conditions, regulations, etc., are met, the City has established a reasonable time period for review of license applications. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.25.030 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words are defined as follows:

(1) “Sexually oriented business” shall mean those businesses defined as follows:

(a) “Adult arcade” shall mean an establishment containing any individual viewing areas or booths, where, for any form of consideration, one or more still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors, or similar machines, or other image producing machines are used to show films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproduction of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

(b) “Adult bookstore,” “adult novelty store,” or “adult video store” shall mean a commercial establishment which has 30 percent or more of its inventory or floor space used for the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, any one or more of the following:

(i) Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other visual representations or sexually oriented paraphernalia or novelty items, which are characterized by the depiction, description or reproduction of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or

(ii) An establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of materials depicting, describing or reproducing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, and still be categorized as adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such establishments from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store so long as 30 percent or more of its inventory or floor space is offering for sale or rental, for some form of consideration, the specified materials which depict or describe specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.

(iii) Video stores that sell and/or rent video tapes or other photographic reproductions and associated equipment shall come within this definition if 30 percent or more of the inventory or floor space includes the rental or sale of video tapes or other photographic reproductions or associated equipment which are characterized by the depiction, description or reproduction of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

(c) “Adult cabaret” shall mean a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served, which features: 

(i) Persons who appear semi-nude or nude; or

(ii) Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.

(d) “Adult motel” means a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment which:

(i) Offers sleeping accommodation to the public for any form of consideration and provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; or

(ii) Offers a sleeping room for rent for a rental fee period of time that is less than 20 hours; or

(iii) Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room for a period of time that is less than 20 hours.

(e) “Adult motion picture theater” shall mean a commercial establishment where films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions characterized by the depiction or description of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities are shown for any form of consideration.

(f) “Adult theater” shall mean a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which, for any form of consideration, features persons who appear live in a semi-nude or nude state, or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.

(g) “Escort agency” means a person or business association that furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as its business purpose for a fee, tip, or other consideration. This shall not include any escort service offered by a charity or nonprofit organization for medical assistance or assistance to the elderly or infirm.

(h) “Nude or semi-nude model studio” shall mean any place where a person, who appears nude or semi-nude, or displays specified anatomical areas, is provided for money or any other form of consideration, to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons.

(2) “Barker” shall mean any person who is located at the entrance of or outside of a sexually oriented business, and attempts to solicit business for the same by using voice or gestures.

(3) “City” means the City of Woodinville, Washington.

(4) “Director” means the City Clerk, or designee.

(5) “Employee” means any and all persons, including managers, entertainers, and independent contractors who work in or at or render any services directly related to the operation of any sexually oriented business of live entertainment, adult theater, or adult use establishments, whether or not such person is paid compensation by the operator of said business.

(6) “Entertainer” means any person who provides sexually oriented live entertainment in an adult cabaret or adult theater, whether or not they are an employee of the business and whether or not a fee is charged or accepted for such entertainment, and whether or not nude, semi-nude or clothed.

(7) “Manager” means any person who manages, directs, administers, or is in charge of, the affairs and/or the conduct of a sexually oriented business.

(8) “Escort” means a person who provides services for an escort service as defined herein, who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person.

(9) “Establishment” shall mean and include any of the following:

(a) The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; or

(b) The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented businesses defined herein; or

(c) The addition of any of the sexually oriented businesses defined herein to any other existing sexually oriented business; or

(d) The relocation of any such sexually oriented business; or

(e) An existing sexually oriented business.

(10) “Nude or state of nudity” shall mean the appearance or less than complete and opaque covering of the human anus, male genitals, female genitals, or the areola or nipple of the female breast.

(11) “Operator” shall mean and include the owner, significant stockholder or significant owner of interest, permit holder, custodian, manager, operator, or person in charge of any permitted or licensed premises.

(12) “Permitted and/or licensed premises” shall mean any premises that requires a license and/or permit and that is classified as a sexually oriented business.

(13) “Permittee and/or licensee” shall mean a person in whose name a permit and/or license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a permit and/or license.

(14) “Person” shall mean any individual, firm, joint venture, co-partnership, association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

(15) “Semi-nude” shall mean a state of dress in which clothing completely and opaquely covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areola and nipple of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.

(16) “Specified anatomical areas” shall mean and include any of the following:

(a) Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, anus, or areola of the female breasts or any artificial depiction of the same; or

(b) Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.

(17) “Specified criminal activities” shall mean any conviction for acts which are sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape, or distribution of obscenity or erotic material to minors, prostitution, pandering, or racketeering.

(18) “Specified sexual activity” shall mean and include any of the following:

(a) The fondling or other intentional touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; or

(b) Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; or

(c) Masturbation, actual or simulated; or

(d) Human genitals or artificial depictions of the same in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or

(e) Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (18)(a) through (d) of this section.

(19) “Sexually oriented live entertainment” means a live performance which is characterized by the performer’s exposure of specified anatomical areas or performance of specified sexual activities.

(20) “Obscenity” shall mean the definition of lewd material provided by RCW 7.48.050, including any matter:

(a) Which the average person applying contemporary community standards would find, when considered as a whole, appeals to the prurient interests in sex; or 

(b) Which explicitly depicts or describes patently offensive representations or descriptions of:

(i) Ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated; or 

(ii) Masturbation, fellatio, cunnilingus, bestiality, excretory functions or lewd exhibitions of the genital or genital areas; or 

(iii) Violent or destructive sexual acts, including, but not limited to, human and/or animal mutilation, dismemberment, rape and/or torture; or 

(iv) Has a dominant theme which appeals to the prurient interests of minors and sex; which is patently offensive because it affronts contemporary community standards relating the description of representation of sexual matters or sadomasochistic abuse; and

(c) Which when considered as a whole lacks serious, literary, artistic, political or scientific value.

(21) “Transfer of ownership or control” of a sexually oriented business shall mean and include any of the following:

(a) The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; or

(b) The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or

(c) The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of a person possessing the ownership or control. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.25.040 Prohibition.

For the reasons stated in the recitals to the ordinance codified in this chapter and WMC 21.25.010, a person shall not use any property or premises for a sexually oriented business within the City of Woodinville, except as permitted in this chapter and WMC 21.21.080(B). (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.25.050 Regulated uses.

All sexually oriented businesses are subject to the provisions of WMC 21.25.040 and the regulations contained in this chapter. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.25.060 Permit required.

(1) No sexually oriented business shall be permitted to operate without a valid sexually oriented business permit, issued by the City for the particular type of business. It shall be unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor if he/she operates, knowingly allows or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without said permit.

(2) The City Clerk, or his/her designee, is responsible for granting, denying, revoking, renewing, suspending, and canceling sexually oriented business permits and related licenses. The Building Official and City Planner or his/her designee are responsible for ascertaining whether a proposed sexually oriented business for which a permit and/or license is being applied complies with all requirements enumerated herein and all other applicable zoning laws and/or regulations now in effect or as amended or enacted subsequent to the effective date of this chapter.

(3) An application for a sexually oriented business permit shall be made on a form provided by the City. Each person desiring to operate a sexually oriented business shall file with the City Clerk an application supplied by the City.

(4) An application shall be deemed complete upon receipt of all the information and documents requested by this section. Where necessary to determine compliance with this chapter, the City Clerk may request information or clarification in addition to that provided in a complete application. The completed application shall contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the following documents:

(a) If the applicant is:

(i) An individual/sole proprietor, the individual/owner shall state his/her legal name and any aliases, stage names, or previous names, date of birth, social security number and submit satisfactory proof that he/she is 18 years of age or older.

(ii) A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name, and the legal names of all partners, including their dates of birth, social security numbers, and submit satisfactory proof that each is 18 years of age and whether the partnership is general or limited, and a copy of the partnership agreement, if any.

(iii) A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of the State of Washington, the legal names, dates of birth, social security numbers, proof that each is 18 years of age or older and the capacity of all officers, directors and principal stockholders, the name of the registered corporate agent, and the address of the registered office for service of process.

(iv) As a part of the application process, each officer, director, or principal stockholder, as defined above, shall provide the City Clerk with an affidavit attesting to their identity and relationship to the corporation. Principal stockholder shall mean those persons who own 10 percent or greater interest in the sexually oriented business.

(b) Whether the applicant or any other individuals listed pursuant to subsections (4)(a)(i), (ii) and (iii) of this section within a four-year period immediately preceding the date of the application has been convicted of a specified criminal activity and, if so, the specified criminal act involved, the date of conviction and the place of conviction.

(c) Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed pursuant to this section has, within the last four years, had a previous permit or license under this chapter or other similar ordinances from another city or county denied, suspended, or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the permit or license was denied, suspended, or revoked, the entity denying the same, as well as the date of the denial, suspension, or revocation.

(d) Whether the applicant or any other entity listed pursuant to this section holds any other permits and/or licenses under this chapter, et seq., or other similar sexually oriented business license from another city or county and, if so, the names and locations of such other permitted businesses.

(e) The single classification of permit for which the applicant is filing.

(f) The location of the proposed sexually oriented business, including a legal description of the property, street address, and telephone number(s), if any.

(g) The applicant’s mailing address and residential address.

(h) Two two-inch by two-inch black and white photographs of the applicant, including any corporate applicants, taken within six months of the date of the application, showing only the full face of the same. The photographs shall be provided at the applicant’s expense. The license, when issued, shall have affixed to it one such photograph of the applicant.

(i) The applicant or each corporate applicant’s driver’s license number, social security number, and/or his/her State or Federally issued tax identification number.

(j) Each application shall be accompanied by a complete set of fingerprints of each person required to be a party to the application, including all corporate applicants as defined above, utilizing fingerprint forms as prescribed by the Chief of Police or his/her designee.

(k) In the case of all sexually oriented businesses, a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram must be professionally prepared and accepted by the City, and it must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches.

(l) Applicants for a permit and/or license under this chapter shall have a continuing duty to promptly supplement application information required in the event that said information changes in any way from what is stated on the application. The failure to comply with said continuing duty within 30 days from the date of such change by supplementing the application on file with the City Clerk or his/her designee shall be grounds for suspension of a permit and/or license.

(m) In the event the City Clerk or his/her designee determines or learns at any time that the applicant has improperly completed the application for a proposed sexually oriented business permit or license, he/she shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact and allow the applicant 10 days to properly complete the application. (The time period for granting or denying a permit shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is allowed an opportunity to properly complete the application.)

(n) The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this section, must have a current City business license, and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with health, fire, and building codes of the City.

(o) The applicant shall be required to pay a preliminary nonrefundable processing fee established by resolution at the time of filing an application under this section. This is a processing fee. License fees shall also be required in the event the application is approved.

(p) The fact that a person possesses other types of State or City permits and/or licenses does not exempt him/her from the requirement of obtaining a sexually oriented business permit.

(q) The application form for licenses and permits issued under this chapter shall contain a provision providing that under penalty of perjury, the applicant verifies that the information contained therein is true to the best of his/her knowledge.

(r) If any person or entity acquires, subsequent to the issuance of an adult business license, a significant interest in the licensed adult entertainment facility, notice of such acquisition shall be provided in writing to the City Clerk within 21 calendar days following such acquisition and the person acquiring the interest shall submit a complete application to the City Clerk pursuant to this section within 45 calendar days of acquiring such interest. For the purpose of this section, “significant interest” means principal responsibility for management or operation of an adult entertainment facility. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.25.070 Investigation and application.

(1) Upon receipt of an application properly filed with the City Clerk, and upon payment of the nonrefundable processing fee, the City Clerk or his/her designee shall immediately stamp the application as received and shall immediately thereafter send photocopies of the application to other City departments or other agencies responsible for enforcement of health, fire, and building codes and laws. Each department or agency shall promptly conduct an investigation of the application and the proposed sexually oriented business. Said investigation shall be completed within 20 working days of receipt of the application by the City Clerk or his/her designee, unless circumstances support extending the same. If such circumstances exist, the City shall inform the applicant of the same and why, and said extension shall not exceed 10 additional calendar days from the original expiration of the 20-day time period stated above. At the conclusion of its investigation, each department or agency shall indicate on the photocopy of the application its recommendation as to approval or disapproval of the application, date it, sign it, and in the event it recommends disapproval, state the specific reasons therefor, citing applicable laws or regulations.

(2) In the event the proposed adult entertainment facility is in a state of construction at the time of the inspection, each interested department or agency shall make a preliminary determination of approval or disapproval based on the drawings submitted in the application. Any adult business license approved prior to final construction of the adult entertainment facility shall contain a condition that the adult entertainment facility shall not open for business until the facility has been inspected and determined to be in compliance with applicable laws and regulations and substantially conforms with the drawings submitted with the application.

(3) A department or agency shall recommend disapproval of an application if it finds that the proposed sexually oriented business will be in violation of any provision of any statute, code, ordinance, regulation, or other law in effect in the City, or if the applicant does not meet the conditions as specified in this chapter. After its indication of approval or disapproval, each department or agency shall immediately return the photocopy of the application to the City Clerk or his/her designee. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.25.080 Issuance of permit.

(1) The City Clerk or his/her designee shall grant or deny an application for a permit within 30 days from the date of its proper filing unless the City or applicant establishes a good reason for an extension.

(2) Grant of Application for Permit.

(a) The City Clerk or his/her designee shall grant the application unless one or more of the criteria set forth in subsection (3) of this section (Denial of Application for Permit) is present.

(b) The permit, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented business. The permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place, at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it can be easily read at any time. It shall be valid until the end of the year.

(3) Denial of Application for Permit. The City Clerk or his/her designee shall deny the application for any of the following reasons:

(a) An applicant is under 18 years of age or will be employing a person under 18 years of age.

(b) An applicant is overdue on his/her payment to the City of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against him/her or imposed upon him/her in relation to a sexually oriented business.

(c) An applicant has failed to provide information required by this section or the application for the issuance of the permit, or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form.

(d) The applicant has failed to comply with any provision or requirement of this chapter.

(e) The premises to be used for the proposed sexually oriented business are not in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances.

(f) The applicant has been convicted, forfeited bail or other adverse finding for a specified criminal activity within the four years prior to the application date. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.25.090 Licenses required for sexually oriented businesses – Fees.

(1) No sexually oriented business shall be operated or maintained in the City of Woodinville unless the owner or operator has obtained a sexually oriented business permit as set forth above, and the applicable licenses from the City Clerk. For adult cabarets the required license shall be the adult cabaret license set forth in subsection (2) of this section. It is unlawful for any entertainer, employee, or operator to knowingly work in or about or knowingly perform any service directly related to the operation of an unlicensed adult cabaret business. Any adult cabaret must meet all of the requirements for a sexually oriented business license as set forth above.

(2) The annual fee for an adult cabaret business license shall be established by resolution. The amount shall be used for the cost of administration and enforcement of this chapter.

(3) The annual license fee for all other sexually oriented businesses described in subsection (2) of this section shall be established by resolution. The amount shall be used for the cost of administration and enforcement of this chapter.

(4) The above-referenced licenses expire annually on December 31st and must be renewed by January 1st.

(5) The applicant must be 18 years of age or older. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.25.100 Licenses for managers, entertainers, escorts, or nude or semi-nude models – Fee.

(1) No person shall work or perform as a manager, entertainer, escort, or nude or semi-nude model at an adult entertainment facility without a valid manager’s or entertainer’s license issued by the City Clerk.

(2) All applications shall be submitted to the City Clerk on a form supplied by the City and shall contain or be accompanied by all of the following information and documents:

(a) The date of the application.

(b) The legal name, any previous names, any aliases, any driver’s license number, any social security number, and the date of birth of the applicant.

(c) Documentation that the applicant has attained the age of 18 years. Any of the following shall be accepted as documentation of age:

(i) A valid driver’s license issued by any State bearing the applicant’s photograph and date of birth;

(ii) A valid identification card issued by any State bearing the applicant’s photograph and date of birth;

(iii) An official passport issued by the United States of America;

(iv) An immigration card issued by the United States of America; or

(v) Any other form of identification that the City Clerk determines to be acceptable.

(d) The height, weight, hair and eye color of the applicant.

(e) The present mailing and residential address of the applicant.

(f) The name and address of the adult entertainment facility at which the applicant will work or perform.

(g) A description of the principal activities or services to be rendered by the applicant at the adult entertainment facility.

(h) Two two-inch by two-inch color photographs of the applicant, taken within six months of the date of the application, showing the full face of the applicant. The photographs shall be provided at the expense of the applicant.

(i) A complete set of fingerprints of the applicant, taken by a designated City official, on a form adopted and approved by the City of Woodinville Police Department.

(j) A statement whether the applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal offense, and if so, the date, place, and jurisdiction of each specified criminal offense.

(k) A statement whether the applicant holds any license issued under this chapter or under a similar ordinance from another city or county, and if so, the operating names and locations of the other licensed businesses.

(l) A statement whether the applicant has had a previous license issued under this chapter denied, suspended, or revoked, and if so, the name and location of the adult entertainment facility for which the license was denied, suspended, or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension, or revocation.

(m) Authorization for the City, its agents, and employees to seek information to confirm any statements or other information set forth in the application.

(3) The applicant shall verify under penalty of perjury that the information contained in the application is true to the best of his or her knowledge.

(4) An application shall be deemed complete upon receipt of all the information and documents requested by this section. Where necessary to determine compliance with this chapter, the City Clerk may request information or clarification in addition to that provided in a complete application.

(5) Each manager’s and entertainer’s license application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee, the amount of which shall be established by resolution.

(6) In addition to the requirements of this chapter, an applicant for a manager’s or entertainer’s license must also obtain any other permits or licenses required by State or local laws or regulations. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.25.110 Temporary licenses for managers and entertainers.

An applicant for a manager’s or entertainer’s license shall be issued a temporary license upon the City’s receipt of a complete license application and fee. Said temporary license shall expire automatically on the fifteenth day following filing of a complete application and fee, unless the City Clerk has failed to approve or deny the license application, in which case the temporary license shall be valid until the City Clerk approves or denies the application, or until the final determination of any appeal from a denial of the application. In no event may the City Clerk extend the application review time for more than an additional 20 days. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.25.120 Due date for license fees.

All licenses required in this chapter must be issued and the applicable fees paid to the City Clerk at least 14 calendar days before commencing work at a sexually oriented business, and on an annual basis as described above. The sexually oriented business permit required by WMC 21.25.060 must only be renewed based on changed circumstances as set forth in WMC 21.25.060(4)(l). The fee structure for all fees and fines in this chapter shall be reviewed annually after a renewal has been applied for, to assure that the fees accurately reflect the cost of enforcement and administration of this chapter. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.25.130 Manager on premises.

(1) A licensed manager shall be on duty at all sexually oriented business premises at all times during which the business is open to customers, whether the business provides live or other performances. The manager shall be stationed at a location within the facility where he or she shall have an unobstructed view of all public portions of the facility.

(2) The licensed manager on duty shall not be an entertainer.

(3) It shall be the responsibility of the manager to verify that any entertainer who works or appears within the premises possesses a current and valid entertainer’s license posted in the manner required by this chapter.

(4) The manager shall not knowingly allow a violation of this code to continue or exist at the facility. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.25.140 License nontransferable.

No license or permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferable. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.25.150 License – Posting and display.

(1) Every entertainer, manager, escort or model shall post his/her license in his/her work area so that it is readily available for public inspection.

(2) Every person, corporation, partnership, or association licensed under this chapter shall display its license in a prominent place within the establishment. In the case of adult cabarets, the name of the manager on duty shall be prominently posted during business hours. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.25.160 Specifications – Adult cabarets and adult theaters.

(1) Separation of Sexually Oriented Live Entertainment Performance Area. The portion of adult cabaret, adult theater or any other premises in which sexually oriented business live entertainment is performed shall be a stage or platform at least 18 inches in elevation above the level of the patron seating areas, and shall be separated by a distance of at least 10 feet from all areas of the premises to which patrons have access. A continuous railing at least three feet in height and located at least six feet from all points of the sexually oriented live entertainment performance area shall separate the performance area and the patron areas.

(2) Lighting. A minimum lighting level of 30 lux semi-cylindrical measured at 30 inches from the floor on 10-foot centers shall be provided and equally distributed in and about the public portions of the cabaret or theater, including the patron seating areas, so that all objects are plainly visible at all times.

(3) Submittal of Plans. Building plans and lighting calculations showing conformance with the requirements of this section shall be included with any application for an adult cabaret or adult theater business license. Building plans must be in compliance with all building, planning and other applicable State, local and Federal regulations. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.25.170 Standards of conduct and operation applicable to adult cabarets.

(1) Standards for Patrons, Employees and Entertainers. The following standards of conduct must be adhered to by patrons, entertainers and/or employees of adult cabarets at all times live performances are provided:

(a) No employee or entertainer may appear nude on any part of the premises open to view of members of the public, except in the entertainment performance area described in WMC 21.25.160(1). No entertainer may perform anywhere on the premises except in the entertainment performance area described above.

(b) No patron or customer shall go into or upon the sexually oriented live performance area described in WMC 21.25.160(1).

(c) No member of the public or employee or entertainer shall allow, encourage, or knowingly permit any person upon the premises to touch, caress, or fondle the breasts, buttocks, anus, pubic area, or genitals of themselves or another.

(d) No member of the public or employee or entertainer shall allow, encourage, or permit physical contact between an employee or entertainer and any member of the public.

(e) No employee or entertainer shall perform acts of or acts which simulate:

(i) Sexual intercourse, masturbation, bestiality, sodomy, oral copulation, flagellation, or any sexual acts the performance of which are prohibited by law; or 

(ii) The touching, caressing, or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, pubic area, or genitals.

(f) No employee or entertainer shall use artificial devices or inanimate objects to depict any of the prohibited activities described in this subsection.

(g) No activity or entertainment occurring at or in an adult cabaret, nor any photograph, drawing, sketch or other pictorial or graphic representation of any specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall be visible at any time from outside the adult cabaret.

(h) No entertainer or other employee employed or otherwise working at an adult cabaret or adult theater shall solicit, demand, accept, or receive either directly or indirectly any gratuity or other payment from a patron, customer, or member of the public except an initial entrance fee or similar fee set out by the premises.

(i) It is unlawful for any entertainer, manager, or waitperson to perform more than one such function at an adult cabaret on the same business day.

(j) No customer or patron of an adult cabaret shall give either directly or indirectly, or otherwise provide an entertainer with a gratuity or other payment, except an initial entrance fee or similar fee set out by the premises.

(k) When not performing, entertainers are prohibited from being present in areas of the establishment that are open to the patrons of the establishment. Entertainers are required to use separate restroom facilities.

(l) At least two signs, in English, of sufficient size to be readable at 20 feet shall be conspicuously displayed in the public area of the establishment stating the following:

THIS ADULT CABARET OR ADULT THEATER IS REGULATED BY THE CITY OF WOODINVILLE. ENTERTAINERS ARE:

(i) Not permitted to engage in any type of sexual conduct;

(ii) Not permitted to appear nude except on stage;

(iii) Not permitted to appear semi-nude or clothed and dance or model, except on stage;

(iv) Not permitted to dance or model except on stage;

(v) Not permitted to solicit, demand, accept, or receive directly or indirectly any gratuity or other payment from a patron.

(m) There must be at least one employee not an entertainer on duty and situated in any public area at all times that any patron, member or customer is present inside the premises.

(n) Doors to areas on the premises which are available for use by persons other than the owner, manager, operator or their agents or employees may not be locked during business hours.

(o) No person may operate or maintain any warning system or device, of any nature or kind, for the purpose of warning or aiding and abetting the warning of patrons, members, customers or any other persons that police officers or health, fire or building inspectors are approaching or have entered the premises.

(2) Standards for Owner or Operator of Adult Cabarets or Adult Theaters. At any adult cabaret or adult theater where live performances are provided:

(a) Admission must be restricted to persons of the age of 18 years or more pursuant to RCW 9.68A.150; and the identification of all patrons must be checked by the employees of the premises.

(b) A minimum lighting level of 30 lux semi-cylindrical measured at 30 inches from the floor on 10-foot centers shall be provided and equally distributed in and about the public portions of the cabaret or theater, including the patron seating areas, so that all objects are plainly visible at all times. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.25.180 Regulations.

All adult bookstores, adult novelty stores, adult arcades, or adult video stores having facilities for customers’ viewing of depictions of human nudity and/or sexual conduct of any nature, including depictions of specified sexual activities, shall comply with the following regulations:

(1) Construction/Maintenance.

(a) The viewing areas within the sexually oriented adult arcade premises shall each be visible from a manager’s station and shall not be obscured by any curtain, door, wall or other enclosure. As used in this section “viewing area” means the area where a patron or customer would be positioned while watching a film, video or other viewing device.

(b) All areas shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition at all times. A minimum lighting level of 30 lux semi-cylindrical measured at 30 inches from the floor on 10-foot centers shall be provided and equally distributed in and about the public portions of the cabaret or theater, including the patron seating areas, so that all objects are plainly visible at all times.

(c) Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment.

(d) No steps or risers are allowed in any adult arcade booth or station.

(e) No adult arcade station or booth shall have more than one stool type seat. In order to prevent obscuring the occupant of an adult arcade station or booth from view, no stool for seating within an adult arcade station or booth shall have any seat back or sides.

(f) All ventilation devices between the adult arcade booths must be covered by a permanently affixed ventilation cover. Ventilation holes may only be located one foot from the top of the booth walls or one foot from the bottom of the booth walls. There may not be any other holes or openings (“glory holes,” etc.) in the booths.

(g) No person may operate any kind of warning device or system for the purpose of warning or aiding or abetting the warning of any patron, employee or other persons that the police, health, fire or building inspector or other public officials are approaching or entering the premises.

(h) The licensee shall not permit any doors to public areas on the premises to be locked during business hours, in violation of the applicable provisions of the Woodinville Building Code, Uniform Fire Code, and National Fire Protection Association Code.

(i) No person under 18 years of age shall be permitted in such premises. The employees shall check identification of all who enter.

(2) Unlawful Conduct. The following conduct or activity is unlawful:

(a) Masturbation or sexual activity of any kind in viewing booths;

(b) Two or more customers in a viewing booth at the same time;

(c) For the owner or manager to knowingly allow any of the disallowed conduct;

(d) Noncompliance with any other regulations set forth in this chapter.

(3) Signs. At least two signs shall be conspicuously and permanently posted on the premises in readable English type from 10 feet away, advising customers using viewing booths that:

(a) Masturbation in such booths is prohibited and unlawful;

(b) That it is unlawful for more than one customer to occupy a viewing booth at any time;

(c) Violations are subject to criminal prosecution. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.25.190 Regulations applicable to video stores not qualifying as sexually oriented businesses.

Video stores that sell or otherwise distribute films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other visual representations which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, and less than 30 percent of their revenues, inventory or floor space includes such items, shall be subject to State regulations, and the following:

(1) All such items as are described above shall be physically segregated and closed off from other portions of the store such that these items are not visible and/or accessible from other portions of the store.

(2) No advertising for such items shall be posted or otherwise visible, except where such items are authorized by law for display.

(3) Signs, in English, readable at a distance of 20 feet shall be posted at the entrance to the area where such items are displayed stating that persons under the age of 18 are not allowed access to the area where “erotic” items as defined by State statute and/or court order are displayed.

(4) The manager or attendant shall take reasonable steps to monitor the area where such “erotic” items are displayed to ensure that persons under 18 years of age do not access the age-restricted area.

(5) Rental or sale of obscene material (as defined herein) shall be considered a moral nuisance, and subject to abatement pursuant to this chapter and RCW 7.48.058.

(6) Employees of such video stores shall check identification for the age of all persons renting or purchasing such “erotic” items.

(7) The store shall not employ anyone under 18 if the store sells or otherwise distributes films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other visual representations which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.25.200 Exemptions.

This chapter shall not be construed to prohibit:

(1) A person appearing in a state of nudity or semi-nudity, modeling in a class operated by: a proprietary school, licensed by the State of Washington; a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; a private college university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or the modeling of clothing or lingerie in a full-service restaurant where no consideration is charged, whether directly or indirectly, specified anatomical areas are opaquely covered and not exposed by the model and the models are not within six feet of any patron of the restaurant;

(2) Plays, operas, musicals, or other dramatic works that are not obscene;

(3) Classes, seminars, and lectures held for serious scientific or educational purposes that are not obscene; or

(4) Exhibitions, performances, expression or dances that are not obscene. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.25.210 License – Name of business and place of business.

No person granted a permit and/or license pursuant to this chapter shall operate a sexually oriented business under a name not specified in his/her license, nor shall he/she conduct business under any designation or at a location not specified in his/her permit and/or license. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.25.220 Inspections.

(1) All books and records required to be kept pursuant to this chapter shall be open to inspection by the Chief of Police or designee of the City of Woodinville during the hours when the licensed premises is open for business. The purpose of such inspection shall be to determine if the books and records meet the requirements of this chapter.

(2) The licensed premises shall be (as an implied condition of receiving a sexually oriented business permit and/or license) open to inspection by the City’s Chief of Police, fire or health officials, or their designees during the hours when the sexually oriented business premises is open for business. The purpose of such inspection shall be to determine if the licensed premises is operated in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. It is hereby expressly declared that unannounced inspections are necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.25.230 Hours of operation.

It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business premises, except adult motels, to be conducted, operated, or otherwise open to the public between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.25.240 Alcohol prohibited.

Alcoholic beverages are prohibited from being served or present at any business subject to regulation under this chapter. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.25.250 Recordkeeping requirements.

(1) Within 30 days following each calendar quarter, each sexually oriented business licensee shall file with the City Clerk a verified report showing the licensee’s gross receipts and amounts paid to entertainers, models, or escorts, if applicable, for the preceding calendar year.

(2) Each sexually oriented business licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of two years from the date of termination of employment, the names, addresses, social security numbers and ages of all persons employed or otherwise retained as entertainers, models, and escorts by the licensee. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.25.260 Denial, suspension or revocation of license or permit – Procedures – Appeal.

(1) When the City Clerk refuses to grant a license or permit under this chapter, or revokes the same, he/she shall notify the applicant in writing of the same, describing the reasons therefor, and shall inform the applicant of his right to appeal to the City Council within 10 days of the date of the written notice by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk containing a statement of the specific reasons for the appeal and a statement of the relief requested.

(2) Whenever the City Clerk has found or determined that any violation or change in circumstances of this chapter has occurred, s/he shall issue a notice of violation and suspension or revocation (“notice”) to the licensee or permit holder.

(3) The notice shall include the following:

(a) Name(s) of person(s) involved;

(b) Description of the violation(s), including date and section of this chapter violated;

(c) Description of the administrative action taken;

(d) Rights of appeal as set forth above.

(4) The notice shall be served either personally or by mailing a copy of the notice by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to the licensee at his or her last known address. Proof of personal service shall be made at the time of service by a written declaration under penalty of perjury, executed by the person effecting the service, declaring the time, date, and the manner by which service was made. The decision may be appealed to the City Council if request for appeal is filed with the City Clerk within 10 days of receipt of the notice. Said request shall be in writing, state specific reasons for the appeal, and the relief requested.

(5) The suspension or revocation of a license shall be immediately effective unless a stay thereof is specifically requested in the written request for an appeal. If a request for such a stay is made, the licensee may continue to engage in the activity for which the license was issued pending the decision of the City Council, unless the license was suspended or revoked based on a threat of immediate serious injury to public health or safety.

(6) Within 10 days of receiving a timely appeal, the City Clerk shall forward the administrative record of the licensing decision to the City Council.

(7) When an applicant has appealed the City Clerk decision according to the stipulations herein, the City Council shall review the administrative record at the next regularly scheduled meeting for which proper notice can be given. Written notice of the date and time of the scheduled meeting will be given to the applicant by the City Clerk by mailing the same, postage prepaid, to the applicant at the address shown on the license or permit application.

(8) If the licensee appeals the notice to the City Council, the licensee shall be afforded a reasonable opportunity to be heard as to the violation and action taken. The applicant and City Clerk or his representative shall be given an opportunity to argue the merits of the appeal before the City Council. Oral argument by each party shall not exceed 10 minutes and shall be limited to the administrative record before the Council.

(9) The City Council shall uphold the City Clerk’s decision unless it finds the decision is not supported by substantial evidence in the administrative record. The City Clerk shall have the initial burden of proof.

(10) The City Council shall issue a written decision within 10 days of hearing the appeal. The Council may uphold the City Clerk’s decision and deny the permit, overrule the City Clerk’s decision and grant the permit, or remand the matter to the City Clerk for further review and action. The City Clerk shall complete further action or review within 30 days of receiving the remand.

(11) Decision by the City Council shall constitute final administrative review. Applicant shall be responsible for the cost of any preparation of record for appeal.

(12) Either party may seek judicial review of a final decision of the City Council as provided by law. If a licensee timely appeals a decision of the City Council, the licensee may continue to engage in the activity for which the license was issued pending the decision of the court, unless the license was suspended or revoked based on a threat of immediate serious injury to public health or safety.

(13) Applicant shall be responsible for the cost of any preparation of record for appeal. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.25.270 Suspension or revocation of license/permit – Duration.

(1) The City shall suspend any license as required by this chapter for a period of 90 days upon the licensee’s first violation of this chapter.

(2) The City shall suspend any license required by this chapter for a period of 180 days upon the licensee’s second violation of this chapter.

(3) The City shall revoke any license required by this chapter for a period of two years upon the licensee’s third, or any subsequent, violation of this chapter.

(4) Notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter, the City shall revoke or deny the renewal of any license required by this chapter for two years if the licensee has made any false or misleading statements or misrepresentations to the City.

(5) Application for a new license may be made following the expiration of the applicable revocation period. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.25.280 Applicability to currently operating businesses.

Any sexually oriented business legally operating upon the effective date of this chapter shall be exempted from the permit and application requirements of WMC 21.25.060, 21.25.070 and 21.25.080 for the remainder of 1994. This section shall not be construed to exempt any legally operating adult bookstore from ceasing to operate portions of such business as an adult arcade pursuant to other regulations. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.25.290 Limitations of liability.

None of the provisions of this chapter are intended to create a cause of action or provide the basis for a claim against the City, its officials, or employees for the performance or the failure to perform a duty or obligation running to a specific individual or specific individuals. Any duty or obligation created herein is intended to be a general duty or obligation running in favor of the general public. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.25.300 Penalties for violation.

Any person violating any provision(s) of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person convicted of such a violation shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000 or a jail term of not more than 90 days, or both. Each such person is guilty of a separate misdemeanor for each and every day which any violation of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted by any such person and said person shall be punished accordingly. Any persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall also be subject to license suspension or revocation and nuisance abatement as set forth herein. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.25.310 Public nuisance – Injunctions.

Any sexually oriented businesses in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a public nuisance, which, in addition to all other remedies, may be abated by injunctive relief. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


Chapter 21.26 TOURIST DISTRICT OVERLAY

Sections:

21.26.010    Special district overlay – Tourist District.


21.26.010 Special district overlay – Tourist District.

(1) The purpose of the Tourist District Overlay is to provide for tourist-oriented retail and commercial uses in the Sammamish Valley. These uses are additional to the uses permitted in the underlying zoning, are visually compatible with surrounding uses, complement the agricultural and recreational activities in the valley, and are planned and conducted in an environmentally sensitive manner. Permitted uses in the Tourist District Overlay and development standards are established to ensure that uses and development within the overlay area fit harmoniously and compatibly and inappropriate intrusion is minimized.

(2) The following additional uses are permitted in the Tourist District Overlay:

(a) Wineries, breweries and distilleries (NAICS 312), and those uses customarily associated with wineries, breweries, and distilleries including administrative offices, grounds maintenance, gardens, parking, visitor services, retail outlets primarily for products produced on site, public concert and theatrical events, restaurants, as well as beer and wine tasting events and facilities;

(b) Manufacture of arts and crafts; provided, that at least 10 percent of floor area is devoted to retail;

(c) Manufacture of bakery (NAICS 311811), confectionery (NAICS 722213), and other specialty food and kindred products; provided, that at least 10 percent of the products manufactured on site must be sold on site;

(d) Tourist-related retail and commercial uses: bike shops, delicatessens, art/Northwest craft shops, and food stores limited to NAICS 4452;

(e) Theaters, museums, and outdoor performance centers, provided:

(i) Movie theaters with more than one screen and drive-in theaters are prohibited;

(f) Lodging facilities, including bed and breakfast guest houses, lodges, inns, youth hostels, and campgrounds, except hotels/motels located in the Tourist Business Zone, provided:

(i) The number of rooms is limited to 24 per acre;

(ii) Minimum landscaping coverage shall be 45 percent of the site;

(iii) The height is limited to 35 feet, not exceeding three stories; and

(iv) The style of the structure shall:

(A) Fit one of the following styles: country inn, bed and breakfast, Victorian, woodland lodge, or other style defined in the Tourist District Master Plan and approved by the Planning Commission Design Review Subcommittee;

(B) Be compatible with existing development; and

(C) Meet the criteria as listed in the Tourist District Master Plan;

(g) Conference centers; provided, that:

(i) The design and scope of the project fit in with the intent of the Tourist District and are compatible with surrounding development; and

(ii) The design meets the criteria of the Tourist District Master Plan;

(h) Passenger train stations;

(i) Parks, trails and recreation services providing rental of bicycles, roller skates or blades, canoes, kayaks, rowboats, and flotation devices;

(j) Restaurants, except drive-through facilities;

(k) Antique stores and bookstores;

(l) Art dealers and galleries (retail);

(m) River-related uses and accessories, such as small-boat rentals or steamboat quays/docking;

(n) Accessory uses incidental to or dependent upon permitted uses; and

(o) Uses similar to those listed above which the Development Services Director determines are consistent with the purposes of the Tourist District Master Plan.

(3) Existing manufacturing businesses in existence prior to January 1, 2010, shall continue to be permitted as an outright use. No provisions in subsection (4) of this section shall be construed to require an existing business to comply with the stated requirements. However, this status does not run with the property, and once the existing business ceases to exist, this status is removed. A new business moving into an existing building shall comply with the requirements in subsection (4) of this section.

(4) New manufacturing uses or businesses that are permitted in the underlying zoning are allowed in the Tourist District, except that:

(a) No primary manufacturing, including smelting or refining, as defined in the NAICS Manual, is allowed;

(b) All manufacturing activities must take place indoors;

(c) No ongoing outdoor storage of machinery, raw materials, or finished products is permitted in excess of 60 days without proper and complete screening from public view;

(d) Noxious and persistent odors must be minimized to the greatest extent available and feasible; and

(e) Repetitive noise that is attributable to manufacturing must be minimized between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.

(5) The following development criteria shall apply to development proposals within the Tourist District Overlay:

(a) Building architecture including design, materials, bulk and scale shall be compatible with the recreational, agricultural, and tourist character of surrounding uses and consistent with the purposes of Tourist District Master Plan;

(b) Site and landscape design shall facilitate pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular traffic flow between major project phases and individual developments and any adjacent tourist-related uses;

(c) Site design shall minimize connections to the Woodinville-Redmond Road (SR 202) through use of shared driveways;

(d) All development is subject to the City of Woodinville’s Design Guidelines and Standards, except that:

(i) Developments shall provide a 10-foot width of pedestrian-oriented space as defined in WMC 21.40.380 or provide 10 feet of Type III landscaping; and

(ii) A 10-foot sidewalk/bike path shall be provided; and

(e) All development with frontage on SR 202 is subject to the City’s Design Guidelines and Standards for pedestrian-oriented streets.

(6) The following development standards and requirements shall apply to all new development or redevelopment and all property under common ownership located within the Tourist District Overlay:

(a) All uses except for accessory uses shall be conducted inside an entirely enclosed building; provided, that uses that are not contained in the enclosed building shall be treated architecturally to minimize visual impact;

(b) The height of each building and accessory structures shall not exceed 45 feet from the existing grade, provided height may be increased when the increase is for architectural or functional features integral to the design or use of the structure and is consistent with the purpose of the Tourist District Overlay, subject to approval by the Development Services Director. Said architectural or functional features shall be limited to penthouses or roof structures for housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the building; fire or parapet walls, skylights, towers, flagpoles, chimneys, smokestacks, church steeples and belfries, wireless mast, utility line towers and poles, windmills, food silos and barns, and similar structures required for the use of the building;

(c) All loading and service areas shall be screened so that they are not visible from public roads and trails by berms, Type I landscaping and/or architectural features;

(d) All buildings shall maintain a 20-foot landscaped setback from residentially zoned or developed areas, unless it can be shown that 20 feet of permanent landscaped buffer exists between structures;

(e) All buildings shall maintain a five-foot-wide landscaped setback from interior property lines abutting nonresidentially zoned areas;

(f) All buildings shall maintain a 100-foot landscaped setback from the Sammamish River;

(g) Trails shall either be provided or land for trails dedicated along the Sammamish River;

(h) The site coverage standards set forth in Chapter 21.22 WMC are modified as follows:

(i) Minimum landscaping coverage shall be 15 percent devoted to open space. Open space may include all required landscaping, and any unbuildable environmentally sensitive areas and their associated buffers;

(ii) Trails may be provided in the area dedicated to open space; and

(iii) When a subdivision or a binding site plan is proposed for a unified site, the site coverage standards apply to the total unified site and not each proposed lot;

(i) Landscaping shall meet the standards set forth in the City’s Design Guidelines and Standards; provided, that:

(i) An overall landscaping plan for each development phase shall be approved by the Development Services Director prior to the issuance of any site development, grading, or building permits;

(ii) Either 10 feet of street front landscaping or 10 feet of pedestrian-oriented space shall be provided;

(iii) Landscaping shall be included along interior lot lines in a commercial, office, or industrial development as follows:

(A) A 20-foot width of Type I abutting residentially developed property or undeveloped residentially zoned property;

(B) A 10-foot width of Type I abutting property developed public recreational;

(C) A 10-foot width of Type I abutting property designated as permanent open space; or

(D) Five feet of Type II abutting commercially or industrially zoned or developed areas;

(iv) Type IV landscaping shall be provided within all surface parking lots as follows:

(A) Fifteen percent of the parking area, excluding required perimeter landscaping, shall be landscaped in parking lots with more than 30 parking stalls;

(B) At least one tree for every four parking stalls shall be provided, to be reasonably distributed throughout the parking lot; and

(C) No parking shall be more than 40 feet from some landscaping;

(v) Notable trees identified in the Tree Board or Public Spaces Commission inventory shall be retained as set forth in Chapter 21.50 WMC;

(j) Refuse collection/recycling areas and loading or delivery areas shall meet the requirements of WMC 21.30.020(4) and shall be located at least 20 feet from residential areas, tourist-related uses, or trails and screened with Type I landscaping;

(k) Sign standards for the Tourist District are set forth in Chapter 21.35 WMC;

(l) All rooftop mechanical equipment shall be screened architecturally to minimize its visual impact; provided, that the screen is as high as the equipment.

(7) All development in the Tourist District shall be subject to design review, provided design review shall be performed considering the following factors:

(a) These regulations;

(b) The City’s design standards;

(c) The design is consistent with any existing development on the site; and

(d) The Tourist District Master Plan.

(8) Street frontage standards shall adhere to the following:

(a) Landscaping and open space shall conform to subsection (6)(i) of this section;

(b) Standard sidewalks and bike paths shall be provided; however, a 10-foot combined sidewalk/bike path made of asphalt may be provided in lieu of standard sidewalks and bike paths;

(c) The sidewalk or the combined sidewalk/bike path shall be separated from vehicle lanes by a minimum five-foot landscaped strip;

(d) The sidewalk or the combined sidewalk/bike path may meander onto private property with a public access easement; and

(e) Street trees shall be planted in the landscaping strip 25 feet on center utilizing one of the species of street tree selected from the Tree Board or Public Spaces Commission recommended Tree Species List, and approved by the City Tree Official.

(9) Special events and outdoor performances shall comply with the temporary use permits sections of Chapter 21.36 WMC and the following:

(a) All needed parking will be accommodated on site by a combination of permanent and temporary facilities or on other private sites with appropriate written consent;

(b) An event management plan covering sanitation, crowd control, traffic parking and emergency services shall be filed with the Public Works Director; and

(c) Chapter 8.08 WMC, Noise Regulation. (Ord. 675 § 14, 2018; Ord. 634 §§ 30, 31, 2016; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


Chapter 21.27 TRANSIT-ORIENTED HOUSING DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY

Sections:

21.27.010    Special district overlay – Transit-Oriented Housing Development Overlay.


21.27.010 Special district overlay – Transit-Oriented Housing Development Overlay.

(1) Purpose. The purpose of the Transit-Oriented Housing Development Overlay is to encourage redevelopment of existing publicly owned park and ride lots within the Central Business District zone as mixed use developments consistent with the definition of transit-oriented housing development in WMC 21.11.220.

(2) The alternative development standards contained in subsection (3) of this section may apply to any transit-oriented housing development which satisfies the following criteria:

(a) The proposed development is located within the Central Business District zone; and

(b) The proponent(s) of the proposed development have executed a development agreement with the City consistent with this chapter and Chapter 36.70B RCW which:

(i) Incorporates the Woodinville TOHD Community Guidelines adopted by the Woodinville City Council on January 3, 2005, including any amendments thereto;

(ii) Ensures the continued viability of the development site as a public transit center;

(iii) Adequately provides for on-site affordable housing;

(iv) Adequately provides for streets, roads, and sidewalks, including but not limited to applicable grid roads depicted on the Roadway Improvement Plan for the downtown area contained within the Transportation Chapter of the adopted Comprehensive Plan.

(3) Alternative Development Standards. For any transit-oriented housing development satisfying the criteria contained in subsection (2) of this section, the calculation of permissible dwelling units may be based upon the maximum floor/lot ratio (FAR) with a base minimum of two and up to a maximum allowable of two and one-half rather than the otherwise applicable dwelling units per acre standard. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


Chapter 21.30 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES

Sections:

21.30.010    Site lighting.

21.30.020    Storage space and collection points for recyclables and garbage.

21.30.030    Fences.


21.30.010 Site lighting.

(1) Lighting provided on sites shall utilize energy-efficient light sources.

(2) All lighting shall comply with the Washington State Energy Code with respect to the selection and regulation of light sources.

(3) Glare from light sources shall not trespass onto adjacent properties or rights-of-way.

(4) Design of interior and exterior lighting levels shall conform to the recommendations of the Illuminating Engineering Society’s “Lighting Handbook,” 8th Edition, or as may hereafter be amended. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.30.020 Storage space and collection points for recyclables and garbage.

Multifamily, commercial, office, and industrial developments shall provide storage space for the collection of recyclables and garbage as follows:

(1) The storage space shall be provided at the rate of:

(a) Three square feet per dwelling unit in multiple-dwelling developments except where the development is participating in a public agency-sponsored or approved direct collection program in which individual recycling bins are used for curbside collection;

(b) Four square feet per every 1,000 square feet of building gross floor area in office, educational and institutional developments;

(c) Six square feet per every 1,000 square feet of building gross floor area in manufacturing and other nonresidential developments; and

(d) Ten square feet per every 1,000 square feet of building gross floor area in retail developments.

(2) The storage space for multifamily residential developments shall be apportioned and located in collection points as follows:

(a) The required storage area shall be dispersed in collection points throughout the site when a residential development comprises more than one building.

(b) There shall be one collection point for every 30 dwelling units.

(c) Collection points may be located within residential buildings, in separate buildings/structures without dwelling units, or outdoors.

(d) Collection points located in separate buildings/structures or outdoors shall be no more than 200 feet from a common entrance of a residential building.

(e) Collection points shall be located in a manner so that hauling trucks do not obstruct pedestrian or vehicle traffic on-site, or project into any public right-of-way.

(3) The storage space for nonresidential development shall be apportioned and located in collection points as follows:

(a) Storage space may be allocated to a centralized collection point.

(b) Outdoor collection points shall not be located in any required setback areas.

(c) Collection points shall be located in a manner so that hauling trucks do not obstruct pedestrian or vehicle traffic on-site, or project into any public right-of-way.

(d) Access to collection points may be limited, except during regular business hours and/or specified collection hours.

(4) The collection points shall be designed as follows:

(a) Dimensions of the collection points shall be of sufficient width and depth to enclose containers for recyclables and garbage.

(b) Architectural design of any structure enclosing an outdoor collection point or any building primarily used to contain a collection point shall be consistent with the design of the primary structure(s) on the site.

(c) Collection points shall be identified by signs not exceeding two square feet.

(d) An eight-foot wall or fence shall enclose any outdoor collection point, excluding collection points located in industrial developments that are greater than 100 feet from Residential zoned property.

(e) Enclosures for outdoor collection points and buildings used primarily to contain a collection point shall have gate openings at least 12 feet wide for haulers. In addition, the gate opening for any building or other roofed structure used primarily as a collection point shall have a vertical clearance of at least 12 feet.

(f) Weather protection of recyclables shall be ensured by using weather-proof containers or by providing a roof over the storage area.

(g) No collection point or container shall be visible from the street right-of-way. The collection point or container shall either be located behind the building or shall be adequately screened with Type I landscaping.

(5) Only recyclable materials and garbage generated on site shall be collected and stored at such collection points. Except for initial sorting of recyclables by users, all other processing of such materials shall be conducted off site.

(6) No container shall be collected and stored at any location on the site except in a designated storage facility.

(7) The lids of all garbage and recyclables containers shall be maintained in a closed position. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.30.030 Fences.

Fences are permitted as follows:

(1) Fences shall not exceed a height of six feet in all Residential and NB zones, except as required pursuant to WMC 21.30.020(4)(d);

(2) Fences exceeding a height of six feet in CBD, GB, O and I zones shall comply with the applicable street and interior setbacks of the zone in which the property is located;

(3) The height of a fence located on a rockery, retaining wall, or berm shall be measured from the top of the fence to the ground on the low side of the rockery, retaining wall, or berm;

(4) When a protective fence is located on top of a rockery within the required setback area, any portion of the fence above a height of six feet shall be an open-work fence;

(5) Electric fences shall:

(a) Be permitted in all zones; provided, that when placed within R-4 through R-48 zones, additional fencing or other barriers shall be constructed to prevent inadvertent contact with the electric fence from abutting property;

(b) Comply with the following requirements:

(i) An electric fence using an interrupted flow of current at intervals of about one second on and two seconds off shall be limited to 2,000 volts at 17 milliamps;

(ii) An electric fence using continuous current shall be limited to 1,500 volts at seven milliamps;

(iii) All electric fences in the R-4 through R-48 zones shall be posted with permanent signs a minimum of 36 square inches in area at 50-foot intervals stating that the fence is electrified; and

(iv) Electric fences sold as a complete and assembled unit can be installed by an owner if the controlling elements of the installation are certified by an A.N.S.I. approved testing agency;

(6) No barbed or razor-wire fence shall be located in any R-4 through R-48 zone or any commercial zone; and

(7) Where possible, the use of landscaping instead of fences is encouraged. Landscaping is not subject to the six-foot height restriction of subsection (1) of this section;

(8) Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, and as necessary to protect essential water and sewer capital facilities in any zone, fences may be constructed as follows:

(a) Up to eight feet high with vinyl- or similarly coated chain-link fence with landscaping to soften the impact as determined by the landscape code;

(b) Such fence may include three strands of barbed wire above the fence not to exceed an additional 18 inches in height;

(c) Such fence may exceed otherwise-applicable setback provisions; and

(d) The Development Services Director may require additional screening and design elements in order to maintain and preserve neighborhood design patterns and to limit impacts upon neighboring properties. Such additional elements may include, but are not limited to:

(i) Decorative block walls, split-faced and colored;

(ii) Wrought iron on top of split-faced, colored and/or similar decorative block walls to prevent entry;

(iii) Landscaping;

(iv) Lighting with motion detectors; and/or

(v) Additional setbacks. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


Chapter 21.31 ANIMALS, HOME OCCUPATION, HOME INDUSTRY

Sections:

21.31.010    Purpose.

21.31.020    Animal regulations – Small animals.

21.31.030    Animal regulations – Livestock – Purpose.

21.31.040    Animal regulations – Livestock – Densities.

21.31.050    Farm management plan.

21.31.060    Animal regulations – Livestock – Management standards.

21.31.070    Existing livestock operations.

21.31.080    Home occupation.

21.31.090    Home industry.


21.31.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to enhance and preserve the compatibility between neighboring properties by regulating the scope and intensity of accessory uses or activities. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.31.020 Animal regulations – Small animals.

The raising, keeping, breeding or fee boarding of small animals are subject to Chapter 11.04 KCC, Animal Control Regulations, and the following requirements:

(1) Small animals which are kept indoors as household pets in aquariums, terrariums, cages or similar containers shall not be limited in number, except as may be provided in KCC Title 11.

(2) Other small animals kept outside, including adult cats and dogs, shall be limited to a maximum of 20, unless more are allowed as an accessory use pursuant to subsection (5) of this section; provided, that not more than three of such cats or dogs are unaltered, or as authorized for a hobby kennel or cattery or commercial kennel or cattery pursuant to Chapter 11.04 KCC, Animal Control Regulations.

(3) Excluding kennels and catteries, the total number of unaltered adult cats and dogs per household shall not exceed three, whether those animals are kept in a dwelling or outside.

(4) Animals considered to be household pets shall be treated as other small animals pursuant to subsection (5) of this section when they are kept for commercial breeding, boarding or training.

(5) Small animals and household pets kept as an accessory use outside the dwelling shall be raised, kept or bred only as an accessory use on the premises of the owner or in a kennel or cattery approved through the conditional use permit process, subject to the following limitations:

(a) Birds shall be kept in an aviary or loft that meets the following standards:

(i) The aviary or loft shall provide one-half square foot for each parakeet, canary or similarly sized birds, one square foot for each pigeon, small parrot or similarly sized bird, and two square feet for each large parrot, macaw or similarly sized bird.

(ii) Aviaries or lofts shall not exceed 2,000 square feet.

(iii) The aviary is set back at least 10 feet from any property line, and 20 feet from any dwelling unit.

(b) Small animals other than birds shall be kept according to the following standards:

(i) The minimum site area shall be one-half acre if more than three small animals are being kept;

(ii) All animals shall be confined within a building, pen, aviary or similar structure;

(iii) Any covered structure used to house or contain such animals shall maintain a distance of not less than 35 feet to any property line, except structures used to house mink and fox shall be a distance of not less than 150 feet;

(iv) Poultry, chicken, squab and rabbits are limited to a maximum of one animal per one square foot of structure used to house such animals, up to a maximum of 2,000 square feet;

(v) Hamsters, nutria and chinchilla are limited to a maximum of one animal per square foot of structure used to house such animals, up to a maximum of 2,000 square feet; 

(vi) Mink and fox are permitted only on sites having a minimum area of five acres; 

(vii) Beekeeping is limited as follows:

(A) Beehives are limited to 50 on sites less than five acres;

(B) The number of beehives shall not be limited on sites of five acres or greater;

(C) Colonies shall be maintained in movable-frame hives at all times;

(D) Adequate space shall be provided in each hive to prevent overcrowding and swarming;

(E) Colonies shall be requeened following any swarming or aggressive behavior;

(F) All colonies shall be registered with the County Extension Agent prior to April 1st of each year, on a State registration form acceptable to the County; and

(G) Abandoned colonies, diseased bees, or bees living in trees, buildings, or any other space except in movable-frame hives shall constitute a public nuisance, and shall be abated as set forth in Chapter 21.12 WMC, Enforcement.

(c) Kennels and catteries are subject to the following requirements:

(i) For kennels located on Residential zoned sites:

(A) The minimum site area shall be five acres; and

(B) Structures housing animals and outdoor animal runs shall be a minimum distance of 100 feet from property lines abutting Residential zones; 

(ii) For kennels located on nonresidential zoned sites, run areas shall be completely surrounded by an eight-foot solid wall or fence, and be subject to the requirements in KCC 11.04.060; and

(iii) Catteries shall be on sites of 35,000 square feet or more, and buildings used to house cats shall be a minimum distance of 50 feet from property lines abutting Residential zones. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.31.030 Animal regulations – Livestock – Purpose. 

The primary purpose of this section is to support the raising and keeping of livestock in the City by setting livestock densities and by implementing applicable best management practices for land used to accommodate such livestock in ways which reduce the impact of livestock on the environment, particularly with regard to their impacts on water quality. The regulations set forth in this section are intended to be consistent with livestock welfare; however, those concerns are more appropriately addressed through Chapter 11.04 KCC. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.31.040 Animal regulations – Livestock – Densities.

The raising, keeping, breeding or fee boarding of livestock are subject to Chapter 11.04 KCC, Animal Control Regulations, and the following requirements:

(1) The minimum site which may be used to accommodate large livestock shall be 35,000 square feet; provided, that the portion of the total site area used for confinement or grazing meets the requirements of this section; and

(2) The maximum number of livestock shall be as follows:

(a) Commercial dairy farms – as authorized by the Washington State Department of Ecology NPDES permit;

(b) Stables with covered arenas for which farm management plans are implemented and maintained pursuant to WMC 21.31.050 such that pasture and paddock use does not exceed the equivalent of three animals using the areas on a full-time basis, up to six resident horses per acre; provided further, that higher densities may be allowed subject to the conditional use permit process to confirm compliance with the management standards;

(c) For all large livestock not covered by subsection (2)(a) or (b) of this section:

(i) If a farm management plan pursuant to WMC 21.31.050 is implemented and maintained as or, in the alternative, all of the management standards of WMC 21.31.060 are met, three horses, cows or similarly sized animals per gross acre of total site area; provided further, that two ponies shall be counted as being equivalent to one horse and that miniature horses shall be treated as small livestock subject to subsection (2)(d) of this section;

(ii) If subsection (2)(c)(i) is not met, one horse, cow, or similarly sized animal (excluding any young under six months of age) per two acres of fenced grazing area; 

(d) Five of each or any combination of small livestock (excluding sucklings) per one acre of fenced pasturage, or per one-half acre of total site area subject to the management standards set out in WMC 21.31.060. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.31.050 Farm management plan.

In order to achieve the maximum livestock density allowances provided for in WMC 21.31.040, a farm management plan developed by the property owner with the assistance of the King County Conservation District which incorporates best management practices for grazing and pasture management, manure management, watering and feeding area management, and stream corridor management must be developed, implemented and maintained. Such plans must include a schedule for implementation and shall be reviewed by the SWM division if the plan is for a site that has streams or wetlands present. Any Indian tribe with tribal rights to protection of the fisheries habitat provided by the site shall have 60 days from plan submission to comment on the plan. The plan must, as a minimum, achieve 25-foot vegetated buffers for all Class 1 and Class 2 streams on the site, and assure that drainage ditches on the site do not channel animal waste to such streams. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.31.060 Animal regulations – Livestock – Management standards.

(1) As an alternative to a farm management plan, any property owner may implement the following management standards:

(a) Livestock access to streams and their buffers shall be limited to stream crossings which have been addressed by a crossing plan designed to SCS/SCD specifications which shall prevent free access along the length of the stream; fencing shall be used to meet this standard wherever topographic constraints or impassible vegetative barriers do not prevent livestock access to streams. Bridges may be used in lieu of stream crossings; provided, that piers and abutments shall not be placed within the ordinary high water mark or top-of-bank, whichever is greater. Bridges shall be designed to allow free flow of flood waters and shall not diminish the flood-carrying capacity of the stream; these bridges may be placed without a City building permit; provided, that such permit waiver shall not constitute any assumption of liability by the City with regard to such bridge or its placement. The waiver of City building permit requirements does not constitute a waiver from other required agency permits;

(b) Grazing areas not addressed by the sensitive areas regulations shall maintain buffers of 10 feet from any naturally occurring pond, wetland edge of a Class I or II wetland (except those wetlands meeting the definition of a grazed wet meadow) or the ordinary high water mark of a Class 1 or 2 stream (excluding grazed wet meadows) within five years of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section. If the buffer does not contain vegetation sufficient for bank stability and biofiltration, fencing or timed rotational grazing shall be used to establish and maintain the buffer;

(c) Confinement areas located within 200 feet of any Class 1 or 2 streams shall:

(i) Have a 20-foot-wide vegetative filter strip downhill from the confinement area, consisting of heavy grasses or other groundcover with high stem density and which may also include tree cover;

(ii) Not be located in any stream or wetland buffer area required by the City’s sensitive areas regulations in effect at the time the confinement area is built, or within 50 feet of any naturally occurring pond, wetland edge of any Class I or II wetland or the ordinary high water mark of any Class 1 or 2 stream, unless some other distance has been approved by a City permit issued following an environment review or by a conservation district plan pursuant to subsection (2) of this section. Existing confinement areas which do not meet these requirements shall be modified as necessary to provide the buffers specified herein within five years of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section; provided further, that buildings in the confinement area need not be modified;

(iii) Have roof drains of any buildings in the confinement area diverted away from the confinement area;

(d) Manure storage areas shall be managed as follows:

(i) Surface flows and roof runoff shall be diverted away from manure storage areas;

(ii) All manure stockpiled within 200 feet of any stream or wetland shall be covered during the winter months (October 15th to April 15th) in a manner that excludes precipitation and allows free flow of air to minimize fire danger; and

(iii) Manure shall be stored in a location that avoids having runoff from the manure enter streams or wetlands. Manure piles shall not be closer than 50 feet to any wetland edge, the ordinary high water mark of any stream, or any ditch to which the topography would generally direct runoff from the manure, nor in any stream buffer; and

(e) Manure shall be spread on fields only during the growing season, and not on saturated or frozen fields;

(2) The following setback and buffer requirements apply to the keeping of livestock:

(a) Any building used to house, confine or feed livestock shall not be located closer than 10 feet to any boundary property line or 35 feet to any residence existing when the livestock structure is built, and shall be increased to 100 feet for any building used to house, confine or feed swine;

(b) Any building used to house, confine or feed livestock shall not be located closer than 35 feet to any dwelling unit or accessory living quarters on the same premises, except that a barn or stable may contain a caretaker’s accessory living quarters;

(c) There shall be no uncovered storage of manure, shavings or similar organic material closer than 45 feet to any dwelling unit or accessory living quarters; and

(d) Grazing and confinement areas may extend to the property line;

(3) In Residential zones, fee boarding of livestock other than in a legally established stable shall only be as an accessory use to a residence on the subject property; and

(4) A barn or stable may contain a caretaker’s accessory living quarters. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.31.070 Existing livestock operations. 

All existing livestock operations shall either implement a farm management plan pursuant to WMC 21.31.050 or meet the management standards in WMC 21.31.060 within five years of the adoption date of the ordinance codified in this chapter; existing buildings are exempt from this provision. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.31.080 Home occupation.

Residents of a dwelling unit may conduct one or more home occupations as accessory activities, provided:

(1) The total area devoted to all home occupation(s) shall not exceed 20 percent of the floor area of the dwelling unit. Areas within attached garages and storage buildings shall not be considered part of the dwelling unit for purposes of calculating allowable home occupation area but may be used for storage of goods associated with the home occupation;

(2) All the activities of the home occupation(s) shall be conducted indoors, except for those related to growing or storing of plants used by the home occupation(s);

(3) No nonresident shall be employed by the home occupation(s);

(4) The following activities shall be prohibited as home occupations:

(a) Automobile, truck and heavy equipment repair;

(b) Autobody work or painting;

(c) Parking and storage of heavy equipment; and

(d) Storage of building materials for use on other properties;

(5) In addition to required parking for the dwelling unit, one on-site parking stall shall be provided when services are rendered on site;

(6) Sales shall be limited to mail order, Internet sales and telephone sales with off-site delivery;

(7) Services to patrons shall be arranged by appointment or provided off site;

(8) The home occupation(s) may use or store a vehicle for pickup of materials used by the home occupation(s) or the distribution of products from the site, provided:

(a) No more than one such vehicle shall be allowed;

(b) Such vehicle shall not park within any required setback areas of the lot or on adjacent streets; and

(c) Such vehicle shall not exceed a weight capacity of one ton;

(9) The home occupation(s) shall not use electrical or mechanical equipment that results in:

(a) A change to the fire rating of the structure(s) used for the home occupation(s);

(b) Visual or audible interference in radio or television receivers, or electronic equipment located off premises; or

(c) Fluctuations in line voltage off premises; and

(10) A home occupation permit is approved by the Development Services Director for each home occupation. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.31.090 Home industry.

A resident may establish a home industry as an accessory activity, provided: 

(1) The site area shall be no less than one acre;

(2) The area of the home industry shall not exceed 50 percent of the floor area of the dwelling unit. Areas within attached garages and storage buildings shall not be considered part of the dwelling unit for purposes of calculating allowable home industry area but may be used for storage of goods associated with the home occupation; 

(3) No more than two nonresidents shall be employed in a home industry;

(4) In addition to required parking for the dwelling unit, on-site parking shall be provided as follows: 

(a) One stall for each nonresident employee of the home industry; and

(b) One stall for customer parking; 

(5) Additional customer parking shall be calculated for areas devoted to the home industry at the rate of one stall per:

(a) One thousand square feet of building floor area; and

(b) Two thousand square feet of outdoor work or storage area;

(6) Sales shall be limited to items produced on site, except for items collected, traded and occasionally sold by hobbyists, such as coins, stamps, and antiques; 

(7) Ten feet of Type I landscaping shall be provided around portions of parking and outside storage areas which are otherwise visible from adjacent properties or public rights-of-way;

(8) The Development Services Director shall ensure compatibility of the home industry by:

(a) Limiting the type and size of equipment used by the home industry to those which are compatible with the surrounding neighborhood; 

(b) Providing for setbacks or screening as needed to protect adjacent residential properties;

(c) Specifying hours of operation;

(d) Determining acceptable levels of outdoor lighting; and

(e) Requiring sound level tests for activities determined to produce sound levels which may be in excess of those set forth in the WMC;

(9) The following activities shall be prohibited as a home industry:

(a) Outdoor repair of any automobile, truck or heavy equipment, pursuant to subsection (9)(d) of this section;

(b) Outdoor autobody work, pursuant to subsection (9)(d) of this section;

(c) Autobody painting;

(d) Outdoor is defined to include carports or other unenclosed structures;

(10) No vehicle, equipment or material shall be parked or stored within any required setback areas of the lot or on adjacent streets;

(11) A home industry permit is approved by the Development Services Director for each home industry. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


Chapter 21.32 ESSENTIAL PUBLIC FACILITIES

Sections:

21.32.010    Authority.

21.32.020    Inventory of essential public facilities.

21.32.030    Purpose.

21.32.040    Siting and expansion of local essential public facilities.

21.32.050    Siting and expansion of State and regional essential public facilities.

21.32.060    Permit conditions.

21.32.070    Optional site consultation process.

21.32.080    Interjurisdictional siting.

21.32.090    Public involvement.

21.32.100    Consultant and legal review – Deposit.

21.32.110    Hearing Examiner decision.

21.32.120    Suspension or revocation of permit.

21.32.130    Appeal.

21.32.140    Decision timing.

21.32.150    Building permit application.

21.32.160    Secure community transition facilities.


21.32.010 Authority.

This chapter is established to regulate the siting of essential public facilities pursuant to RCW 36.70A.200. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.32.020 Inventory of essential public facilities.

The City of Woodinville currently hosts or borders several essential public facilities, including but not limited to the following:

(1) The Brightwater regional wastewater treatment facility;

(2) The Cascade recycling facility;

(3) The Sound Transit/Metro park and ride facility;

(4) The Olympic pipeline system;

(5) Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railroad corridor;

(6) State Route 522; and

(7) State Route 202. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.32.030 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to implement the Growth Management Act and the Woodinville Comprehensive Plan by establishing a process for the siting and expansion of essential public facilities as necessary to support orderly growth and delivery of public services. Essential public facilities and transportation facilities of State-wide significance are necessary and important in the provision of public systems and services. The City’s goal in promulgating the regulations under this chapter is to ensure the timely, efficient and appropriate siting of EPFs while simultaneously acknowledging and mitigating the significant community impacts often created by such facilities. Nothing in this chapter should be construed as an attempt by the City to preclude the siting of essential public facilities in contravention of applicable State law. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.32.040 Siting and expansion of local essential public facilities.

(1) A special use permit shall be required as provided in this section before any local essential public facility may be located or expanded within the City of Woodinville, regardless of the zoning district in which such facility is or is proposed to be located.

(2) A complete application for a special use permit for a local essential public facility shall comply with WMC 21.83.060. The Director shall develop a supplemental application form which addresses and provides sufficient information to determine the application’s estimated compliance with each of the approval criteria set forth in this section.

(3) A special use permit for a local essential public facility shall be processed as a Type III permit under the table codified at WMC 21.83.020. Notice of the application and the required public hearing shall be given as provided in Chapter 21.84 WMC. Notices shall be posted on site, posted at the City’s designated posting places, advertised in the City’s official newspaper, and mailed to property owners within 500 feet of the project site.

(4) A special use permit for a local essential public facility shall be approved upon a determination that:

(a) The project sponsor has demonstrated a need for the project, as supported by a detailed written analysis of the projected service population, an inventory of existing and planned comparable facilities, and the projected demand for the type of facility proposed;

(b) The project sponsor has reasonably investigated alternative sites, as evidenced by a detailed explanation of site selection methodology, and as verified by the City and reviewed by any relevant associated jurisdictions and agencies;

(c) Necessary infrastructure is or will be made available to ensure safe transportation access and transportation concurrency to the extent required by applicable State and City regulations;

(d) Necessary infrastructure is or will be made available to ensure that public safety responders have capacity to handle increased calls or expenses that will occur as the result of the facility;

(e) The project sponsor has the ability to fund all capital costs associated with required on-site and off-site improvements;

(f) The facility will not unreasonably increase noise level in residential areas, especially at night;

(g) Visual screening will be provided that will mitigate the facility’s visual impacts from streets and adjoining properties;

(h) The facility is not located in any residential zoning district, except to the extent provided herein;

(i) The facility meets all provisions of this title for development within the underlying zoning district, except to the limited extent provided in this subsection. If a local essential public facility does not meet all such provisions, the applicant must demonstrate that compliance with such provisions would preclude the siting of all similar facilities anywhere within the City. If the applicant is able to make such a demonstration, the Hearing Examiner shall authorize the essential public facility to deviate from the provisions of this title to the minimum extent necessary to avoid such preclusion;

(j) The project sponsor’s public participation plan has allowed for public participation in the siting decision and with respect to appropriate mitigation measures;

(k) The project will not result in an unnecessarily disproportionate burden of essential public facilities on a particular geographic area of the City; and

(l) Any and all probable significant adverse environmental impacts, including but not limited to impacts to wetlands, shorelines and wildlife habitat, are adequately mitigated.

(5) The Hearing Examiner may, pursuant to WMC 21.32.060, impose such reasonable conditions on approval of the special use permit as may be necessary in order to enable the proposed facility to:

(a) Satisfy the decision criteria set forth in subsection (4) of this section;

(b) Satisfy any other applicable criteria set forth in this title; and

(c) Protect the public health, safety and welfare.

(6) The decision criteria set forth in this section shall not be applied in such a manner as to preclude the siting or expansion of local essential public facilities in the City of Woodinville. In the event that a local essential public facility cannot, by the imposition of reasonable conditions, satisfy the decision criteria set forth in this section with respect to the applicant’s preferred site, the Hearing Examiner shall either:

(a) Deny the special use permit with respect to the requested site, and require the local essential public facility to be located on one of the investigated alternative sites, if the proposal can be reasonably conditioned to meet the decision criteria at the alternative site; or

(b) Approve the siting or expansion of the local essential public facility at the requested site with such reasonable conditions of approval as may be imposed to mitigate the impacts of the proposal to the maximum extent practicable, if there is no reasonable alternative site on which the decision criteria can be met. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.32.050 Siting and expansion of State and regional essential public facilities.

(1) A special use permit shall be required as provided in this section before any State or regional essential public facility may be located or expanded within the City of Woodinville, regardless of the zoning district in which such facility is or is proposed to be located.

(2) A complete application for a special use permit for a State or regional essential public facility shall comply with WMC 21.83.060. The Director shall develop a supplemental application form which addresses and provides sufficient information to determine the application’s estimated compliance with each of the approval criteria set forth in this section.

(3) A special use permit for a State or regional essential public facility shall be processed as a Type III permit under the table codified at WMC 21.83.020. Notice of the application and the required public hearing shall be given as provided in Chapter 21.84 WMC. Notices shall be posted on site, posted at the City’s designated posting places, advertised in the City’s official newspaper, and mailed to property owners within 500 feet of the project site.

(4) State and regional essential public facilities shall satisfy the provisions of this title for development within the zoning district in which they are proposed to be located, except as provided in this section.

(5) The Hearing Examiner shall not deny a special use permit application for a State or regional essential public facility, and shall accept the valid siting determination made by a State or regional sponsor with respect to any such facility. The Hearing Examiner may, pursuant to WMC 21.32.060, impose reasonable conditions upon the State or regional essential public facility in order to ensure that:

(a) Necessary infrastructure is or will be made available to ensure safe transportation access and transportation concurrency;

(b) Necessary infrastructure is or will be made available to ensure that public safety responders have sufficient capacity to handle increased calls or expenses that will occur as the result of the facility;

(c) All capital costs associated with on-site and off-site improvements necessitated by the facility are borne by the project sponsor to the extent legally permissible;

(d) The facility will not unreasonably increase noise levels in residential areas, especially at night;

(e) Visual screening will be provided that will mitigate the visual impacts from streets and adjoining properties;

(f) Any and all probable significant adverse environmental impacts, including but not limited to impacts to wetlands, shorelines and wildlife habitat, are adequately mitigated;

(g) Any other applicable criteria set forth in this title are satisfied; and

(h) The public health, safety and welfare are adequately protected.

(6) In the event that a State or regional essential public facility cannot, by the imposition of reasonable conditions of approval, satisfy the criteria set forth in this section, the Hearing Examiner shall approve the siting or expansion of the State or regional essential public facility with such reasonable conditions of approval as may mitigate such impacts to the maximum extent practicable. The Hearing Examiner shall not impose conditions in such a manner as to preclude the siting or expansion of any State or regional essential public facility in the City of Woodinville. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.32.060 Permit conditions.

(1) In issuing a special use permit under this chapter, the Hearing Examiner may impose such reasonable conditions as necessary in order to ensure that a proposed essential public facility satisfies, to the extent practicable, the applicable permit criteria therefor and does not unreasonably impact the public health, safety, environment and welfare. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:

(a) Limiting the manner in which the proposed special use is conducted, including restricting the time during which an activity may take place, and restraints to minimize such environmental effects as noise, vibration, air pollution, glare and odor;

(b) Requiring a special yard or other open space or lot area or dimension;

(c) Limiting the height, size or location of a building or other structure;

(d) Designating the size, number, location or nature of vehicle access points;

(e) Designating the amount of street dedication, roadway width or improvements within the street right-of-way;

(f) Designating the size, location, screening, drainage, surfacing or other improvement of parking or vehicle loading areas;

(g) Limiting or otherwise designating the number, size, location, and height of lighting of signs;

(h) Limiting the location and intensity of outdoor lighting, and/or requiring shielding thereof;

(i) Requiring screening, landscaping or another facility to protect adjacent or nearby property, and designate standards for the installation or maintenance of such facility;

(j) Designating the size, height, location or constituent materials for on-site fencing;

(k) Protecting existing trees, vegetation, water resources, wildlife habitat or other significant natural resources;

(l) Requiring provisions for public access, both physical and visual, to natural, scenic and recreational resources;

(m) Requiring provisions for stormwater drainage, including designating the size, location, screening, or other improvements of detention ponds and related facilities;

(n) Imposing special conditions on the proposed special use to reasonably ensure its conformance with the surrounding neighborhood and the intent and purpose of the underlying zoning district; and

(o) Requiring financial guarantees regarding the installation of required infrastructure and landscaping improvements, as well as reasonable evidence or assurances that any permit conditions will be complied with.

(2) The list of conditions enumerated in subsection (1) of this section is nonexclusive. Nothing in this chapter is intended to diminish or otherwise abridge the City’s authority to require mitigation measures or impose conditions pursuant to any other applicable State or local requirement, including but not limited to the SEPA regulations codified at Chapter 21.52 WMC and the subdivision regulations codified at Chapter 21.60 WMC. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.32.070 Optional site consultation process.

Prior to submitting a special use permit application under this chapter, an EPF sponsor may request site consultation with the Director. Participation in this consultation process is encouraged as a means for project sponsors to present facility proposals, provide information about potential sites, and discuss possible siting incentives and mitigation measures. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.32.080 Interjurisdictional siting.

Where the City has executed an interlocal agreement with one or more other jurisdictions regarding the siting of EPFs of a regional or State-wide nature, the City shall cooperate fully and in good faith with said jurisdiction(s) to the extent specified in the interlocal agreement; provided, that nothing in this section nor in any such interlocal agreement shall be construed as waiving, limiting or otherwise abridging the City’s regulatory authority. The City may also in its discretion execute a development agreement with the sponsor of any proposed EPF pursuant to Chapter 21.82 WMC and Chapter 36.70B RCW. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.32.090 Public involvement.

The special use permit application process shall include a public participation plan designed to encourage early public involvement in the siting decision and to assist in determining possible mitigation measures. Informational public meetings within the City shall be scheduled pursuant to this process, the number of which shall be determined by the Director based upon consideration of the size, complexity and estimated impacts of the proposed facility. The Director shall determine the format and location(s) for the meetings, and shall require that public notice and meeting summaries acceptable to the City shall be either prepared or funded by the EPF sponsor. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.32.100 Consultant and legal review – Deposit.

The Director may require legal and/or independent consultant review of a proposed EPF or expansion of an existing EPF in order to assess its impacts and compliance with the criteria contained in this chapter. If such review is required, the project sponsor shall make a deposit with the City sufficient to reasonably fund the cost of such review, as determined by the Director. Said deposit shall be separate from and in addition to any other required fee. The deposit shall be set at a level reasonably consistent with the anticipated cost of review based on the size, complexity and estimated impacts of the proposal, as determined by the Director. The Director may require the sponsor to periodically supplement the deposit to the extent necessary to ensure payment of the review. Any unexpended funds shall be returned to the applicant following the final decision on the underlying special use permit application. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.32.110 Hearing Examiner decision.

(1) The Hearing Examiner shall issue a written decision approving, approving with conditions, or denying an application for a special use permit for an essential public facility under this chapter. The Hearing Examiner’s decision shall contain findings and conclusions addressing the standards and criteria applicable to the category of EPF under consideration.

(2) The decision criteria set forth in this chapter shall not be applied in such a manner as to preclude the siting or expansion of essential public facilities in the City of Woodinville.

(3) Any party of record may request reconsideration of the Hearing Examiner’s decision within 10 days of issuance thereof. Any such request for reconsideration shall be in writing and addressed to the Director, who shall transmit it to the Hearing Examiner. If a request for reconsideration is received, the Hearing Examiner shall, within 10 days, issue a decision granting or denying said request. The relevant appeal deadline for the Hearing Examiner’s underlying decision shall be tolled during the period of any reconsideration. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.32.120 Suspension or revocation of permit.

A special use permit issued for an EPF may be suspended or revoked by the Director if the sponsor subsequently fails to comply with any condition of approval. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.32.130 Appeal.

Appeal of the Hearing Examiner’s ruling shall be governed by Chapter 21.85 WMC. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.32.140 Decision timing.

The review, reconsideration and appeal process set forth in this chapter shall not be used to preclude an EPF. The Hearing Examiner shall render a final, appealable decision with respect to special use permit application for an EPF within 240 days of the City’s notice of completion regarding the permit application. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.32.150 Building permit application.

(1) Any building permit for an EPF approved under this chapter shall comply with all conditions of approval in the special use permit. In the event a building permit for an EPF is denied, suspended or revoked due to a failure to comply, the Director shall submit in writing the reasons for denial to the project sponsor.

(2) No building or construction permits may be applied for prior to special use permit approval of an EPF unless the applicant signs a written release acknowledging that such approval is neither guaranteed nor implied by the Director’s acceptance of the building or construction permit applications. The applicant shall expressly accept all financial risk associated with preparing and submitting construction plans before the final decision is made under this chapter.

(3) Building permits for an EPF which fails to comply with the conditions of approval shall be suspended and a report made to the Director. The Director shall institute a proceeding before the Hearing Examiner to permit the EPF’s sponsor a hearing at which to show cause why its special use permit should not be revoked or further conditioned. Such hearing shall be conducted in accordance with Chapter 21.84 WMC; provided, that the Hearing Examiner’s decision shall be final and appealable only to Superior Court pursuant to the Land Use Petition Act. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.32.160 Secure community transition facilities.

(1) The siting of secure community transition facilities as defined by RCW 71.09.020 shall be governed by the applicable provisions of Chapter 71.09 RCW and this section.

(2) The Hearing Examiner may impose reasonable conditions upon the granting of a special use permit for a secure community transition facility, pursuant to applicable provisions of the WMC; provided, that with respect to the subject matters specifically addressed in RCW 71.09.285 through 71.09.340, the Hearing Examiner shall not impose any condition more restrictive than the requirements specifically addressed by those sections. This subsection shall not be construed as limiting any authority the Hearing Examiner may have to impose conditions of a type that are not specifically addressed by RCW 71.09.285 through 71.09.340. The State Department of Social and Health Services (DSHS) may voluntarily impose conditions upon its proposal that would be more restrictive than the requirements of RCW 71.09.285 through 71.09.340. To the extent that this subsection conflicts with subsection (4) of this section, subsection (4) shall control.

(3) The City hereby acknowledges and adopts the siting policy guidelines developed by DSHS pursuant to RCW 71.09.285 and 71.09.290 and such guidelines shall be considered by the Hearing Examiner in making his/her decision on the special use permit for a secure community transition facility. The Hearing Examiner shall deny a special use permit application if it determines that DSHS did not comply with the siting policy guidelines in selecting the proposed site.

(4) With respect to the siting of secure community transition facilities, nothing in this section shall be construed by the Hearing Examiner or a reviewing court to be a regulation more restrictive than the minimum requirements (RCW 71.09.285 through 71.09.340). The Hearing Examiner is hereby authorized, in making his/her decision regarding the siting of a secure community transition facility, to ignore any regulation herein that the Hearing Examiner determines to be more restrictive than the minimum requirements. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


Chapter 21.33 LANDMARK PROTECTION AND PRESERVATION

Sections:

21.33.010    Purpose.

21.33.020    Landmarks and Heritage Commission.

21.33.030    King County Code sections adopted.

21.33.040    Review of building and related permits.

21.33.050    Direction to City Clerk.

21.33.060    Reuse of facilities – Standards for conversion of historic buildings.


21.33.010 Purpose.

The purposes of this chapter are to:

(1) Designate, preserve, protect, enhance, and perpetuate those sites, buildings, districts, structures and objects which reflect significant elements of the City’s, County’s, State’s and nation’s cultural, aesthetic, social, economic, political, architectural, ethnic, archaeological, engineering, historic and other heritage;

(2) Redesignate two sites in the City of Woodinville, previously designated as historic landmarks by the King County Landmarks and Heritage Commission, as City of Woodinville landmarks, thereby entitling them to the same advantages, responsibilities and opportunities under the City of Woodinville Ordinance as were available under the King County Landmarks Ordinance and program. These two sites are the Hollywood Farm, 14111 NE 145th Street, and the Hollywood School, 14810 NE 145th Street;

(3) Foster civic pride in the beauty and accomplishments of the past;

(4) Stabilize and improve the economic values and vitality of landmarks;

(5) Protect and enhance the Woodinville tourist industry by promoting heritage-related tourism;

(6) Promote the continued use, exhibition and interpretation of significant sites, districts, buildings, structures, and objects for the education, inspiration and welfare of the people of Woodinville;

(7) Promote and continue incentives for ownership and utilization of landmarks;

(8) Assist, encourage and provide incentives to public and private owners for preservation, restoration, rehabilitation and use of landmark buildings, sites, districts, structures and objects; and

(9) Work cooperatively with other jurisdictions to identify, evaluate, and protect historic resources in furtherance of the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.33.020 Landmarks and Heritage Commission.

(1) The King County Landmarks and Heritage Commission established pursuant to Chapter 20.62 KCC is hereby designated and empowered to act as the Landmarks Commission for the City of Woodinville pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

(2) The special member of the King County Landmarks and Heritage Commission provided for in KCC 20.62.030 shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to confirmation of the Council. Such special member shall have a demonstrated interest and competence in historic preservation. Such appointment shall be made for a three-year term. Such special member shall serve until his or her successor is duly appointed and confirmed. In the event of a vacancy, an appointment shall be made to fill the vacancy in the same manner and with the same qualifications as if at the beginning of the term, and the person appointed to fill the vacancy shall hold the position for the remainder of the unexpired term. Such special member may be reappointed, but may not serve more than two consecutive three-year terms. Such special member shall be deemed to have served one full term if such special member resigns at any time after appointment or if such special member serves more than two years of an unexpired term. The special member shall serve without compensation except for out-of-pocket expenses incurred in connection with commission meetings or programs. The City of Woodinville shall reimburse such expenses incurred by the special member.

(3) The Commission shall not conduct any public hearings required under this chapter with respect to properties located within the City of Woodinville until its rules and regulations, including procedures consistent with this chapter, have been filed with the Woodinville City Clerk. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.33.030 King County Code sections adopted.

The City Council hereby adopts the following sections of Chapter 20.62 KCC which are incorporated by reference herein and made a part of this chapter:

(1) KCC 20.62.020 – Definitions, except as follows:

(a) Paragraph (H) is changed to read “‘Director’ is the City of Woodinville Building Official or his or her designee.”

(2) KCC 20.62.040 – Designation Criteria, except all references to “King County” are changed to read “Woodinville.”

(3) KCC 20.62.050 – Nomination Procedure.

(4) KCC 20.62.070 – Designation Procedure, except all references to “King County” are changed to read “Woodinville.”

(5) KCC 20.62.080 – Certificate of Appropriateness Procedure, except the last sentence of paragraph A thereof.

(6) KCC 20.62.100 – Evaluation of Economic Impact.

(7) KCC 20.62.110 – Appeal Procedure.

(8) KCC 20.62.130 – Penalty for Violation of Section 20.62.080.

(9) KCC 20.62.140 – Special Valuation for Historic Properties.

(10) KCC 20.62.150 – Historic Resources – Review Process, except all sections but the final sentence of paragraph B(4) and the entirety of paragraph C thereof. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.33.040 Review of building and related permits.

The official responsible for the issuance of building and related permits shall promptly refer applications for permits which “affect” historic buildings, structures, objects, sites, districts, or archaeological sites to the King County Historic Preservation Officer (HPO) for review and comment. For the purposes of this section, “affect” shall be defined as an application for change to the actual structure, on a property with a landmark structure or designated as a landmark property, or on an adjacent property sharing a common boundary line. The responsible official shall seek and take into consideration the comments of the HPO regarding mitigation of any adverse effects affecting historic buildings, structures, objects, sites, or districts. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.33.050 Direction to City Clerk.

Pursuant to RCW 35A.12.140, the City Clerk is directed to keep on file a copy of the King County Code sections adopted by this chapter for the use and examination by the public. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.33.060 Reuse of facilities – Standards for conversion of historic buildings.

In order to insure that significant features of the property are protected, the following standards shall apply to conversion of historic buildings:

(1) Gross floor area of building additions or new buildings required for the conversion shall not exceed 20 percent of the gross floor area of the historic building, unless allowed by the zone;

(2) Conversions to apartments shall not exceed one dwelling unit for each 3,600 square feet of lot area, unless allowed by the zone; and

(3) Any construction required for the conversion shall require certification of appropriateness from the King County Landmarks Commission. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


Chapter 21.34 NONCONFORMITY

Sections:

21.34.010    Purpose.

21.34.020    Nonconformance – Applicability.

21.34.030    Nonconformance – Determining status.

21.34.040    Nonconformance – Abatement of illegal use, structure or development.

21.34.050    Nonconformance – Continuation and maintenance of nonconformance.

21.34.060    Nonconformance – Reestablishment of a discontinued nonconformance.

21.34.070    Nonconformance – Repair, remodel or reconstruction of nonconforming structure.

21.34.080    Nonconformance – Modifications to nonconforming structure.

21.34.090    Nonconformance – Expansion of nonconformance prohibited.

21.34.100    Nonconforming lots.


21.34.010 Purpose. 

The purposes of this chapter are to:

(1) Establish the legal status of a nonconformance by creating provisions through which a nonconformance may be maintained, altered, reconstructed or terminated; 

(2) Provide for the temporary establishment of uses that are not otherwise permitted in a zone and to regulate such uses by their scope and period of use; and

(3) Encourage the adaptive reuse of existing public facilities which will continue to serve the community, and to ensure public review of redevelopment plans by allowing:

(a) Temporary reuse of closed public school facilities retained in school district ownership, and the reconversion of a temporary reuse back to a school use;

(b) Permanent reuse of surplus nonresidential facilities (e.g., schools, fire stations, government facilities) not retained in school district ownership; or 

(c) Permanent reuse of historic structures listed on the National Register or designated as County landmarks. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.34.020 Nonconformance – Applicability. 

(1) All nonconformances shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter.

(2) The provisions of this chapter do not supersede or relieve a property owner from compliance with:

(a) The requirements of the International Building and Fire Codes; or

(b) The provisions of this code beyond the specific nonconformance addressed by this chapter. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.34.030 Nonconformance – Determining status. 

(1) Any use, structure, or other site improvement (e.g., landscaping or signage) that was legally established prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title shall be considered nonconforming if:

(a) The nonconformance is now prohibited or cannot meet use or site limitations applicable to the zone in which it is located; or

(b) The nonconformance does not comply with the density, dimensions, landscaping, parking, sign, buffer or design standards of this title.

(2) A change in the required permit review process shall not create a nonconformance.

(3) Any nonconformance that is brought into conformance for any period of time shall forfeit status as a nonconformance, except as specified by WMC 21.34.060. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.34.040 Nonconformance – Abatement of illegal use, structure or development.

Any use, including structures, or other site improvement not established in compliance with use, development, setback, site, and design standards or critical areas and buffers in effect at the time of establishment shall be deemed illegal and shall be discontinued or terminated and subject to removal pursuant to the applicable provisions of the WMC. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.34.050 Nonconformance – Continuation and maintenance of nonconformance. 

A nonconformance may be continued or physically maintained as provided by this chapter. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.34.060 Nonconformance – Reestablishment of a discontinued nonconformance.

Except as otherwise provided in WMC 21.34.070, a nonconformance may be reestablished as a nonconformance, except any nonconformance that is discontinued for a period of 12 continuous months shall be deemed abandoned and shall not be reestablished. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.34.070 Nonconformance – Repair, remodel or reconstruction of nonconforming structure.

A damaged or partially destroyed nonconforming structure may be repaired, remodeled or reconstructed; provided, that:

(1) The extent of the previously existing nonconformance is not increased;

(2) The building permit application for repair or reconstruction is submitted within 12 months of the occurrence of damage or destruction; and

(3) The structure has not been damaged or destroyed beyond 50 percent of its assessed value. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.34.080 Nonconformance – Modifications to nonconforming structure.

Modifications to a nonconforming structure may be permitted; provided the modification does not increase the area, height or degree of an existing nonconformity. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.34.090 Nonconformance – Expansion of nonconformance prohibited.

A nonconformance may not be expanded. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.34.100 Nonconforming lots.

Legally established lots in existence prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title which do not meet the requirements set forth in this title are considered nonconforming lots of record and are legally buildable subject to the following conditions:

(1) Where two or more adjacent nonconforming lots of record are under common ownership, they must be consolidated into one lot. For that single combined lot to be subdivided, all lots created shall conform to area and setback regulations for the district in which they are located and to all applicable critical area regulations.

(2) To be legally buildable, a lot must be in compliance with the rules and regulations of the County Health District. Where there is a conflict between the provisions of this section and those rules of the County Health District, the more restrictive rules shall apply.

(3) A structure on any lot must meet all dimensional requirements for the zone in which the property is located, pursuant to Chapter 21.22 WMC.

(4) A lot that was created as a “special tract” to protect critical area, provide open space, or as a public or private access tract is not considered a legal nonconforming lot.

(5) Legal nonconforming lots may be altered or changed, provided such change does not increase the degree of nonconformity. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


Chapter 21.35 SIGNS

Sections:

21.35.010    Purpose.

21.35.020    Permit requirements.

21.35.030    Exempt signs.

21.35.040    Prohibited signs.

21.35.050    Sign area calculation.

21.35.060    General sign requirements.

21.35.070    Community bulletin board signs.

21.35.080    Sign types permitted by zone.

21.35.090    Bulk standard by zone.

21.35.100    Changing general message electronic reader boards.

21.35.110    Window signs.

21.35.120    Master signage plan.

21.35.130    Signs or displays of limited duration.

21.35.140    Nonconforming signs.


21.35.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to enhance the visual environment and safety of the City by:

(1) Establishing standards that regulate the type, number, location, size, and lighting of signs;

(2) Encouraging attractive, effective signage throughout the community, and providing clearly identifiable design objectives for public and private signage in the downtown. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.35.020 Permit requirements. 

(1) Except as otherwise permitted by this chapter, no sign shall be erected, altered or relocated without a sign permit issued by the City.

(2) No permit shall be required for cleaning or other normal maintenance and repair of a sign, except as it is regulated under WMC 21.35.120 and 21.35.140. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.35.030 Exempt signs.

The following signs or displays are exempted from the regulations under this chapter:

(1) Historic site markers or plaques, gravestones, and address numbers;

(2) Signs required by law, including but not limited to:

(a) Official or legal notices issued and posted by any public agency or court; or

(b) Traffic directional or warning signs;

(3) Plaques, tablets or inscriptions indicating the name of a building, date of erection, or other commemorative information, which are an integral part of the building structure or are attached flat to the face of the building, which are nonilluminated, and which do not exceed four square feet in surface area;

(4) Incidental signs, which shall not exceed two square feet in surface area; provided, that said size limitation shall not apply to signs providing directions, warnings or information when established and maintained by a public agency;

(5) State or Federal flags;

(6) Religious symbols;

(7) The flag of a commercial institution, provided no more than one on-site flag is permitted per business premises; or one per tenant in a multitenant building; and further provided, the flag is on a designated flagpole or a flag stand attached to a building, the flag does not exceed 20 square feet in surface area and does not advertise a product. This does not include pennant-style or feather-style signs, which are prohibited;

(8) Signs or displays not intended to be visible from streets or public ways, signs in the interior of a building more than three feet from the closest window and not facing a window, and point of purchase advertising displays, such as vending machines;

(9) Wayfinding signs installed as part of a City-sponsored and coordinated wayfinding program; 

(10) Public gateway entrance signs. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.35.040 Prohibited signs.

Except as indicated by this chapter, the following signs or displays are prohibited:

(1) Portable signs; except as provided for in WMC 21.35.130, Signs or displays of limited duration;

(2) Signs on utility poles, except signs of the utility or government;

(3) Signs which, by reason of their size, location, movement, content, coloring or manner of illumination, may be confused with traffic control signs or signals;

(4) Signs located in the public right-of-way, except where permitted in this chapter;

(5) Posters, pennants, strings of lights, blinking lights, balloons, searchlights and other displays of a carnival nature; except as provided for in WMC 21.35.130, Signs or displays of limited duration;

(6) Billboards, poster boards and other advertising for products or business not located on the site of the business or place of sale, except as permitted by WMC 21.35.060(6) and (7);

(7) Signs that are located so as to interfere with visibility for the safe movement of pedestrians, bicycles, and vehicles;

(8) Animated signs;

(9) Highly reflective frame materials such as mirrored glass or chrome metal;

(10) Signs for businesses that are no longer operating and open for business;

(11) Off-premises signs, except where permitted in this chapter;

(12) Signs located on or above a roof; and

(13) Human held signs. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.35.050 Sign area calculation. 

Sign area shall be calculated by measuring the smallest single rectangle which will enclose the combined letters and symbols, and for freestanding signs shall be calculated by determining the total surface area of the sign as viewed from any single vantage point. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.35.060 General sign requirements. 

(1) Because fuel price signs are required by Federal statute, such signs shall not be included in determining sign area square footage or number limitations as referenced in WMC 21.35.090. Fuel price signs shall be part of or attached to a permanent monument sign and shall not exceed 20 square feet per street frontage. The price display may be electronic as long as it meets the requirements for changing message signs in WMC 21.35.100, and does not create a traffic safety issue by glare or by including blinking or flashing lights.

(2) On-premises direction signs shall not be included in the sign area or number limitation of WMC 21.35.080 through 21.35.120, provided they shall not exceed six square feet in surface area and are limited to one for each entrance or exit to surface parking areas, parking structures, drive-through lanes, or as determined by the Development Services Director for safe circulation.

(3) Sign Illumination and Glare.

(a) Internally illuminated signs shall be designed to emphasize the lighting of the sign text, message and/or symbols, while minimizing the lighting of the background of the sign face. The colors of the sign, letters and background shall remain fixed.

(b) In those cases where indirectly illuminated signs are permitted, the light source shall be no farther away from the sign than the height of the sign.

(c) Indirectly illuminated signs shall be arranged so that no direct rays of light are projected from such artificial source into residences or any street right-of-way.

(d) Electrical requirements for signs shall be governed by Chapter 19.28 RCW and Chapter 296-46B WAC.

(e) Signs should not exhibit undue brightness. “Undue brightness” means illumination in excess of that which is necessary to make the sign reasonably visible to the average person on the abutting street, as determined by the Development Services Director.

(4) One off-premises freestanding sign for each business is permitted on private property as regulated in this section and WMC 21.35.090. To qualify for an off-premises freestanding sign, two or more businesses must be advertised; and the businesses advertised must have no street frontage.

(5) If more than one freestanding sign is permitted on a site, these signs must be spaced a minimum of 140 feet apart.

(6) All signs, except for signs or displays of limited duration as permitted under WMC 21.35.130, must be constructed of durable, maintainable materials, and must be properly maintained. Signs that are made of materials that deteriorate quickly or that feature impermanent construction are not permitted. For example, plywood or plastic sheets without a sign face overlay or without a frame to protect exposed edges are not permitted.

(7) Recommended materials include:

(a) Sign frames constructed of wood, anodized metal or concrete are encouraged.

(b) Sign faces constructed of anodized metal, wood or bronze are encouraged. Plastic is discouraged except for backlit lettering.

(c) Sign mountings constructed of wood, stone, concrete, masonry or structural metal are encouraged.

(8) Recommended background colors are found in WMC 21.11.210.

(9) Required frame colors are found in WMC 21.11.210.

(10) Reader boards are permitted. If the reader board features dark letters on a light or white background, the sign will not be considered as featuring “recommended colors” and the smaller sign area allowance for freestanding signs will apply.

(11) Street addresses must be prominently displayed either on the building or on the sign.

(12) All signs shall meet the sight distance requirements of WMC 21.22.190.

(13) Allowances for Larger Signs. The following allowances for freestanding and building signs may be permitted, subject to the below requirements and the approval of the Development Services Director.

	Type of Sign	Maximum Allowance	Requirement

	Building	Sign Face: 12% of facade area	1. Must use recommended background colors and materials and required frame colors.

2. Must have no backlighting of the sign, except logos and lettering.

	Freestanding	Sign Face: Smaller of 1% of gross floor area tenant/building space or 1 sq. ft. per 4 feet of street frontage, maximum 100 sq. ft. Height: 15 feet	1. Must use recommended background colors and materials and required frame colors.

2. Must have no backlighting of the sign, except logos and lettering.

3. A minimum of two of the following elements must be provided:

a. Recommended materials are used.

b. The sign is designed to reflect architectural features of the building or site.

c. Minimum 2 sq. ft. of landscaping per 1 sq. ft. of sign face is provided and includes strong vertical elements, such as tall shrubs and/or trees.

d. A fountain or other similar water feature that is incorporated into the design of the sign and landscaping.

(14) Any sign that projects over pedestrian walkways or sidewalks shall maintain a minimum clearance of eight feet above finished grade and shall not project more than six feet from the supporting building unless a greater projection is approved by the Development Services Director through the Design Guidelines and Standards review process.

(15) Each tenant may also display a single shingle sign that has a face perpendicular to the building, provided the sign is no larger than three square feet, is no less than eight feet above the ground, and does not extend more than three feet from the building or beyond an existing architectural canopy. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.35.070 Community bulletin board signs.

Community bulletin board signs shall be limited as follows:

(1) In the R zones, community bulletin board signs may not exceed 32 square feet and are only permitted at public schools, police stations, fire stations or other public facilities;

(2) In the P/I, O, TB and NB zones, community bulletin board signs may not exceed 40 square feet;

(3) In the I zone, community bulletin board signs may not exceed 60 square feet; and

(4) In the CBD and GB zones, community bulletin board signs may not exceed 100 square feet. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.35.080 Sign types permitted by zone.

Signs are permitted in the zones indicated according to the following chart. The Development Services Director shall determine which sign type category applies to a proposed sign.

SIGN TYPE 

	ZONE/AREA	Freestanding	Building	Window

	CBD, GB, NB, TB, O	P	P	P

	R Zones	P	P	P

	P/I, P	P	P	P

	I	P	P	P

Notes:    P = Permitted in accordance with standards.

    X = Not permitted.

(Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.35.090 Bulk standard by zone.

	Criteria	R1 – 8	R9+	CBD, GB, NB, TB, O	I	P/I, P

	Building Signs

	Number of signs	1	1	1 per tenant per facade, maximum 2 per tenant, plus 1 per building	1 per tenant per facade, maximum 2 per tenant, plus 1 per building	1

	Maximum height	No portion of the sign may protrude above the highest point of the roof, or break the plane of the roof. 	No portion of the sign may protrude above the highest point of the roof, or break the plane of the roof.	No portion of the sign may protrude above the highest point of the roof, or break the plane of the roof.	No portion of the sign may protrude above the highest point of the roof, or break the plane of the roof.	No portion of the sign may protrude above the highest point of the roof, or break the plane of the roof.

	Maximum size per face	8% of building facade area, maximum 10 square feet	8% of building facade area, maximum 20 square feet	8% of building facade area	8% of building facade area	8% of building facade area

	Colors	Required to use City background colors	Required to use City background colors	 	 	Required to use City background colors

	Illumination	No illumination permitted	No illumination permitted	Permitted	Permitted	Permitted

	Materials	Plastic not permitted	Plastic not permitted	Sign face encouraged to be constructed of anodized or treated metal, wood, masonry, tile or neon. Plastic is discouraged	Sign face encouraged to be constructed of anodized or treated metal, wood, masonry, tile or neon. Plastic is discouraged	Sign face encouraged to be constructed of anodized or treated metal, wood, masonry, tile or neon. Plastic is discouraged

	Mounting	Maximum protrusion from facade is 1 foot	Maximum protrusion from facade is 1 foot	Maximum protrusion from facade is 1 foot	Maximum protrusion from facade is 1 foot	Maximum protrusion from facade is 1 foot

	Sign frames	Frame must be concealed or integrated with the building using similar materials and colors	Frame must be concealed or integrated with the building using similar materials and colors	Frame must be concealed or integrated with the building using similar materials and colors	Frame must be concealed or integrated with the building using similar materials and colors	Frame must be concealed or integrated with the building using similar materials and colors

	Freestanding Signs

	Number of signs	1 per entrance	1 per entrance	1 per street frontage, plus 1 for each 250 feet street frontage	1 per street frontage, plus 1 for each 250 feet street frontage	1 per entrance

	Maximum height	6 feet	6 feet	10 feet	10 feet	6 feet

	Maximum size per face	20 square feet	20 square feet	Smaller of 1% of gross floor area tenant/building space or 1 sq. ft. per 4 lineal feet of street frontage, minimum 25 sq. ft., maximum 75 sq. ft.	Smaller of 1% of gross floor area tenant/building space or 1 sq. ft. per 4 lineal feet of street frontage, minimum 25 sq. ft., maximum 75 sq. ft.	20 square feet

	Maximum number of faces	2	2	2	2	2

	Colors	Required to use City background colors	Required to use City background colors	 	 	Required to use City background colors

	Landscaping	1 sq. ft. per 1 sq. ft. of sign face area. Landscaping must include trees, shrubs, and/or floral displays	1 sq. ft. per 1 sq. ft. of sign face area. Landscaping must include trees, shrubs, and/or floral displays	1 sq. ft. per 1 sq. ft. of sign face area. Landscaping must include trees, shrubs, and/or floral displays	1 sq. ft. per 1 sq. ft. of sign face area. Landscaping must include trees, shrubs, and/or floral displays	1 sq. ft. per 1 sq. ft. of sign face area. Landscaping must include trees, shrubs, and/or floral displays

	Illumination	Not permitted	Not permitted	Permitted	Permitted	Not permitted

	Sign frame and mounting	Base must be solid, and use City materials and frame colors	Base must be solid, and use City materials and frame colors	Base must be solid, or use double post; and use City frame colors	Base must be solid, or use double post; and use City frame colors	Base must be solid, and use City materials and frame colors

	Setbacks	5 feet	5 feet	5 feet	5 feet	5 feet

	Lettering/logo size	Minimum lettering height 6 inches	Minimum lettering height 6 inches	Minimum lettering height 6 inches	Minimum lettering height 6 inches	Minimum lettering height 6 inches

(Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.35.100 Changing general message electronic reader boards.

(1) Changing general message electronic reader boards are permitted in the Public/Institutional zone, except for those Public/Institutional zones that abut the Central Business District zone. Where they are permitted, a single changing general message electronic reader board may be substituted for one of the permitted signs, not to exceed 32 square feet provided it meets the requirements of the type of sign installed. The following additional requirements apply to changing general message electronic reader board signs in these zones:

(a) The electronic message may not change more frequently than every four seconds;

(b) The sign may only display messages for school or community events or activities; and

(c) The sign’s lights are limited to a single color and must be a warm-toned off-white or similar color as approved by the Development Services Director.

(2) Changing message center signs for date, time and temperature only, which can be incorporated into a building or freestanding sign, shall not exceed the size or height permitted for a building or freestanding sign, and shall be permitted only in the CBD, GB, O, I, and P/I zones, except in the Tourist District. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.35.110 Window signs.

Window signs are allowed without a permit. The maximum allowable sign area is 20 percent of the window area. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.35.120 Master signage plan.

(1) A master signage plan shall be prepared for all new commercial, office or industrial projects or any multitenant buildings or group of buildings having four or more tenant or occupant spaces on a lot or combination of lots subject to a common development permit or plan. Existing developments desiring to achieve conformance with this code shall be permitted to apply for a master sign plan retroactively. A “common development permit or plan” means any grading, building, sign or other permit issued by the city which is for the complex, building(s) as a whole or four or more tenants. A fee will be charged based on processing costs as provided for by the city’s most current fee resolution.

(2) Application of the master signage plan shall be concurrent with the project application to construct the associated development. Master signage plans approved under this section shall be evaluated based upon the following criteria:

(a) Placement. All signs shall be placed where they are sufficiently visible and readable for their function. Factors to be considered shall include the purpose of the sign, its location relative to traffic movement and access points, site features, structures and sign orientation relative to viewing distances and viewing angles.

(b) Size. In a master signage plan, signs shall be no larger than necessary for visibility and readability. Factors to be considered in determining appropriate size shall include topography, volume and speed of traffic, visibility range, proximity to adjacent uses, amount of sign copy, placement of display (location and height), lettering style, and sign proportions and dimensions. The Planning Commission may approve height and area deviations that achieve these purposes.

(c) Number of Signs. The master signage plan shall not exceed the total number of building or freestanding signs permitted in WMC 21.35.080 and 21.35.090, except as noted herein. Each additional monument sign must be separated by at least 140 feet from all other monument signs on the property. The size requirements in WMC 21.35.090, or as approved through this section, may not be exceeded. Additional monument signs may be approved upon meeting any of the following criteria:

(i) There must be at least two separate street frontages;

(ii) There must be at least three separate access points with a minimum distance of 300 feet from all other access points on that property; or

(iii) The applicant must demonstrate that vehicular traffic movement visibility is not impaired, and location is such that the business, property or complex access could not be identified without the additional signage.

(d) Materials. Sign materials shall be compatible with architectural and/or natural features of the project. This may be accomplished through similarity of materials for sign structures and faces, the use of complementary colors, similarity of architectural style, or the use of a consistent lettering style or copy.

(e) Illumination. Proposed illumination shall be such that any and all project light is either shielded away from adjacent land uses or otherwise situated so as to minimize any adverse impacts upon adjacent properties. Refer to WMC 21.35.060(3).

(f) Design. All tenant building signs on the building are required to be similar in location, configuration, materials and construction; must be architecturally integrated into the building; and employ a coordinated color scheme. Recommended background colors and required frame colors must be used.

(3) Applications for a master signage plan shall include, but are not limited to, the following information:

(a) The applicant’s name and address;

(b) A legal description of the property;

(c) Existing zoning of the property;

(d) A site plan depicting the proposed plan of development;

(e) Standards for size, qualities, materials, and illumination; and

(f) A narrative description of the common theme for signage within the development, how it relates to architectural and/or landscaping elements of the development, and how the master signage plan relates to each of the six criteria set forth in subsection (2) of this section.

(4) In conducting its review of the master signage plan, the reviewing body shall seek architectural compatibility between the subject building(s) and proposed future signage on the basis of location, dimensions, area, illumination and possible limitation on materials and colors. The reviewing body may approve and/or impose additional limitations on signage as deemed necessary as part of a specific review of the proposed signage plan.

(5) Master signage plans which do not deviate from the requirements of this chapter and do not include legally nonconforming signs shall be reviewed (approved, approved with conditions, or denied) by the Development Services Director or his/her designee. Master signage plans which seek deviations from the requirements of this chapter shall be reviewed for approval by the Planning Commission at a public hearing. Any sign permitted under a master signage plan shall be considered a legally approved sign.

(6) All such signage plans should not propose to exceed the overall allowed square footage of signage for a given lot(s) but may include, for example, an increase in the amount of wall signage with a decrease in the amount of freestanding signs.

(7) After approval of a master signage plan, no sign shall be erected except in conformance with the approved plan, and such plan may be enforced in the same way as any provision of this chapter. The approved master signage plan may be amended by filing a new application that conforms with the requirements of the ordinance then in effect. New applications will be reviewed under the same permit process as the original application.

(8) Appeals of the reviewing body shall be made in accordance with the procedures contained in Chapters 21.80 through 21.89 WMC. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.35.130 Signs or displays of limited duration.

Unless otherwise regulated by this chapter, temporary signs regulated under this chapter not removed by the applicable post-event deadline will be subject to removal by the City of Woodinville and any and all costs associated with such removal may be assessed against the person(s) responsible for having the temporary signs put on display, the owner of the temporary sign and/or the sponsor(s) of the event or sale for which the temporary signs were put on display. The following temporary signs or displays are allowed, and except as required by the International Building Code, or as otherwise required in this chapter, do not require building permits. The signs allowed in this section are in addition to any other signs allowed in this chapter. Each type of sign or display of limited duration is allowed on a premises, subject to the regulation listed for the type of sign.

(1) Special Event Signs.

(a) One special event sign per premises is allowed by permit, to announce grand openings or other special events or promotions, for not more than 30 days for any one event. Property owners may apply for one annual permit for all special event signs within a 12-month period, or permits may be granted for each special event. Special event signs are allowed on or inside a building, on or adjacent to the premises; none are to be allowed on public right-of-way, or on trees or utility poles.

(b) Temporary signs or banners for organized mall-wide promotions may be allowed by permit for up to five days, with up to two permits per mall per year.

(c) Seasonal lights and decorations of a noncarnival nature for the current season or holiday are allowed without a permit.

(d) No sign shall exceed 32 square feet in surface area and may be no taller than the building eave or cornice if on a building, and not taller than 10 feet if freestanding.

(2) Construction Signs.

(a) Construction signs that identify architects, engineers, planners, contractors or other individuals or firms involved with the construction or funding of a project and signs announcing the character of the project or the purpose for which the project is intended may be displayed.

(b) One nonilluminated, double-faced sign is permitted for each public street upon which the project fronts.

(c) No sign shall exceed 32 square feet in surface area and may be no taller than 10 feet in height, or be located closer than 30 feet from the property line of the adjoining property.

(d) Construction signs must be removed by the date of issuance of the first occupancy permit for the premises or one year after placement of the signs, whichever occurs first. If the signs are not removed within this time period, they may be removed by the City at the expense of the owner of the property and/or the person(s) responsible for having the signs put on display.

(3) Political Signs.

(a) On-premises political signs, posters or bills located at the headquarters of a political party, candidate or public service office, or a public issue decided by ballot are permitted. All on-premises political signs, posters or bills shall comply with the dimensional and locational requirements of the zoning district in which they are located, or of the applicable sign type.

(b) Off-premises political signs that do not exceed four square feet in area (i.e., four feet by one foot, two feet by two feet, etc.) may be displayed in the public right-of-way as allowed in subsection (3)(e) of this section. Off-premises political signs that do not exceed 32 square feet in area and six feet in height may be displayed on private property. Freestanding political signs with a height greater than four feet and signs made of wood or metal which are attached to buildings must submit a sign application for safety and structural review.

(c) Dividing a sign into several smaller pieces as a means to circumvent the political sign dimensional requirements of subsections (3)(a) and (b) of this section is not permitted.

(d) Political signs, posters or bills may be displayed from the closing date for filing for an election until seven days after the general election. It shall be the responsibility of the candidate to have his/her campaign/political signs removed within this time period or the City may remove such signs at the candidate’s expense.

(e) No person, firm or corporation shall post, paint, nail, fasten or affix a political sign, poster, bill, or other advertising device of any kind on any streetlight, crosswalk, curb, curbstone, lamppost, street sign, utility pole, hydrant, tree, shrub, or public building or structure. Political signs are permissible on parking strips, the periphery of the public right-of-way and other portions of the right-of-way not used for vehicular or pedestrian travel preceding a primary or general election. Political signs must be installed in such a manner as not to constitute a traffic hazard or impair or impede pedestrian thoroughfares. No political sign placed within the public right-of-way shall be installed within the median of the roadway, or create a safety hazard for pedestrians or motorists as determined by the Police Administrator Chief or Public Works Director.

(f) Permits for political signs, posters or bills are not required unless the height of the freestanding sign is greater than four feet or the sign is made of wood or metal and is attached to a building.

(g) Political signs shall include only a message for a political party, candidate for public service office or a public issue decided by ballot. Political signs shall not include any message pertaining to a business, product or service.

(4) Real Estate Signs. All temporary real estate signs can be single- or double-faced signs:

(a) Single-Family Residential for Sale or Rent. Signs advertising an individual residential unit for sale or rent shall be limited to one sign per street frontage on site. The sign may not exceed eight square feet in area, and shall not exceed six feet in height. The sign shall be removed within 30 days after closing of the sale, lease or rental of the property.

(b) Commercial or Industrial for Sale or Rent. On-site commercial or industrial property for sale or rent signs shall be limited to one sign per street frontage on site, and shall not exceed 32 square feet in area. The sign shall not exceed 12 feet in height. The sign shall be removed within 30 days after closing of the sale, lease or rental of the property. A building permit is required and shall be issued for a one-year period. The permit is renewable for one-year increments up to a maximum of three years.

(c) Multifamily or Neighborhood Residential for Sale or Rent. On-site residential neighborhood or multifamily complex for sale or rent sign shall be limited to one sign per development. The sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in area, and shall not exceed 12 feet in height. A building permit is required and shall be issued for a one-year period. The permit is renewable annually for up to a maximum of three years.

(d) Other real estate signs are permitted pursuant to subsection (7) of this section.

(5) Community Event Signs.

(a) Community event signs shall be limited to announcing or promoting a nonprofit sponsored community fair, festival or a special event.

(b) Community event signs may be displayed no more than 30 days before the event.

(c) Community event signs shall be removed by the event sponsor within 72 hours following the end of the community fair, festival or a special event.

(d) On-premises and off-premises signs for recurring community events may be allowed annually by permit.

(6) Street Banners Announcing Community Fairs, Festivals, and Special Events.

(a) Street banners shall be limited to announcing or promoting a nonprofit sponsored community fair, festival, or a special event, and are allowed by permit.

(b) Street banners shall be permitted only within the Central Business District and Tourist Business zone at approved locations.

(c) Street banners may be displayed for no more than 30 days and shall be removed within five days following the end of the community fair, festival, or a special event. It shall be the responsibility of the event sponsor to remove the street banner or the City will remove such banner and retain the application deposit.

(d) The event sponsor shall provide a certificate of insurance evidencing commercial general liability insurance as described in the street banner application form provided.

(e) The event sponsor shall submit site placement and street banner mounting plans and specifications with the application.

(f) The minimum street clearance of the banner is 18 feet above the street.

(7) Portable Signs in Residential Zones. Portable signs that display information regarding directions to real estate, garage sale, or other events are permitted in all residential zones subject to the following requirements. Portable signs in the Tourist District Overlay shall also be subject to WMC 21.26.010 and Chapter 8.12 WMC for special event requirements.

(a) Permit Not Required. A permit is not required for portable signs.

(b) Number of Signs Permitted. Up to six portable signs per destination may be permitted.

(c) Location. Portable signs may be located on property owned or controlled by the sign owner or in the public right-of-way, subject to the following requirements:

(i) Portable signs may not be located in a street, on a sidewalk, or where they would obstruct vehicular, bicycle or pedestrian traffic.

(ii) Portable signs may not be placed on public property other than public rights-of-way.

(iii) Portable signs may only be placed in residential zones.

(iv) Portable signs shall not block the sight distance triangle pursuant to WMC 21.22.190.

(v) Portable signs placed in public rights-of-way shall:

(A) Not create a traffic safety or maintenance problem; the City may remove and dispose of any signs that do create a safety or maintenance problem.

(B) Be freestanding.

(C) Not be attached to any structure or vegetation.

(D) Not be attached to utility poles, traffic signs, or street signs.

(d) Size. All portable signs are limited to a maximum six square feet of sign area. Signs may have no more than two sign faces. Two-sided signs may each display up to six square feet on each face.

(e) Height. All portable signs are limited to a maximum height of three feet.

(f) Duration of Display. Portable signs may be displayed only during the hours of the event plus an additional half an hour before and after the event to place and remove the signs. It is the responsibility of the sign owner to remove the sign outside the hours of the event. The City may remove any portable sign that is displayed outside the hours of the event.

(g) Limitations.

(i) Portable signs shall be nonilluminated.

(ii) Portable signs in residential zones are intended only to provide directions to events within residential zones.

(iii) No landscaping may be damaged or modified to accommodate portable signs. The City may require replacement of any damaged landscaping.

(h) Appearance and Maintenance. Signs shall be constructed of durable materials by a person skilled in the art of graphic design and shall be well maintained.

(i) Failure to Comply with Requirements of This Chapter. Portable signs that do not comply with the provisions of this section may be confiscated by the City. Signs that are confiscated are subject to immediate disposal. Sign owners that do not comply with the requirements of this chapter may be subject to the code enforcement procedures pursuant to Chapter 1.06 WMC.

(8) Portable Signs in the Central Business District, Neighborhood Business, Tourist Business, General Business or Office Zones. Portable signs in the Central Business District, Neighborhood Business, Tourist Business, General Business or Office zones are permitted subject to the following requirements. Portable signs in the Tourist District Overlay shall also be subject to WMC 21.26.010 and Chapter 8.12 WMC for special event requirements.

(a) Permit Required. Portable signs shall be subject to an annually renewable permit.

(b) Number of Signs Permitted. One portable sign per premises is permitted.

(c) Location. Portable signs may be placed in the zone in which the business is located, in conformance with the following requirements:

(i) Signs may be placed within public right-of-way, but not within a street or on a sidewalk.

(ii) Signs shall be located either on-premises or adjacent to the property line for that property where the business is located.

(iii) Signs placed within public right-of-way shall not block pedestrian, bicycle or vehicle traffic.

(iv) Signs may not be placed on public property other than public rights-of-way.

(v) Signs shall not block the sight distance triangle pursuant to WMC 21.22.190.

(d) Size. All portable signs are limited to a maximum six square feet of sign area. Signs may have no more than two sign faces. Two-sided signs may each display up to six square feet on each face.

(e) Height. All portable signs are limited to a maximum height of three feet.

(f) Duration of Display. Portable signs may be displayed only during the hours of operation of the establishment. It is the responsibility of the sign owner to remove the sign when the establishment is not open to the public. The City may remove any portable sign that is displayed outside the operation hours of the establishment.

(g) Limitations.

(i) Portable signs shall be nonilluminated.

(ii) No landscaping may be damaged or modified to accommodate portable signs. The City may require replacement of any damaged landscaping.

(h) Appearance and Maintenance. Signs shall be constructed of durable materials by a person skilled in the art of graphic design and shall be well maintained.

(i) Failure to Comply with Requirements of This Chapter. Portable signs that do not comply with the provisions of this section may be confiscated by the City. Signs that are confiscated are subject to immediate disposal. Sign owners that do not comply with the requirements of this chapter may be subject to the code enforcement procedures pursuant to Chapter 1.06 WMC and may result in revocation of the sign permit.

(j) An administrative variance, decided by the Director, shall be available for those properties that can meet the following requirements:

(i) The variance criteria in WMC 21.80.280 shall be used to determine if the variance is warranted.

(ii) If the applicant can demonstrate that the variance criteria have been met, the following regulations may be modified by the Director: number, location, and/or height of signs.

(iii) This administrative variance shall be considered a Type I permit, and shall be exempt from the project permit procedures in Chapters 21.80 through 21.89 WMC.

(9) Portable Signs in Industrial Zones. Portable signs in Industrial zones that display information regarding commercial businesses or services are permitted in Industrial zones subject to the following requirements. Portable signs in the Tourist District Overlay shall also be subject to WMC 21.26.010 and Chapter 8.12 WMC for special event requirements.

(a) Permit Required. Portable signs shall be subject to an annually renewable permit.

(b) Number of Signs Permitted. Two signs per premises are permitted.

(c) Location. Portable signs may be placed in the Industrial zones in conformance with the following requirements:

(i) Portable signs may be placed within public right-of-way, but not within a street or on a sidewalk.

(ii) Portable signs placed within public right-of-way shall not block pedestrian, bicycle or vehicle traffic.

(iii) Portable signs may not be placed on public property other than public rights-of-way.

(iv) Portable signs shall not block the sight distance triangle pursuant to WMC 21.22.190.

(d) Size. All portable signs are limited to a maximum six square feet of sign area. Signs may have no more than two sign faces. Two-sided signs may each display up to six square feet on each face.

(e) Height. All portable signs are limited to a maximum height of three feet.

(f) Duration of Display. Portable signs may be displayed only during the hours of operation of the establishment. It is the responsibility of the sign owner to remove the sign when the establishment is not open to the public. The City may remove any portable sign that is displayed outside the operation hours of the establishment.

(g) Limitations.

(i) Portable signs shall be nonilluminated.

(ii) No landscaping may be damaged or modified to accommodate portable signs. The City may require replacement of any damaged landscaping.

(h) Appearance and Maintenance. Signs shall be constructed of durable materials by a person skilled in the art of graphic design and shall be well maintained.

(i) Failure to Comply with Requirements of This Chapter. Portable signs that do not comply with the provisions of this section may be confiscated by the City. Signs that are confiscated are subject to immediate disposal. Sign owners that do not comply with the requirements of this chapter may be subject to the code enforcement procedures pursuant to Chapter 1.06 WMC and may result in revocation of the sign permit. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.35.140 Nonconforming signs.

(1) Signs in existence at the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter that do not comply with the standards of this chapter shall be deemed legally nonconforming and may continue to exist.

(2) Legal nonconforming signs may be removed for cleaning and routine maintenance, i.e., changing of lighting and wiring. Legal nonconforming signs may continue to exist, except as noted in subsections (3) through (8) of this section. Changes to a legal nonconforming sign shall not make the sign more nonconforming.

(3) Any legal nonconforming sign (except a billboard) that undergoes a name change (single-tenant only) or a change to the structure of the sign shall be brought into conformance immediately.

(4) Any legal nonconforming sign that is damaged in excess of 50 percent of the original value of the sign shall be brought into conformance immediately, or removed within 90 days.

(5) Any legal nonconforming sign that is relocated or replaced shall be brought into conformance immediately, or removed within 90 days.

(6) If a business ceases to operate, all existing nonconforming signs associated with the business shall be removed by the property owner within 90 days. If the business had signage on a mall sign or building or related structure, the surface or facade or structure at the previous location of the nonconforming sign(s) shall be repaired at the time of nonconforming sign removal.

(7) A nonconforming sign, when being an accessory to a business operation which changes its use or location, shall no longer be considered a legal sign and shall be removed within 90 days.

(8) Billboards.

(a) New billboards are not permitted.

(b) Existing billboards are subject to the following:

(i) Except as provided in subsections (8)(b)(ii) and (iii) of this section, billboards shall not be altered with regard to size, shape, orientation, height, advertising method or function such as three-dimensional, moving or lighted display, or location. Such alteration shall result in an illegal nonconforming status, and the billboard shall be removed within 90 days of the alteration.

(ii) Removal of a billboard shall require the issuance of a demolition permit. The demolition shall be completed within 90 days of permit issuance.

(iii) Ordinary and necessary repairs that do not change the size, shape, orientation, height, advertising method or function such as three-dimensional, moving or lighted display, or location of billboards shall not require a permit. Billboard copy replacement may occur at any time and does not require issuance of a permit.

(iv) Any billboard that is damaged in excess of 50 percent of the original value of the sign shall be removed within 90 days.

(v) Any billboard that is relocated or replaced shall be removed within 90 days. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


Chapter 21.36 TEMPORARY USES

Sections:

21.36.010    Temporary use permits – Uses requiring permits.

21.36.020    Temporary use permits – Exemptions to permit requirement.

21.36.030    Temporary use permits – Duration and frequency.

21.36.040    Temporary use permits – General requirements.

21.36.050    Temporary use permits – Mobile vendors.

21.36.060    Temporary education or public facilities.

21.36.070    Temporary construction buildings.

21.36.080    Temporary construction residence.

21.36.090    Temporary mobile home for medical hardship.

21.36.100    Temporary real estate offices.

21.36.110    Temporary personal wireless service facilities.

21.36.120    Temporary encampments.


21.36.010 Temporary use permits – Uses requiring permits.

Temporary uses are those uses that are of a limited duration and/or frequency or comprise multiple related events over a specified period. Except as provided by WMC 21.36.020, a temporary use permit shall be required for the following activities:

(1) Uses not otherwise permitted in the zone that can be made compatible for periods of limited duration and/or frequency;

(2) Limited expansion of any use that is otherwise allowed in the zone but which exceeds the intended scope of permit approval;

(3) Temporary structures subject to WMC 21.36.050 through 21.36.110; or

(4) Businesses operating as mobile vendors. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.36.020 Temporary use permits – Exemptions to permit requirement. 

(1) The following uses shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter when located in the CBD, GB, NB, TB, O, or I zones when the use does not exceed a total of 14 days each calendar year:

(a) Activities subject to a special event permit pursuant to Chapter 8.12 WMC;

(b) Temporary sales conducted by businesses on private property, such as holiday sales, grand opening sales, or anniversary sales; and

(2) Any use not exceeding a cumulative total of two days each calendar year shall be exempt from requirements for a temporary use permit. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.36.030 Temporary use permits – Duration and frequency.

Temporary use permits shall be limited in duration and frequency as follows, unless specified otherwise in WMC 21.36.050 through 21.36.110:

(1) The temporary use permit shall be effective for no more than 180 days from the date of the first event or occurrence;

(2) The temporary use shall not exceed a total of 60 days and applies only to the days that the event actually takes place;

(3) The temporary use permit shall specify a date upon which the use shall be terminated and removed;

(4) A temporary use permit shall not be granted for the same temporary use on a property more than once per calendar year; and

(5) A temporary use permit may be granted for multiple temporary uses on a property once per calendar year. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.36.040 Temporary use permits – General requirements.

(1) Parking and access for proposed temporary uses shall be determined by the Development Services Director.

(2) The applicant for a proposed temporary use shall provide any parking/traffic control attendants as specified by the Public Works Director. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.36.050 Temporary use permits – Mobile vendors.

Mobile vendors shall include those businesses or persons who engage in selling goods, services, or food from a temporary structure, vehicle, or other conveyance. Mobile vendors may be permitted on private property, provided all of the following requirements are met:

(1) Mobile vendors may operate in one location for a maximum of 12 hours per any 24-hour period;

(2) The temporary structure, vehicle, or other conveyance shall be allowed on the premises for no longer than seven consecutive days;

(3) All facilities associated with the mobile vendor shall be located outside of emergency or fire access lanes and public rights-of-way as to not obstruct access or sight distance of a sidewalk, street, or other public place;

(4) No sound generating devices, such as radios or speaker systems, producing sound distinguishable from 50 feet away may be used;

(5) Authorization is granted from the property owner on the location and hours of operation;

(6) Vendors shall be responsible for collecting trash within 50 feet of the vending area at the close of each business day and disposing of trash off site or in an approved receptacle;

(7) Mobile vendors shall provide documentation of the following:

(a) City of Woodinville business license;

(b) Current vehicle registration, if applicable;

(c) Current King County Public Health mobile food service permit, if applicable; and

(d) Site plan identifying temporary structures, vehicles, queuing areas, tables, tents, waste receptacles, and other pertinent information, as determined by the City;

(8) A copy of the temporary use permit shall be kept on the temporary structure, vehicle, or other conveyance available for public inspection. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.36.060 Temporary education or public facilities.

Temporary education or public structures may be permitted; provided, that such structures are:

(1) Allowed only during periods of permit review by the appropriate permitting agency and active construction or remodeling;

(2) Do not exceed the capacity or square footage of the structure to be constructed or remodeled; and

(3) Removed within 30 days of project completion or cessation of work. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.36.070 Temporary construction buildings.

Temporary structures for storage of tools and equipment or for supervisory offices may be permitted for construction projects; provided, that such structures are:

(1) Allowed only during periods of active construction; and 

(2) Removed within 30 days of project completion or cessation of work. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.36.080 Temporary construction residence. 

(1) A mobile home may be permitted on a lot as a temporary dwelling for the property owner; provided, a building permit for a permanent dwelling on the site has been obtained. 

(2) The temporary mobile home permit shall be effective for a period of 12 months. The permit may be extended for one additional period of 12 months if the permanent dwelling is constructed with a finished exterior by the end of the initial approval period.

(3) The mobile home shall be removed within 90 days of:

(a) The expiration of the temporary mobile home permit; or

(b) The issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the permanent residence, whichever occurs first. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.36.090 Temporary mobile home for medical hardship. 

(1) A mobile home may be permitted as a temporary dwelling on the same lot as a permanent dwelling, provided:

(a) The applicant demonstrates the temporary dwelling is necessary to provide daily care to an individual certified by a physician as needing such care;

(b) The primary provider of daily care shall reside on site; and

(c) The mobile home together with the permanent residence shall meet the setback, height, building footprint, and lot coverage provisions of the applicable zone.

(2) Temporary mobile home permits for medical hardships shall be effective for 12 months. Extensions of the temporary mobile home permit may be approved in 12-month increments subject to demonstration of continuing medical hardship.

(3) The mobile home shall be removed within 90 days of:

(a) The expiration of the temporary mobile home permit; or

(b) The cessation of provision of daily care. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.36.100 Temporary real estate offices.

One temporary real estate office may be located on any new residential development; provided, that activities are limited to the initial sale or rental of property or units within the development. The office use shall be discontinued within one year of recording of a subdivision or short subdivision, or issuance of a final certificate of occupancy in the case of an apartment development. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.36.110 Temporary personal wireless service facilities.

(1) The placement and use of temporary personal wireless service facilities shall conform to required setbacks, shall be maintained in a good and safe condition, and shall comply with all applicable Federal, State and local rules and regulations.

(2) A temporary personal wireless service facility may be used to evaluate the technical feasibility of a particular site for no more than three days. Provided, with the Development Services Director’s approval, an extension may be granted to a maximum of 15 days.

(3) Unless otherwise approved by the Development Services Director, temporary personal wireless service facilities may be used to provide emergency personal wireless services during natural disasters and other emergencies for no more than 30 days. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.36.120 Temporary encampments.

(1) This section applies to temporary encampments which house groups of persons experiencing homelessness, excluding indoor temporary housing or indoor sleeping accommodations to homeless persons.

(2) Only the following entities can establish a temporary encampment described in subsection (1) of this section:

(a) Religious organizations as set forth in the Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act, 42 U.S.C. Chapter 21c;

(b) Any 501(c) Internal Revenue Service recognized nonprofit organization having expertise managing facilities for homeless persons;

(c) Government agencies that provide services for homeless persons.

(3) Temporary encampments are permitted on public or private property, except R-1 zoned properties having ownership not listed in subsection (2) of this section.

(4) Temporary encampments must satisfy the following requirements:

(a) No more than 50 residents shall reside within a temporary encampment;

(b) The temporary encampment must be sponsored and/or managed by one or more of the entities set forth in subsection (2) of this section;

(c) The property must be sufficient in size to accommodate the temporary encampment;

(d) The temporary encampment must be located at least 20 feet from any property line abutting a property having an existing residential use, and 10 feet from all other property lines;

(e) A sight-obscuring screen shall be erected around the outer perimeter of the temporary encampment consisting of any combination of fencing, landscaping, existing structures, or other screening methods approved by the Director;

(f) The temporary encampment shall make adequate accommodations that ensure the general health, welfare and safety of the residents including, but not limited to, potable water, sanitation facilities, solid waste removal, fire protection, electricity, noise control and security;

(g) Suitable on-site parking and space for deliveries must be provided; and

(h) No permanent structures are constructed under the provisions for this section.

(5) The operating of a temporary encampment shall include the following:

(a) A point of contact shall be appointed and on file with the City for managing and enforcing the terms of the temporary use permit;

(b) A code of conduct for living at the temporary encampment shall be established specifying:

(i) Operating policies;

(ii) Restrictions on drugs, alcohol, weapons, violence, open flames;

(iii) Prohibitions on smoking in public places, littering, loitering and/or trespassing on nearby properties; and

(iv) Establishment of quiet hours;

(c) Establishment of measures that ensure compliance with all applicable State and local regulations as well as the code of conduct for the temporary encampment;

(d) The sponsor and/or managing entity shall take all reasonable and legal steps to:

(i) Obtain verifiable identification from current and prospective encampment residents and use such identification to obtain sex offender and warrant checks from agencies; and

(ii) If said warrant and sex offender checks reveal either (A) an existing or outstanding warrant from any jurisdiction in the United States for the arrest of the individual who is the subject of the check; or (B) the individual who is the subject of the check is a sex offender, required to register with the County Sheriff or their county of residence pursuant to RCW 9A.44.130, then the sponsoring and/or managing entity will reject the individual who is the subject of the check for residency in the temporary encampment, or eject the individual who is the subject of the check from the temporary encampment if that person is already a resident of the temporary encampment; and

(iii) Notify the City’s Police Department if an individual is ejected from the encampment due to an active warrant or match on a sex offender check, or if the individual appears to pose a threat to the community; and

(e) The managing entity shall allow access for inspections by public agency officials for the purposes of ensuring public health, safety, and welfare and for monitoring compliance with the requirements set forth herein and the conditions of approval of the temporary use permit.

(6) Timing.

(a) A temporary use permit may authorize the occupation of a temporary encampment for up to a maximum of 150 days after which all temporary facilities of the encampment must be removed within seven calendar days;

(b) Only one temporary encampment is allowed on the same property during any 365-day period with a minimum 180 days separating the erecting of another temporary encampment on the same property.

(7) Submission of an application for a temporary use permit for a temporary encampment shall include the following:

(a) A written project summary specifying the following information:

(i) The date the temporary encampment will commence;

(ii) The length of time the temporary encampment will be erected;

(iii) The maximum number of residents proposed;

(iv) The manner in which the temporary encampment will comply with the requirements of this section;

(b) Site plan drawing identifying the location of all sleeping tents, sanitation facilities including restrooms and showers, cooking facilities, waste receptacles, water facilities, sanitary sewer or human waste disposal facilities, parking and delivery space facilities, and any other pertinent information identified by the Director as being necessary to show compliance with this section;

(c) Name and contact information of the sponsor, managing agency and, if applicable, other point of contact information;

(d) Property owner’s authorization for the temporary encampment’s use of the property;

(e) A copy of the proposed code of conduct and operating agreement;

(f) Information on transportation and transit services to and from the encampment; and

(g) In the case of nonreligious organizations, evidence of the organization’s ability to successfully and safely operate a temporary encampment for homeless persons.

(8) Decision Criteria. A temporary use permit for a temporary encampment may be approved by the director if the following criteria are satisfied:

(a) Adequate provisions are made for public health and safety;

(b) The proposed use will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the property or nearby improvements; and

(c) The proposed use satisfies the requirements of this section and all other applicable local, State and Federal regulations.

(9) Miscellaneous Provisions.

(a) Conditions of Approval.

(i) Because each temporary encampment has unique characteristics such as size, duration, uses, number of occupants and composition, the Director is authorized to impose conditions on the approval of a temporary use permit;

(ii) Conditions, if imposed, must be intended to minimize nuisance-generating features in matters of noise, waste, air quality, unsightliness, traffic, physical hazards and other similar matters.

(b) The Director may modify the submittal requirements to request more or less information if determined appropriate to achieve the purpose of this chapter.

(c) If the sponsoring and/or managing entities, upon being notified by the Director in writing, fail to act to correct any violations in a reasonable time, the temporary use permit may be revoked.

(d) The provisions for temporary uses set forth in WMC 21.36.030, 21.36.040 and 21.80.260 shall not apply to temporary encampments. (Ord. 644 § 1, 2018)


Chapter 21.37 WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES

Sections:

21.37.010    Purpose.

21.37.020    Applicability.

21.37.030    Permit required.

21.37.040    Exceptions.

21.37.050    General provisions.

21.37.060    Permitted locations.

21.37.070    Visibility and performance standards.

21.37.080    Requirements for modifications.

21.37.090    Supplemental provisions – Conditional uses.

21.37.100    Criteria for new monopole or stealth supported facilities.

21.37.110    Maintenance of facilities.

21.37.120    Co-location – Covenant of good faith.

21.37.130    Testing of facilities required – Radio-frequency (RF) emissions.

21.37.140    Testing of facilities required – Noise emissions.

21.37.150    Security fencing.

21.37.160    Abandonment of facilities.

21.37.170    Signs.

21.37.180    Lighting standards.


21.37.010 Purpose.

The purposes of this chapter are as follows:

(1) Establish development regulations consistent with Woodinville’s Comprehensive Plan;

(2) Protect property values and promote tourism through protection of scenic vistas of mountains, tree-covered hillsides, the valley floor, and tourist-related zones and areas;

(3) Maintain the Northwest woodland character of Woodinville and maintain the quality of life associated with the aesthetic character of Woodinville’s surroundings;

(4) Provide adequate sites for locating wireless service facilities;

(5) Provide facilities and infrastructure to provide wireless communications service to City residents or others when in Woodinville;

(6) Encourage optimal co-location and sharing of new and existing facilities;

(7) Encourage use of most appropriate technology and prompt removal of outdated or abandoned wireless service facilities;

(8) Encourage the location of wireless service facilities upon alternative support structures;

(9) Require that the design of wireless service facilities incorporate camouflage, disguise, screening and concealment technology so that such facilities blend into their surroundings;

(10) Facilitate the use of public property and structures for wireless service facilities to reduce the impact of such facilities upon residential and other property; and

(11) Provide a level, nondiscriminatory competitive environment and thereby encouraging increased competition among providers of functionally equivalent wireless services. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.37.020 Applicability.

Except as otherwise provided herein, the placement of any wireless service facility at any location within Woodinville is subject to the provisions of this chapter. The standards and process requirements of this chapter supersede all other review process, setback, height or landscaping requirements of this title. Except as provided herein, all wireless service facilities shall comply with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.37.030 Permit required.

(1) New Facilities. A wireless service facility (WSF) permit or conditional use permit (CUP) shall be required prior to the site preparation, construction, or installation of any new wireless service facility other than a temporary wireless service facility as defined in Chapter 21.11 WMC. The review process for wireless service facility permits shall be as specified in WMC 21.37.060.

(2) Modifications to Existing Facilities. Modifications to existing facilities that involve addition, removal, and/or replacement of transmission equipment that do not substantially change the physical dimensions of an existing wireless service facility shall be subject to the requirements in WMC 21.37.080 and required to apply for and obtain all applicable building, site development, and right-of-way permits provided for in this code prior to making the modification(s). A WSF or CUP will not be required for these types of modifications. Modifications that do substantially change the existing facility shall be subject to this chapter and follow the requirements for new facilities.

(a) For the purpose of this chapter, “substantial change” means the following:

(i) Any mounting of the proposed antenna on the tower that would increase the height of the tower by more than 10 percent over the height of the tower at the time the existing facilities proposed to be modified were initially permitted, except that the mounting of the proposed antenna may exceed the size limits set forth in this subsection if necessary to avoid interference with existing antennas; or

(ii) The mounting of the proposed antenna would involve the installation of more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved (not to exceed four) or more than one new equipment shelter; or

(iii) The mounting of the proposed antenna would involve adding an appurtenance to the body of the tower that would protrude from the edge of the tower more than the width of the existing appurtenances and/or antennas, except that the mounting of the proposed antenna may exceed the size limits set forth in this subsection if necessary to shelter the antenna from inclement weather or to connect the antenna to the tower via cable; or

(iv) The mounting of the proposed antenna would involve excavation outside the current tower site, defined as the current boundaries of the leased or owned property surrounding the tower and any access or utility easements currently related to the site.

(b) To the maximum extent feasible, additional equipment shall maintain the appearance intended by the original facility, including, but not limited to, color, screening, landscaping, stealthing, mounting configuration, or architectural treatment. To determine feasibility, the applicant shall submit an engineer’s report regarding the proposed modification and the feasibility of maintaining the appearance; the Director shall determine whether it is feasible to maintain the appearance.

(3) No wireless service facility permit shall be issued unless the applicant demonstrates compliance with the terms, conditions and performance standards set forth in this chapter. Any such permit denominated as a conditional use shall also meet the criteria for said use permits set forth in Chapter 21.80 WMC. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.37.040 Exceptions.

The design, siting (location or landscaping) and dimension requirements and/or standards of this section may have modifications by the Development Services Director when, in his or her judgment, design, siting and dimension requirements are proven to produce negative unintended results and/or accomplish the same results with alternatives. Such exceptions must be reviewed and approved by a standards review panel comprised of the Directors of the Development Services, Public Works, and Parks and Recreation Departments. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.37.050 General provisions.

(1) Lattice and guyed wire towers shall not be permitted in any zoning district.

(2) Commercial advertising including billboards and business identification signs may not be used as alternative antenna support structures.

(3) Construction and/or installation of towers is prohibited within the Tourist District Overlay. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.37.060 Permitted locations.

Wireless service facilities shall be permitted as follows, with the type of permit indicated:

	Type of Facility	R1 – 8	R9+	CBD, GB, NB, TB, O	I	P/I, P

	Street Pole Mounted	Permitted with WSF	Permitted with WSF	Permitted with WSF, except not permitted in CBD	Permitted with WSF	Permitted with WSF

	Electric Transmission Towers	Permitted with WSF	Permitted with WSF	Permitted with WSF, except not permitted in CBD	Permitted with WSF	Permitted with WSF

	Utility Poles Outside Public Rights-of-Way	Permitted with CUP	Permitted with CUP	Permitted with WSF, except not permitted in CBD	Permitted with WSF	Permitted with CUP

	Water Tank Mounted	Permitted with WSF	Permitted with WSF	Permitted with WSF	Permitted with WSF	Permitted with WSF

	Playfield, Ballfield and Stadium Light Mounted Facilities	Permitted with CUP	Permitted with CUP	Permitted with WSF	Permitted with WSF	Permitted with WSF

	Building Attached	Permitted with WSF, only for nonresidential uses	Permitted with WSF, only for nonresidential uses	Permitted with WSF. In NB zone, restricted to buildings two stories and higher	Permitted with WSF	Permitted with WSF, except not permitted in P zone

	Monopoles	Permitted with CUP	Permitted with CUP	Permitted with CUP	Permitted with CUP	Permitted with CUP

	Co-Locations	Permitted with WSF	Permitted with WSF	Permitted with WSF	Permitted with WSF	Permitted with WSF

	Stealth Support Structure	Permitted with WSF	Permitted with WSF	Permitted with WSF	Permitted with WSF	Permitted with WSF

	Other Types Not Listed	 	 	Permitted with CUP	Permitted with CUP	 

(Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.37.070 Visibility and performance standards.

All wireless service facilities locating within Woodinville shall comply with the following standards:

(1) Standards for all types of facilities:

	General	1. All portions of the facility shall be the minimum size necessary to support operation of the facility, as certified by the provider’s licensed engineer. Where multiple facilities are proposed to be located in close proximity, they may be required to be consolidated in one equipment housing structure.

2. Owners and operators shall provide information regarding the opportunity for the co-location of facilities. Provision for future co-location may be required if technically feasible and where opportunities for smaller facilities with less impacts are limited due to topography, lack of existing above ground structures or other circumstances. To determine feasibility, the applicant shall submit an engineer’s report regarding the feasibility of co-location; the Director shall determine whether it is feasible to provide for future co-location.

	Antennas	1. In general, an antenna array shall either be flush mounted within 12 inches of the support structure, or within 12 inches of the face of the building it is attached to; or be contained in a canister that is a continuation of the support structure and is centered on top of the support structure; or be placed pursuant to the City’s adopted design standards in Chapter 21.40 WMC.

2. All antennas or arrays shall be a color and material that matches the support structure.

3. For building attached facilities, roof-mounted installation is permitted when the City’s adopted design standards in Chapter 21.40 WMC have been met. The antennas, mounting brackets and any concealment structures shall be exempt from the height limit of the underlying zone to the extent that the total height of such facilities does not increase the overall building height by 18 feet, or 50 percent of the original building height, whichever is less.

	Equipment Enclosures	1. All equipment necessary for the operation of the facility shall be concealed, either within an existing building, within an architecturally compatible addition to an existing building, or within a new building which is architecturally compatible with other buildings on the site and adjoining properties; or shall be located underground. Except that equipment enclosures may be located above ground, and landscaped and screened pursuant to this chapter, if the Development Services Director finds that the requirements of WMC 21.37.040 have been met. Underground shelters shall not be allowed where such shelters would interfere with existing uses of public land, including, but not limited to, public rights-of-way. Equipment enclosures less than or equal to five cubic feet, with no single dimension over three feet, and with the approval of the Public Works Director, may be mounted directly on a street pole.

2. Equipment enclosures are permitted upon abutting private property and may, with approval from the Public Works Director, be located within public rights-of-way.

3. The size of equipment enclosures shall be minimized to the greatest extent possible.

	Appearance	The following standards may be applied, as required by the Development Services Director, to ensure the facility minimizes its visual impact:

1. Requiring specific materials, surfaces or finishes that achieve a facility that is compatible with the existing neighborhood, that blends with the surrounding setting, and/or is screened from surrounding uses and properties.

2. Requiring specific design and configurations to minimize visual intrusion of the facility on surrounding uses and properties. Such techniques include, for example: requiring transmission and power cables and other conduit to be contained within any support structure, located underground, or otherwise screened; requiring the lateral projection of antenna arrays to be minimized to the greatest extent technically feasible; and requiring antenna arrays to be integrated into the design of any structure to which they are attached. To determine feasibility, the applicant shall submit an engineer’s report regarding the feasibility of the lateral projection of antenna arrays; the Director shall determine whether the proposed projection is the least that is technically feasible.

3. For facilities on private property, requiring screening through the use of mature trees that are a minimum of 20 feet tall and planted to screen at least 80 percent of the area around the facility.

4. Prefabricated concrete and metal structures for equipment enclosures shall not be permitted unless treated with a facade giving the appearance of masonry or wood siding and approved by the Development Services Director.

5. For stealth supported structures, the structure shall be designed to resemble an object that would be commonly found in the area, including, but not limited to, a flagpole, a clock or bell tower, a tree that is a native conifer species, or a silo. Antennas, to the maximum extent feasible, shall be concealed by the stealth support structure, or shall not be easily recognized. To determine feasibility, the applicant shall submit an engineer’s report regarding the feasibility of concealing the antennas; the Director shall determine whether the proposed concealment is the maximum extent feasible.

	Screening and Noise	Noise reduction measures shall comply with Chapter 8.08 WMC, Noise Regulation, or the standards set forth with the Federal Interagency Committee on Urban Noise, whichever demonstrates the least amount of noise impact for the nearest residential dwelling(s) at any time of day or night, as measured from the closest point from the exterior of the dwelling to the wireless facility. Such requirements shall be exempt during testing of alternative power sources (i.e., power generators or similar emergency power sources).

	Landscaping	Facilities shall be surrounded with a 10-foot width of Type I landscaping, as defined in WMC 21.43.040, or requirements within the Tourist Overlay District, whichever is more stringent. All existing and required landscaping shall be maintained for the life of the facility, pursuant to WMC 21.43.130.

	Setbacks	Facilities shall comply with the setback requirements set forth in Chapter 21.22 WMC, and meet or exceed the standards set forth in Chapter 8.08 WMC or the Federal Interagency Committee on Urban Noise, whichever demonstrates the least amount of noise impact for the nearest residential dwelling(s), as measured from the closest point from the exterior of the dwelling to the facility. Subject to approval by the Development Services Director, the setback may be reduced if the applicant uses noise abatement techniques, such as decorative noise walls, to achieve equivalent or greater reduction of visual and noise impacts from the facility.

For co-locations, new equipment associated with the facility shall be placed no closer to existing residential uses than any existing equipment enclosure on the subject property.

(2) Standards for specific types of facilities:

	Street Pole Mounted	1. Only one facility shall be permitted on any street pole.

2. Facilities located within public rights-of-way shall be located a minimum of 500 feet apart; the Development Services Director and Public Works Director may approve a shorter distance, subject to the applicant submitting engineering analysis and equipment specifications that demonstrate the reduced distance is necessary to provide adequate coverage and/or capacity.

3. Where a utility located upon the support structure (such as a street or utility pole) requires vertical separation between its facilities and the antenna(s), the structure/pole and antenna may be raised by a mount to accommodate the minimum separation requirement, not to exceed 30 feet. Any additions shall be constructed of similar materials, and shall have surface treatments which match the color and texture of the original facility.

	Electric Transmission Towers or Utility Poles Outside Public Rights-of-Way	Where a utility located upon the support structure (such as a street or utility pole) requires vertical separation between its facilities and the antenna(s), the structure/pole and antenna may be raised by a mount to accommodate the minimum separation requirement, not to exceed 30 feet. Any additions shall be constructed of similar materials, and shall have surface treatments which match the color and texture of the original facility.

	Playfield, Ballfield and Stadium Light Mounted Facilities	Only one facility shall be permitted on any pole.

	Building Attached	The equipment for roof-mounted antennas within the NB zone shall be located within the same building on which the antennas are located.

	Monopoles	The height of the facility shall be no greater than 120 feet.

	Co-Locations	1. Co-locations are permitted on existing monopoles and on existing stealth support structure facilities.

2. The height of the existing facility may be increased by the minimum separation necessary between the facilities, not to exceed 20 feet.

3. Existing monopoles and antenna support structures may be replaced to accommodate co-location. Monopoles and stealth support structures shall, to the maximum extent feasible, be located within 20 feet of the existing structure, and maintain the design of the original structure. To determine feasibility, the applicant shall submit an engineer’s report regarding the feasibility of a proposed location; the Director shall determine whether the proposed location is feasible.

	Stealth Support Structure	The height of the facility shall be no greater than 120 feet.

(Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.37.080 Requirements for modifications.

All modifications to wireless service facilities that do not substantially change the existing facility shall comply with the following standards:

(1) No modification shall violate the noise provisions in Chapter 8.08 WMC, or the standards set forth with the Federal Interagency Committee on Urban Noise. A noise study shall be submitted with any modification to antennas or equipment.

(2) No modification shall violate setback or other bulk requirements in Chapter 21.22 WMC.

(3) To the maximum extent feasible, modifications that change the appearance of the facility may be required to upgrade the facility in one or more of the following ways, where the improvements are needed to maintain compatibility with the existing neighborhood. To determine feasibility, the applicant shall submit a report acceptable to the Directors of Public Works and Development Services regarding the proposed modification and the feasibility of the upgrade; the Director shall determine whether it is feasible to maintain the appearance:

(a) Using specific finishes or paint on the tower/support structure and antennas;

(b) Adding mature trees that are a minimum of 20 feet tall, or paying into the tree fund as permitted in Chapter 21.50 WMC for an equivalent-sized tree;

(c) Adding Type I landscaping screening to the facility; and/or

(d) Adding architectural fencing or screening. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.37.090 Supplemental provisions – Conditional uses.

(1) In addition to the criteria for approval of conditional uses set forth in Chapter 21.80 WMC, the following criteria shall apply to all wireless service facility permits denominated as conditional uses:

(a) The applicant has demonstrated that visual, noise, and other impacts associated with the proposed facility have been minimized to the maximum extent possible using existing concealment technology, site design, noise abatement techniques, concealment, disguise, camouflage, and/or the use of architecturally compatible improvements to existing structures where permitted, and/or underground placement of ancillary equipment. In evaluating the site design, consideration shall be given to whether the facility will blend into the surrounding topography, tree coverage, foliage, and other natural features and whether locating the facility in alternative locations upon the subject property, or reasonably available properties, would better conceal the facility through use of existing natural and built features;

(b) The applicant has demonstrated that the design of the proposed facility complies with the purpose and intent of this chapter, including, but not limited to, the visibility and performance standards set forth in WMC 21.37.070 which most closely match the proposed facility;

(c) Whether alternative locations, including other co-locations and alternative support structures, are available for the proposed facility; and

(d) Whether the proposed facility is in compliance with all applicable Federal, State, and local statutes, regulations, ordinances, and policies.

(2) In evaluating any proposed wireless service facility denominated as a conditional use, the Development Services Director may, at the expense of the applicant, retain an outside consultant to review the technical, design and other materials submitted by the applicant in conjunction with the proposal. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.37.100 Criteria for new monopole or stealth supported facilities.

Any wireless service provider which proposes to construct a new monopole or stealth supported facility shall provide, as part of its permit application, written findings from a qualified engineer which demonstrate that:

(1) Either there are no other facilities reasonably available for co-location; or

(2) Any existing facilities reasonably available are not technologically suitable for use by the applicant; and

(3) The proposed monopole has been designed in a manner that will allow for the co-location of at least one additional antenna array on the structure. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.37.110 Maintenance of facilities.

The owner and/or operator of all wireless service facilities shall maintain their facilities in a good and safe condition and in a manner which complies with all applicable Federal, State, and local requirements. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.37.120 Co-location – Covenant of good faith.

All antenna support structures permitted pursuant to the terms of this chapter or otherwise located within Woodinville shall be made available for use by the owner or initial user thereof, together with as many other wireless service providers as can be technically co-located thereon. However, nothing in this chapter shall prevent the owner of an antenna support structure from charging a reasonable fee for the co-location of additional facilities upon said structure which does not exceed the fair market value for the space occupied by said co-located facilities. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.37.130 Testing of facilities required – Radio-frequency (RF) emissions.

(1) All wireless service facilities shall comply with applicable Federal Communications Commission (FCC) regulations regarding radio-frequency emissions. All tests shall be performed by or under the supervision of a professional engineer competent to perform such testing and interpret the data gathered.

(2) Reports or similar support documents shall be submitted for all facilities confirming compliance with all applicable FCC regulations. Compliance reports shall be required when requested by the Development Services Director.

(3) If at any time radio-frequency emission tests show that a facility exceeds any of the standards established by the FCC, the owner or operator thereof shall immediately discontinue use of the facility and notify the Development Services Director. Use of such facilities may not resume until the owner or operator demonstrates that corrections have been completed which reduce the radio-frequency emissions to levels permitted by the FCC. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.37.140 Testing of facilities required – Noise emissions.

(1) The owner or operator of a wireless service facility shall conduct tests necessary to demonstrate compliance with all applicable local regulations regarding the noise emissions of the facility when notified in writing by the Development Services Director that a noise complaint has been received regarding the facility. All such tests shall be performed by or under the supervision of a licensed environmental noise consultant competent to perform such tests and interpret the data gathered.

(2) When such a report is required, a report, certified by a licensed environmental noise consultant, setting forth the observed noise levels at the property line of the property upon which the facility is located shall be submitted. The report shall account for background noise and other noise sources and demonstrate the noise levels emitted by the facility, including any air conditioning or ventilation equipment contained therein. Such report shall address standards set forth within noise reduction measures within Chapter 8.08 WMC, Noise Regulation, or the standards set forth with the Federal Interagency Committee on Urban Noise, whichever demonstrates the least amount of noise impact for the nearest residential dwelling(s), at any time of day or night, as measured from the closest point from the exterior of the dwelling to the wireless facility.

(3) The Development Services Director may retain a technical expert in environmental noise measurement to verify the noise measurements and certification. The cost of such a technical expert shall be borne by the owner or operator of the facility, if said facility fails to comply with applicable State or local noise standards.

(4) This section shall not apply during the testing of alternative power sources (i.e., power generators). (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.37.150 Security fencing.

All wireless service facilities shall be protected from unauthorized entry. The perimeter of all wireless service facilities which include an antenna support structure shall be secured with security fencing which does not exceed six feet in height. Wireless service facilities that do not include an antenna support structure shall be protected from unauthorized entry through appropriate means approved by the Development Services Director or his or her designee on a case-by-case basis consistent with the purpose of protecting the public health, safety, and welfare. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.37.160 Abandonment of facilities.

Any antenna support structure that has had no antennas mounted upon it for a period of six months, or if the antennas mounted thereon are not operated for a period of six months, shall be considered abandoned, and the owner thereof shall remove such structure and any accompanying equipment and enclosure within 90 days after receipt of a notice from the Development Services Director to do so. The Development Services Director may extend this time period to a maximum of six additional months. The owner or operator of all wireless service facilities shall, when requested by the Development Services Director, submit a written report, signed under penalty of perjury, which demonstrates whether or not there has been a cessation in use of the facility for a period of six months during the prior year. If a facility and associated equipment are not removed within 90 days after receipt of a notice from the Development Services Director requiring said removal, the Development Services Director may seek and obtain a court order directing such removal and imposing a lien upon the real property upon which such wireless service facility is situated in an amount equal to the cost of removal. In the event that more than one wireless service provider is using the antenna support structure, the antenna support structure shall not be considered abandoned until all such users cease using the structure as provided in this section. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.37.170 Signs.

Except as approved by the Development Services Director as part of a plan to conceal, disguise, or camouflage a wireless service facility, no signs, symbols, flags, banners, or similar devices shall be placed on, attached to, painted, or inscribed upon any antenna support structure or alternative antenna support structure. Notwithstanding the foregoing, an applicant and/or land owner may place not more than four signs measuring 12 by 18 inches upon or near a wireless service facility which: (1) state that trespassers will be prosecuted; (2) list the names and telephone numbers of persons to be contacted in the event of an emergency; (3) identify the applicant and/or land owner or person responsible for operating the wireless facility; and/or (4) contain information necessary and convenient for the person operating the wireless service facility to identify the wireless service facility. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the placement of safety or warning signs upon any portion of the wireless service facility which are required by law or which are designed to apprise emergency response personnel and the employees and agents of wireless service providers of particular hazards associated with equipment located upon the wireless service facility. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.37.180 Lighting standards.

Except as specifically required by Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or FCC regulations, antenna support structures shall not be illuminated. However, equipment enclosures may be illuminated for security reasons when compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


Chapter 21.40 COMMERCIAL DESIGN STANDARDS

Sections:

21.40.010    Purpose.

21.40.020    Administrative procedures.

21.40.030    Applicability.

21.40.035    Alternative commercial design standards.

21.40.040    Interpretation.

21.40.050    Design review procedures.

21.40.060    Review by the Planning Commission Design Review Committee.

21.40.070    Appeals.

21.40.080    Amendment of approved design.

21.40.090    Expiration.

21.40.100    Criteria for approval.

21.40.110    Site planning – Relationship to street front.

21.40.120    Site planning – Interior yard compatibility.

21.40.130    Site planning – Multiple building/large lot developments and large format retail stores.

21.40.140    Mechanical equipment and service areas.

21.40.150    Design standards for outdoor sales lots.

21.40.160    Design standards for gasoline service stations.

21.40.170    Site planning – Integration of LID and stormwater retention.

21.40.180    Street corners.

21.40.190    Site lighting.

21.40.200    Site landscaping.

21.40.210    General pedestrian access requirements.

21.40.220    Pathways through parking lots.

21.40.230    Sidewalks – Size and materials.

21.40.240    Pedestrian amenities.

21.40.250    Internal pedestrian paths and circulation.

21.40.260    Pedestrian activity and plazas.

21.40.270    Residential open space.

21.40.280    Vehicular access and circulation.

21.40.290    Parking reductions.

21.40.300    Vehicle entrances.

21.40.310    Building design – Character.

21.40.320    Human scale.

21.40.330    Architectural scale.

21.40.340    Building corners.

21.40.350    Building details.

21.40.360    Materials.

21.40.370    Blank walls.

21.40.380    Definitions.



21.40.390    Northwest woodland character design standards illustrative guide.


21.40.010 Purpose.

(1) The overall purpose of these commercial design standards is to help implement the City’s Comprehensive Plan vision:

In the year 2015, Woodinville is a safe, friendly, family-oriented community that supports a successful balance of neighborhoods, parks and recreation, tourism, and business. We have preserved our Northwest woodland character, our open space, and our clean environment. We have enhanced our ability to move freely throughout the community by all modes of travel. Woodinville is a pleasant place in which to live, work, play, and visit, with a compact, inviting downtown that is attractive and functional.

(2) More specifically, the purposes of these commercial design standards are to guide development in a manner that is not only functional, but also aesthetically pleasing, promotes social and economic vitality, and fosters an enhanced sense of safety, comfort, interest and identification between people and their environment. Additionally, the purpose of these commercial design standards is to encourage development that meets the goals and policies of the City of Woodinville Comprehensive Plan for community design. These goals are:

(a) Goal CD-1: To promote an image of a visually cohesive community to residents and visitors.

(b) Goal CD-2: To maintain the Northwest woodland character and heritage of Woodinville.

(c) Goal CD-3: To promote quality design that preserves and enhances the character of Woodinville.

(d) Goal CD-4: To create pedestrian-friendly environments in Woodinville.

(e) Goal CD-5: To encourage the arts as a vital contributor to community design. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.40.020 Administrative procedures.

(1) The Director will report design review activity regularly to the Planning Commission, who will serve as the monitor for these commercial design standards. The City is committed to incorporating design review procedures that:

(a) Apply to all commercially designated property within the City;

(b) Allow for flexibility to accommodate creative design that meets the intent of adopted standards;

(c) Do not prolong approval processes; and

(d) Encourage design review that parallels development design for economy of design resources.

(2) Applicants will have opportunity to informally discuss and formally review proposed designs throughout the design process, including preapplication, project permit review, and final construction design review.

(3) Where the Director is provided with administrative flexibility under this code he/she shall develop a written record of consultation (with other department heads, design review committee or with the City’s contract design professional) by project. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.40.030 Applicability.

(1) All new construction within the CBD, O, TB, GB and NB zones shall be subject to all chapters of the design standards. The Downtown and Little Bear Creek Corridor study area has some additional specific design standards that are incorporated into the commercial design standards.

(2) Figure 1 identifies the Downtown and Little Bear Creek Corridor (DTLBCC) study area. Additionally, this area is divided into design districts with special use provisions and guidelines to create the following characteristics in each district:

(a) Civic/Gateway Design District: Public and high visibility (e.g., hotel) uses. Emphasis on attractive streets, landscaping and pedestrian connections. Development standards/guidelines emphasize design character as seen from streets and pedestrian connections.

(b) Pedestrian Core Design District: Highly integrated mix of smaller, pedestrian-oriented commercial services (specialty shops, restaurants, personal services, community-oriented retail, etc.) and residential. Residential dwelling units are required subject to applicable development conditions under WMC 21.21.030. Offices above the ground floor are encouraged. The goal is to develop at least 1,000 dwelling units in this area to support retail and provide activity. Development standards/guidelines emphasize pedestrian-oriented streets, efficient but nonintrusive auto access, plazas, small open spaces and amenities, and human scale, high quality architecture. Also important is to provide enough development capacity to ensure feasible high quality development, while modulating building bulk to retain sunlight and views. 

(c) East Frame Design District: Mix of uses including accommodation of larger format retail centers. Development standards/guidelines emphasize integrated site development with good interior pedestrian circulation, ample, “garden like” landscaping, compatibility with adjacent uses (minimization of service area impacts), and an attractive eastern entry into the downtown. 

(d) Little Bear Creek Design District: General commercial and office uses. Buildings of up to 60 feet in height are allowed if development includes structured parking and “greensward” corridors on the side yard that provide pedestrian connections to the creek and water quality treatment. The emphasis is on enhancing the environment and providing access to Little Bear Creek.

(e) Transition Area Design District: Mix of uses including accommodation of medium format retail centers. Development standards/guidelines emphasize many of the same characteristics of the East Frame, but focus on transitioning to the residential areas to the east.


[IMAGE]


Figure 1. Downtown and Little Bear Creek Corridor Design Districts

(3) Alteration of any structure on commercially designated property within the City that affects the exterior appearance of a building shall be subject to design review under the design standards. While Woodinville would benefit greatly if all the design standards were met when existing properties are altered, such a strict application of the design standards might disadvantage property owners or discourage them from improving their buildings. The City has established two thresholds to gauge the extent of remodeling and set requirements based on what is practical and reasonable for that level of improvement.

(a) If 50 percent or more of a building or structure subject to design review is altered within a period of three years, the structure shall be subject to the applicable requirements that do not involve repositioning the building or reconfiguring site development as determined by the Director.

(b) If less than 50 percent of a building or structure subject to design review is altered within a period of three years, the requirement is only that the proposed improvements meet the standards and/or guidelines and do not lead to further nonconformance with the standards and guidelines. For example, if a property owner decides to replace a building facade’s siding, then the siding shall meet the applicable exterior building material and color standards and/or guidelines, but elements such as building modulation would not be required.

(4) The design standards checklist will be used for addressing design issues in all review processes. (Ord. 656 § 2, 2018; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.40.035 Alternative commercial design standards.

The Director may approve departures from any of the standards set forth in this chapter; provided: 

(1) The departures are consistent with and substantially implement the objectives, concepts and guidelines set forth in the “Downtown Vision and Illustrative Guide: June 2018” approved by the City Council pursuant to Resolution 524; and 

(2) A development agreement is obtained pursuant to Chapter 21.82 WMC where substantial compliance with the Downtown Vision and Illustrative Guide is included in the terms of the development agreement; and

(3) The applicant submits with their application for design review specific identification of proposed departures from those commercial design standards set forth in this chapter in favor of specific identified provisions of the “Downtown Vision and Illustrative Guide: June 2018.” (Ord. 677 § 2, 2018)


21.40.040 Interpretation.

(1) Where there is a conflict between these design standards and other City plans, policies, and regulations, the most specific standard, guideline, or regulation shall apply, as determined by the Director. For example, this title provides for a minimum street setback of 10 feet in commercial districts, whereas the design standards allow buildings to be placed on the front property line as long as they meet certain design requirements. While the design standards herein are less restrictive in this case, they are more specific in that they allow for zero setbacks if certain conditions are met. (Therefore, the Director will determine that they apply.)

(2) Each section of the design standards contains a list of “intent” statements followed by “design principles” and subsequent implementing measures. Specifically:

(a) Intent statements are overarching objectives. For example, the intent statement for the “building corners” section is to “create visual interest and increased activity at street corners.” Project applicants must be able to demonstrate how their project meets the intent, to the Director’s satisfaction.

(b) Design principle statements describe broad actions that are necessary to achieve the intent.

(c) A collection of standards implements the design principles. Specifically:

(i) Standards that use words such as “shall,” “must,” “is/are required,” or “is/are prohibited” signify required actions.

(ii) Some standards take a “tool box” approach, in that a development may be required to include at least two design elements from a large list of options.

(iii) Standards using words such as “should” or “is/are recommended” signify recommended actions that are meant to be applied with some flexibility. Development projects must comply with such measures unless the development proposal meets the intent in some other manner, as determined by the Director.

(d) Furthermore, the document contains some specific standards that are easily quantifiable, while others provide a level of discretion in how they are complied with. In the latter case, the applicant must demonstrate to the Director, in writing, how the project meets the intent of the standard.

(3) Words within the standards and guidelines that are italicized in the ordinance codified in this chapter are defined in WMC 21.40.380. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.40.050 Design review procedures.

(1) When an applicant submits a development application that triggers design review, design review shall be reviewed as part of the applicable permit application or process. When an applicant proposes a stand-alone design that does not require any other development application, the applicant shall comply with the Type I review process and submittal requirements in Chapters 21.80 through 21.89 WMC. Within 21 calendar days, the Director shall review such stand-alone applications and either approve, approve with conditions or modifications, deny the application, or request additional information. Any decision to deny the application shall be in writing along with the reasons for the denial and the appeal process.

(2) No project approval shall be granted, no building permit issued and no construction shall begin until the Director has completed design review and determined that the application is consistent with the criteria in this section, has issued a design decision or notice of decision, and all appeal periods have expired.

(3) A design review application shall be submitted with application for the project permit, pursuant to Chapters 21.80 through 21.89 WMC. The Director may require other information to be submitted that is determined to be appropriate and necessary for a proper review of the requested action.

(4) With submittal of the building permit, the Director shall determine that the final design is consistent with the issued design decision. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.40.060 Review by the Planning Commission Design Review Committee.

(1) The Planning Commission Design Review Committee shall review, and make a recommendation to the Director on, all proposed development activity that requires review under the State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA) or requires a project approval pursuant to WMC 21.80.140.

(2) The review and recommendation of the Design Review Committee shall be based on whether the proposal is consistent with the design standards in this chapter. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.40.070 Appeals.

Appeals of design review decisions for stand-alone design review applications shall comply with the procedural requirements of Chapters 21.80 through 21.89 WMC. All other design review decisions shall be made part of the overall permit application or process, and appeals shall also follow the appeals process for the overall permit application or process. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.40.080 Amendment of approved design.

Major change(s) to plans approved by the Director may only be amended by the same procedures provided herein for original design approval. Design review for amendments shall be limited to the proposed change, except the proposed amendment shall be considered in context with approved design review. A major change is a change that affects a design standard reviewed in the original approval(s). (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.40.090 Expiration.

(1) Design approval shall expire within two years of the date of approval, except as provided for phased site plan approvals below. A single two-year extension may be granted for good cause as determined by the Director.

(2) The Director may grant design approval for large projects planned to be developed in phases over a period of years exceeding the normal time limits of subsection (1) of this section. Such approval shall include time limits for particular phases of the development as agreed upon by the applicant and the Director. If the time limits of a phase cannot be met, a single two-year extension may be granted for good cause by the Director. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.40.100 Criteria for approval.

As part of the design decision or notice of decision, the Director shall make a decision whether or not the proposed design is consistent with the design standards found in this chapter. As part of the decision, the Director shall consider the applicant’s submitted material, the review and recommendation by the Planning Commission Design Review Committee, and/or the results of any consultation with other department heads or the City’s contract design professional. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.40.110 Site planning – Relationship to street front.

(1) Intent. People experience the City from streets. Streets are some of the vital spaces that bind the community together and allow for various modes of movement within the City. The intent for street fronts is:

(a) To create an active, safe pedestrian environment;

(b) To enhance commercial areas and to establish visual identity for each area;

(c) To reflect a small village tradition in structures;

(d) To unify streetscapes;

(e) To improve circulation, including options for pedestrians, bicycles and vehicles;

(f) To enhance the visual character of streets within commercial areas;

(g) To encourage garden-type landscaping elements as a unifying feature; and

(h) To enhance the visibility of commercial uses from the street.


[IMAGE]


Figure 2. An example of development that meets frontage requirements for pedestrian-oriented streets.

(2) Pedestrian-Oriented Street Design Principle. Relate development to designated pedestrian-oriented street frontages. All development for properties fronting on a designated pedestrian-oriented street, as defined in WMC 21.40.380, shall include the following features: site planning measures to define the street edge; encourage pedestrian access amenities; and support the commercial area’s design purpose stated in WMC 21.40.010. 

Streets within the Downtown and Little Bear Creek Corridor study area shall comply with the provisions of subsection (4) of this section. The following streets are designated as pedestrian-oriented streets:

•    NE 175th Street

•    135th Avenue NE

•    133rd Avenue NE

•    138th Avenue NE

•    140th Avenue NE

Developments on pedestrian-oriented streets must adhere to the following standards, unless the Director determines that they prevent viable site development: 

(a)  Buildings shall orient to the street in one of the following ways: 

(i) The building shall abut the sidewalk (including any setback required to achieve a wider sidewalk) and shall include a pedestrian-oriented facade; or

(ii) The building shall be set back from the sidewalk edge a minimum of five feet with either pedestrian-oriented space as described in WMC 21.40.260 or garden area landscaping as described in subsection (2)(c) of this section between the sidewalk edge and the building front.

(b) Pedestrian-oriented facades shall include: 

(i) Transparent window areas or window displays along at least 75 percent of the ground-floor facade. The window area must cover the area between two feet and eight feet above the sidewalk or walkway surface; and


[IMAGE]


Figure 3. An example of a pedestrian-oriented facade.

(ii) Weather protection at least six feet wide along at least 75 percent of the building’s front face. Wider weather protection features are encouraged to provide for outdoor seating areas such as in Figure 4. The weather protection may be in the form of awnings, marquees, canopies, or building overhangs (see Figure 4). Gaps in the covering allow for visual variety in the facade through the use of architectural features and/or landscaping components.


[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]


Figure 4. Examples of weather protection features. Weather protection features that are eight feet or wider, shown at right, can protect outdoor seating areas.

(c) Garden Area Landscaping Standards. The garden landscaping shall incorporate landscaping that adds seasonal color and interest and does not act as a visual barrier. Such areas should incorporate a variety of plant types that feature a range of colors and textures that provide visual interest from the sidewalk. Grass is acceptable only if combined with other plantings that provide seasonal interest and meet the intent of this section. English ivy and other nonnative, invasive plants are prohibited in this space. Plant types should be appropriate to the Pacific Northwest climate. Native and drought tolerant plants are preferred. The garden area shall be designed and maintained to provide clear visibility between storefront windows and the street.

(d) The front facade of buildings separated from the sidewalk edge by at least five feet of pedestrian-oriented space or garden area landscaping shall adhere to the standards for pedestrian-oriented facades (according to subsection (2)(b) of this section) or adhere to the following standards: 

(i) The building must include transparency along at least 50 percent of the ground-floor facade between four and eight feet above the sidewalk. For buildings with ground-floor residential units, the Director may reduce the transparency requirement, provided the design treatment meets the intent of the standards.

(ii) Weather protection at least six feet deep is required over the entry. Such elements can project into front setback areas. 


[IMAGE]


Figure 5. An example of incorporating a small garden area between the sidewalk and the building.


[IMAGE]


Figure 6. A variety of “garden” type landscaping configurations and designs that would be appropriate for areas between the sidewalk and a building on a pedestrian-oriented street. 

(e) Building entries must have direct access to the public sidewalk. Such entries should face the street to the extent possible. Where entries are located on the side of the building, they must be visible from the street and connected by a pedestrian pathway. See Figures 3 and 4 for examples.

(f) Parking shall be located behind structures, away from pedestrian-oriented streets. On sites that front on two or more pedestrian-oriented streets and where the Director determines that there are no reasonable alternatives, parking and vehicle access areas may occupy no more than 50 percent or 65 feet of the street frontage, whichever is less. The Director will determine on which street frontage the parking may be allowed. Parking lots may not be located at a corner that faces on a pedestrian-oriented street.


[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]


Figure 7. Parking location and configuration options.

(g) If allowed, parking lots adjacent to pedestrian-oriented streets shall be screened from the sidewalk by one of the following methods: 

(i) Provide a five-foot-wide planting bed that incorporates a continuous three-foot-tall wall. The planting bed shall be in front (street side) of the wall and feature Type III landscaping. Alternative landscaping schemes will be considered by the Director provided they meet the intent of the guidelines. The wall shall be constructed of brick, stone, decorative concrete or concrete block, or other permanent material that provides visual interest and helps to define the street edge, as determined by the Director. See Figure 8 for an example.


[IMAGE]


Figure 8. Parking lot planting buffer with low wall.

(ii) Provide an elevated planter that is a minimum of five feet wide and between two and three feet in height. Ledges that are approximately 12 inches in width are encouraged, as they can double as a seating area. The planter must be constructed of masonry, concrete or other permanent material that effectively contrasts with the color of the sidewalk and combines groundcover and annuals, perennials, ornamental grasses, low shrubs, and/or small trees that provide seasonal interest and winter greenery, as determined by the Director. See Figure 9 as an example.


[IMAGE]


Figure 9. Elevated parking lot planting buffer.

Both options in subsections (2)(g)(i) and (ii) of this section feature plantings to maintain eye level visibility between the street/sidewalk and parking area for safety. This means that shrubs and other low plantings should be maintained below three feet in height, while trees (once they achieve taller heights) should generally be trimmed up to the eight-foot level. See Figure 10. The planting beds in both options shall be irrigated unless the Director determines it is not necessary for the plant materials selected.


[IMAGE]


Figure 10. Parking lot planting buffers shall emphasize the 3:8 rule for visibility and safety.

(h) Parking structures located adjacent to pedestrian-oriented streets and other streets noted in subsection (4) of this section shall be designed with ground level commercial space fronting on the street consistent with standards herein. Such commercial space shall be at least 30 feet deep. Vehicular entrances and other ground-floor openings of the parking garage are allowed only if the Director determines no other configuration is feasible. Openings and entries for structured parking shall not count as transparent window area for the purpose of determining transparency requirements set forth herein.

(i) If insufficient right-of-way exists to allow for 12 feet of public sidewalk, set the building back sufficiently to provide at least 12 feet of walking surface according to WMC 21.40.230(2)(a), sidewalks – size and materials. (For Downtown and Little Bear Creek Corridor study area, see subsection (4) of this section for sidewalk dimensions and requirements.)


[IMAGE]


Figure 11. Where insufficient right-of-way exists, set buildings back sufficiently to meet minimum sidewalk width standards.

(j) No large item display areas are permitted (e.g., auto sales) in the front yard area. Sidewalks shall not be enclosed as building space for retailing. Small, temporary displays for items such as groceries, hardware, nursery stock, books, etc., may be allowed provided the display does not unduly impede pedestrian sidewalk traffic. Large items, such as potting soil and compost bags, are not allowed.

(k) The Director may permit departures from the specific standards if he/she determines that public benefit can be achieved in terms of the intent described above. The applicant must demonstrate that there is a compelling reason to depart from specific standards and that the departure will result in increased pedestrian activity and visual interest along the street.

(3) Nonpedestrian-Oriented Street Design Principle. Relate development to street fronts for streets that are not designated as pedestrian-oriented streets. (These standards do not apply to streets in the Downtown and Little Bear Creek Corridor study area. See subsection (4) of this section for specific standards for streets in Downtown and Little Bear Creek Corridor.)

All development on streets not designated as pedestrian-oriented streets shall include site planning measures to create an attractive street edge, accommodate pedestrian access, and support the applicable design objectives stated in the Comprehensive Plan. Developments must adhere to the following standards unless the Director determines that they prevent viable site development. 

(a) Developments must provide the following amenities near the sidewalk:

(i) Physically define the street edge with building(s), landscaping, or other features as approved by the Director; 

(ii) Parking lots adjacent to sidewalks shall provide one of the options in subsection (2)(g) of this section or a 10-foot-wide landscape screening buffer consisting of Type III landscaping pursuant to WMC 21.43.040;

(iii) Provide sufficient room for a sidewalk at least eight feet wide if there is not space in the public right-of-way; and


[IMAGE]


Figure 12. Provide sufficient room for a sidewalk at least eight feet wide on streets that are not designated as pedestrian-oriented streets.

(iv) Provide direct access to building fronts from the sidewalk. Preferably, these areas should be separate from the parking lot. If access traverses the parking lot, then it should be raised and/or specially marked.

(b) Buildings are encouraged to be located adjacent to the sidewalk. Such buildings must feature a pedestrian-oriented facade and weather protection at least four feet, six inches wide along at least 75 percent of the building’s front face. The weather protection may be in the form of awnings, marquees, canopies, or building overhangs (see Figures 3 and 4). 

(c) Developments should use the architectural elements of a building and landscaping to highlight and define the entrance, particularly where the entrance is set back off the street. 


[IMAGE]


Figure 13. Provide highlighted building entries, particularly where the entry  is not adjacent to a public street.


[IMAGE]


Figure 14. This building effectively uses architectural features, open space, and landscaping to highlight the entry.

(4) Downtown and Little Bear Creek Corridor Study Area Site Planning – Relationship to Street Front.

(a) Street Orientation Requirements Matrix. Development in the Downtown and Little Bear Creek Corridor study area shall adhere to the standards in Table 1 of this section. If there is a conflict with other provisions of these standards, the Director shall determine the governing provision.

 

Table 1. Downtown and Little Bear Creek Corridor Street Orientation Requirements Matrix  

	Street	Building Orientation2	Driveway Access	Adjoining Parking Lots	Adjoining Parking Garage

	NE 175th Street	Adhere to pedestrian-oriented street standards per subsection (2) of this section, except garden area landscaping in the front yard is not an option.	New driveways are not allowed unless there is no other feasible option, as determined by the Director.	Not allowed.	Not allowed on ground floor facing street.

Adhere to subsection (2)(h) of this section.

	135th Ave NE	Adhere to pedestrian-oriented street standards per subsection (2) of this section. This emphasizes:

Building located next to (abutting) the sidewalk with a pedestrian-oriented facade or separated from the sidewalk with a minimum of 5 feet of pedestrian-oriented space or garden area landscaping.	New driveways not allowed, unless no other feasible option, as determined by the Director.	Not allowed unless site abuts two pedestrian-oriented streets and there is no other feasible option. 

Adhere to pedestrian-oriented street standards per subsection (2)(f) of this section. 

If parking is allowed to locate next to (abutting) the street, landscape screening shall be provided in accordance with subsection (4)(b) of this section.	Not allowed on ground floor facing street.

Adhere to subsection (2)(h) of this section.

	138th Avenue NE/ Garden Way NE	If the building is located next to (abutting) the sidewalk, a pedestrian-oriented facade as specified in subsection (2)(b) of this section shall be required. 

If building is located within 20 feet of the sidewalk, the area between the building and the sidewalk shall be pedestrian-oriented space or garden area landscaping in accordance with subsection (2)(c) of this section and the facade and entrance shall be in accordance with subsections (2)(d) and (e) of this section. If the building is more than 20 feet from the sidewalk, Type II or III landscape screening shall be provided.	Parking lot entrances, driveways and other vehicle access routes restricted to no more than one entrance lane and one exit lane per 300 linear feet of property; see WMC 21.40.300.	Allowed with required landscape screening.1

Adhere to subsection (4)(b) of this section for parking lot screening methods. 	Must be set back at least 20 feet and screened with Type I landscaping.1

	NE 173rd Street	If the building abuts the sidewalk, a pedestrian-oriented facade as specified in subsection (2)(b) of this section shall be required.

If building is located within 20 feet of the sidewalk, the area between the building and the sidewalk shall be pedestrian-oriented space or garden area landscaping in accordance with subsection (2)(c) of this section and the facade and entrance shall be in accordance with subsections (2)(d) and (e) of this section. If the building is more than 20 feet from the sidewalk, Type II or III landscape screening shall be provided.	Adhere to the vehicle access requirements in WMC 21.40.300.	Adhere to parking lot requirements in subsections (3)(a) and (4)(b) of this section, and all requirements for parking lots adjoining non-pedestrian oriented streets.	Allowed with landscape screening conforming to subsection (4)(c) of this section.

	133rd Ave NE	Adhere to pedestrian-oriented street standards per subsection (2) of this section. This emphasizes:

Buildings located next to (abutting) the sidewalk with a pedestrian-oriented facade or separated from the sidewalk with at least 5 feet of pedestrian-oriented space or garden area landscaping.	Allowed, but Director may determine location and special conditions to ensure safety and streetscape quality; see WMC 21.40.300.	Adhere to pedestrian-oriented street standards per subsection (2)(f) of this section.

If parking is allowed to locate next to (abutting) the street, landscape screening shall be provided in accordance with subsection (4)(b) of this section.	Allowed with landscape screening conforming to subsection (4)(c) of this section.

	NE 171st Street	If the building is located next to (abutting) the sidewalk, a pedestrian-oriented facade, as specified in subsection (2)(b) of this section, shall be required.

If the building is located within 20 feet of the sidewalk, the area between the building and the sidewalk shall be pedestrian-oriented space or garden area landscaping in accordance with subsection (2)(c) of this section and the facade and entrance shall be in accordance with subsections (2)(d) and (e) of this section.

When buildings are separated from NE 171st St. by Woodin Creek, alternate landscaping may be permitted by the Director. 

If the building is more than 20 feet from the sidewalk, Type II or III landscape screening shall be provided.	Restricted. Not permitted unless the Director determines there are no feasible alternatives; see WMC 21.40.300.	Parking lots facing Woodin Creek are allowed with landscape screening in accordance with subsection (4)(b)(iv) of this section. Otherwise development shall adhere to parking lot location and screening standards set forth in subsection (4)(b)(iii) of this section.	Allowed with landscape screening conforming to subsection (4)(c) of this section. 

	Little Bear Creek Parkway	If the building is located next to (abutting) the sidewalk, a pedestrian-oriented facade, as specified in subsection (2)(b) of this section, shall be required.

If the building is located within 20 feet of the sidewalk, the area between the building and the sidewalk shall be pedestrian-oriented space or garden area landscaping in accordance with subsection (2)(c) of this section and the facade and entrance shall be in accordance with subsections (2)(d) and (e) of this section.

If the building is more than 20 feet from the sidewalk, Type II or III landscape screening shall be provided.	Joint driveways serving more than one property where possible. 

Adhere to WMC 21.40.300.

No more than one entry and exit per 300 LF of street property are allowed.	Parking lots facing the street are allowed with landscape screening, as specified in subsection (4)(b)(iii) of this section.	Allowed with landscape screening conforming to subsection (4)(c) of this section.

	Woodinville-Duvall Road	If the building is located next to (abutting) the sidewalk, a pedestrian-oriented facade, as specified in subsection (2)(b) of this section, shall be required.

If the building is located within 20 feet of the sidewalk, the area between the building and the sidewalk shall be pedestrian-oriented space or garden area landscaping in accordance with subsection (2)(c) of this section and the facade and entrance shall be in accordance with subsections (2)(d) and (e) of this section.

If the building is more than 20 feet from the sidewalk, Type II or III landscape screening shall be provided.	Joint driveways where possible to reduce accidents.

Adhere to WMC 21.40.300. 	Parking lots facing street allowed with landscape screening, as specified in subsection (4)(b)(iii) of this section.	Allowed with landscape screening, as specified in subsection (4)(c) of this section.

	NE 178th Street	If the building is located next to (abutting) the sidewalk, a pedestrian-oriented facade, as specified in subsection (2)(b) of this section, shall be required. 

If the building is within 20 feet of the sidewalk, pedestrian-oriented space or garden area landscaping shall be provided in accordance with subsection (2)(c) of this section and the facade and entrance shall be in accordance with subsections (2)(d) and (e) of this section. 

If the building is more than 20 feet from the sidewalk, Type II or III landscape screening shall be provided.	Joint driveways where possible to reduce accidents.1

Adhere to WMC 21.40.300.	Parking lots facing street allowed with 10 feet of Type III landscape screening.1	Allowed with landscape screening conforming to subsection (4)(c) of this section.1

	140th Ave NE	If the building is located next to (abutting) the sidewalk, a pedestrian-oriented facade, as specified in subsection (2)(b) of this section, shall be required.

If the building is within 20 feet of the sidewalk, pedestrian-oriented space or garden area landscaping shall be provided in accordance with subsection (2)(c) of this section and the facade and entrance shall be in accordance with subsections (2)(d) and (e) of this section.

If the building is more than 20 feet from the sidewalk, Type II or III landscape screening shall be provided.	Driveways restricted where possible.

Adhere to WMC 21.40.300.	Parking lots proposed to be located next to (abutting) a street allowed only if no other configuration is possible.

If allowed, parking is limited to 50% of street frontage and 10 feet of Type III landscape screening is required.	Allowed with landscape screening per subsection (4)(c) of this section only if no other configuration is possible.

	Woodinville-Snohomish Road	If the building is located next to (abutting) the sidewalk, a pedestrian-oriented facade, as specified in subsection (2)(b) of this section, shall be required.

If the building is within 20 feet of the sidewalk, pedestrian-oriented space or garden area landscaping shall be provided in accordance with subsection (2)(c) of this section and the facade and entrance shall be in accordance with subsections (2)(d) and (e) of this section.

If the building is more than 20 feet from the sidewalk, Type II or III landscape screening shall be provided.	Joint driveways where possible to reduce accidents; see WMC 21.40.300.	Parking lots facing street allowed with 10 feet of Type III landscape screening.	Allowed with landscape screening conforming to subsection (4)(c) of this section.

	Notes:

1. Implemented only when new development occurs on 138th Avenue NE and NE 178th Street. 

2. Setbacks may be required to accommodate new streetscape and sidewalk standards, according to Public Works Standards and the street configuration chart (Table 2 of this chapter).

(b) Parking Lot Screening Along Streetscapes in the Downtown and Little Bear Creek Corridor Study Area.

(i) If allowed, parking lots next to (abutting) streets in the Downtown and Little Bear Creek Corridor study area shall be screened from the sidewalk according to the standards in subsection (2)(g) of this section unless otherwise noted in subsections (4)(b)(i) through (vi) of this section;

(ii) Parking lots next to (abutting) 138th Ave NE/Garden Way NE shall be screened from the sidewalk with a 20-foot-wide landscaped screening buffer. This can consist of either:

(A) A berm raised at crown at least two feet above sidewalk grade. The landscaping shall consist of Type III landscaping in accordance with WMC 21.43.040. Fifty percent of the required shrubs and groundcover shall exhibit decorative flowers or foliage;

(B) An alternative design, as approved by the Director, that meets the following intent:

1. Continuous screen three feet high;

2. Attractive streetscape with a variety of decorative planting;

3. Attractive stormwater features such as a rain garden or biofiltration swale; 

(iii) Parking lots abutting Little Bear Creek Parkway NE, NE 171st Street, and NE Woodinville-Duvall Road shall be screened with a 15-foot-wide area of Type II landscaping;

(iv) Parking lots, parking garages, vehicle circulation, and service areas abutting Woodin Creek or its critical areas buffer must be screened from the creek corridor with at least a 10-foot-wide area of Type I landscaping. Buildings with storefronts or residential units directly facing Woodin Creek or its critical areas buffer do not require screening;

(v) Parking lots adjacent to streets not noted in subsections (4)(b)(i) through (iv) of this section and in the Downtown and Little Bear Creek Corridor study area, where allowed, shall provide one of the options described in subsection (2)(g) of this section or a 10-foot-wide landscape screening buffer consisting of Type III landscaping in accordance with WMC 21.43.040;

(vi) Alternate Street Front Landscaping Requirements. The Director may allow alternate landscape screening standards if he/she finds that the intent of the guidelines is met.

(c) The ground floor of any parking garage facing a sidewalk in the Downtown and Little Bear Creek Corridor study area, where allowed, shall be fully screened with 10-foot-wide area of Type I landscaping.

(d) Setbacks for Street Improvements. The Director may require that buildings and other site improvements be set back from the street right-of-way to allow for street improvements such as sidewalks, bike lanes and parking lanes. Table 2 of this section indicates the City’s general intent for street configuration on each street. It is included only as an informational guide. Actual street configuration may vary as design progresses or with specific locations.

 

Table 2. Downtown and Little Bear Creek Corridor Street Configuration Guidelines Matrix  

	Street	No. of Lanes	Sidewalk Width	Bike Lane	On-Street

Parking	Median

	NE 175th Street	1 each way with left-turn lanes at 135th, 133rd, and Garden Way NE	12' wide (minimum) with trees and amenities	Yes	None 	Yes, where feasible (west of 133rd Ave NE)

	135th Ave NE	1 each way	12' wide (minimum) with street trees that do not obstruct view	Yes; connects 21 Acres to Little Bear Creek and transit	Yes	No 

	138th Avenue NE/

Garden Way NE	3 lanes

72' ROW	6' sidewalk and 10' planting area	Yes	Yes	Yes, where feasible

	NE 173rd Street	2 lanes	16' (minimum) for sidewalk and planting area	No	Yes 	No

	133rd Ave NE	2 lanes	12' – 15' for sidewalk and planting area	No	Yes	No

	NE 171st Street	5 lanes with left-turn lane	8'

Street trees or native vegetation on north side; south open for views	Yes	No	No

	Little Bear Creek Parkway	3 lanes	8'	Yes	No	Yes, where feasible

	Woodinville-Duvall Road	As existing	As existing with planter strip and trees	No	No	No

	NE 178th Street (Mill Pl.)	As existing	As existing	Yes	No	No

	140th Ave NE	As existing	8' (minimum) with 6' planting strip and trees	Partial	No	No

	Woodinville-Snohomish Road	5 lanes to 3 lanes	8' on west side

Street trees and landscape strip	No	No	No

(e) Businesses with drive-through access are prohibited in the Downtown-Little Bear Creek Corridor-Pedestrian Core Design District.

(f) Entries. All buildings shall have at least one public entry directly facing the street with an eight-foot-wide (minimum) walkway between the sidewalk and the street. (Ord. 634 § 32, 2016; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.40.120 Site planning – Interior yard compatibility.

(1) Intent. To provide functional and visual compatibility between adjacent properties.


[IMAGE]


Figure 15. Provide landscape screening along property lines adjacent to incompatible uses.

(2) Design Principle. Minimize visibility and impacts of service areas. Specifically:

(a) Landscape screening, buffers, or other forms of screening must be provided along property lines adjacent to “incompatible uses.” Incompatible uses include outdoor storage areas adjacent to any other use, service areas adjacent to any other use, and commercial development adjacent to a residentially zoned or developed property. 

(i) Provide a landscaped buffer along interior lot lines per the requirements of WMC 21.43.060.

(ii) New development shall provide enclosures for recyclable and garbage collection points per WMC 21.30.020 and 21.40.140.

(iii) Where outdoor storage is greater in size than 120 square feet and abuts another commercial area or industrial use, 10-foot width of Type II landscaping shall be provided. 

(iv) Integrate outdoor storage areas and loading facilities into the site design to minimize their size, reduce visual impact, and, where appropriate, allow for pedestrian and vehicular movement between sites.

(b) Modifications may be allowed by the Director where site or development conditions are present that reduce or eliminate the need for landscaped screening. Examples include scenarios where a zero lot line fire wall is present next door or where changes in topography between the residentially zoned or developed property and adjacent property are significant and thus warrant no screening or reduced screening. The Director may waive screening requirements if shared parking advantage and/or other landscaping is approved.

(3) Design Principle. Provide side and rear design options that enhance the area’s pedestrian environment and the setting for development. Specifically, project applicants shall incorporate one or more of the following design options into the site:

(a) Provide a zero lot line fire wall for commercial or mixed use developments where allowed by the applicable zoning district. This configuration provides for the maximum use of property. Project applicants are encouraged to consider the design implications to the adjacent property.

(b) Provide a shared internal drive or public street/alley along the property line. This configuration may be required by the City for large sites (two-plus acres) where there is a strong need for internal connectivity. Depending on the status of the adjacent property, this may be a partial roadway along the property line or a complete roadway entirely within the subject property. This determination will be made by the Director. Where the roadway is constructed entirely within the subject property, at least a five-foot-wide area of Type I, II or III landscaping shall be provided between the road and the property line.

(c) Provide a trail or other internal pathway along the property line. Trails that span the property line require written approval from the adjacent property owner. Other trails require at least a five-foot-wide area of Type III landscaping between the trail and the property line. 

(d) Retain existing native or desirable mature vegetation along the side or back property line. 

(e) Provide a six-foot-tall wood or masonry fence and/or at least a five-foot-wide area of Type I or II landscaping along the side and/or rear property line(s). These options may be used only where options in subsections (3)(a), (b), (c), or (d) of this section are not viable, as determined by the Director based on the applicable uses and views between properties.

(f) Other treatments that meet the intent of the standards as approved by the Director. Factors that must be considered in determining the appropriate treatment include lot sizes and established neighborhood patterns, applicable uses, connectivity, environmental conditions, and desired level of privacy. 

(g) A rain garden or other low-impact development measure may be incorporated as part of the treatments above.


[IMAGE]


Figure 16. Side and rear yard design treatments.

(4) Design Principle. Enhance solar access and privacy for residential uses along side and rear yards. Specifically:

(a) Buildings or portions thereof containing dwelling units whose solar access is only from the applicable side of the building (facing towards the side property line) shall be set back from the applicable side or rear property lines at least 15 feet; see Figure 17.

(b) Transparent windows shall occupy no more than 10 percent of any facade within 15 feet of the side or rear property line facing an adjacent property where either property’s residential privacy may be compromised. The Director may waive this requirement where he or she finds that it achieves no practical increase in privacy.

(c) Balconies shall be set back at least 10 feet from side or rear yard property lines separating adjacent residential or mixed use properties. Balconies or rooftop decks within 15 horizontal feet of a side property line must utilize opaque guard rails to minimize impacts to privacy on adjacent properties.


[IMAGE]


Figure 17. Solar access and privacy standards for multifamily residential buildings along side/rear yards.


[IMAGE]


Figure 18. Internal walkway example between different multifamily developments.

(Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.40.130 Site planning – Multiple building/large lot developments and large format retail stores.

(1) Intent. To encourage project designers to coordinate design standard requirements into an innovative organizational scheme, such as a “village green,” “small town grid,” “pedestrian square,” “perimeter walk,” etc., that integrates the new development into the existing/proposed structure and creates a pedestrian-oriented focus. 

In addition to other requirements, the intent of multiple building/large lot development standards is:

(a) To reduce negative impacts to adjacent properties;

(b) To take advantage of special opportunities to create a composition of buildings and landscape features;

(c) To enhance pedestrian and vehicular circulation;

(d) To encourage transit use;

(e) To provide usable open space;

(f) To create focal points for pedestrian activity for developments; and

(g) To enhance the visual character of the community. 

(2) Multi-Building/Large Lot Development Design Principle. Take advantage of special opportunities to mitigate impacts of multiple building and large developments (sites over two acres) through implementing measures such as the following: 

(a) The site planning for all developments must demonstrate a unifying, organized design that:

(i) Incorporates open space and landscaping as a unifying element (see WMC 21.40.260, Pedestrian activity and plazas, and Chapter 21.43 WMC);

(ii) Where possible, incorporates screening, environmental mitigation, utilities, and drainage as positive elements (example: create a “natural” open space or wet pond as a site feature to accommodate surface water runoff); and

(iii) Provides pedestrian paths or walkways connecting all businesses and the entries of multiple buildings as required by WMC 21.44.100.

(b) Provide pedestrian paths from/to all transit stops through commercial areas to residential areas within 1,200 feet of the site.

(c) Enhance transit stops by providing rider convenience and amenities such as weather protected seating, newspaper dispensers, postal boxes, automated teller machines (ATM), and small vendor spaces (i.e., cleaners, florist, etc., pursuant to Chapter 21.21 WMC, Permitted Uses).

(d) Integrate pedestrian accommodations for transit stops into the development of public and private streets, in addition to WMC 21.44.090.

(e) Integrate on-site pedestrian circulation with adjoining right-of-way activity and development.

(f) Provide on-site pedestrian-oriented space at the following ratio: one percent of applicable lot area plus one percent of nonresidential floor area. 


[IMAGE]


Figure 19. Illustrating how much pedestrian-oriented space would be required for a typical grocery store served by surface parking.

(3) Large Format Retail Store Design Principle. In the design of the building and site layout, mitigate the impacts of large format retail stores containing over 60,000 gross square feet through the application of the following measures:

(a) Provide centralized and visible pedestrian-oriented space at a ratio of one percent of applicable lot area plus one percent of nonresidential floor area, said space to include accessible covered seating (under canopy, awning, pergola, sheltering roof, or other similar architectural feature), landscaping and a water feature or public art;

(b) Provide roofline treatments to break down the size of the buildings;

(c) Provide 15-foot-wide Type III landscape buffer between sidewalk and non-pedestrian-oriented facade. The Director may approve a reduction in the width of the landscape buffer to not less than five feet upon demonstration that the intent of this section and the design principle of this subsection (3) have been fulfilled within the parcel;

(d) Provide 15-foot-wide Type III landscape buffer between sidewalk and on-site parking. The Director may approve a reduction in the width of the landscape buffer to not less than five feet upon demonstration that the intent of this section and the design principle of this subsection (3) have been fulfilled within the parcel;

(e) Provide on-site pathway along building facade at least 12 feet in width and include street trees;

(f) Minimize access points from public street onto site;

(g) Screen service areas with landscaping and solid wall or fence;

(h) Provide parallel parking along major access roads located on site;

(i) Provide an enhanced building entry;

(j) Provide landscaped, raised pedestrian pathways; pedestrian-scaled lighting and sheltering roofs through parking areas as required in WMC 21.44.100, Pedestrian circulation and access (see Figure 41, Parking lot pathway configuration, also Figures 118 and 119 in WMC 21.40.390, Northwest woodland character design standards illustrative guide);

(k) Include uses that will expand the range of activities in downtown. Such uses might include a cultural or performing arts facility, public assembly area, and similar uses that will encourage pedestrian activity and/or support for other business or community activities;

(l) Other significant features that exceed the development standards and regulations.


[IMAGE]


Figure 20. An example of a multiple building/large lot development that incorporates the implementation measures in this section.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21. Another large site development example incorporating many of the implementation measures in this section.

(Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.40.140 Mechanical equipment and service areas.

(1) Intent.

(a) To minimize adverse visual, olfactory, or auditory impacts of mechanical equipment and service areas at ground and roof levels; and

(b) To encourage more thoughtful siting of trash containers and service areas.


[IMAGE]


Figure 22. Locate service elements to reduce impacts on the pedestrian environment.

(2) Design Principle. Reduce impacts of refuse containers and storage areas. Implementation measures:

(a) Service areas (loading docks, trash dumpsters, compactors, mechanical equipment, and storage yards) shall be located to avoid negative visual, auditory (noise), olfactory, or physical impacts on the street environment and adjacent residentially zoned or developed properties. 

(b) Refuse containers are not to be visible from the sidewalk and adjacent properties. Acceptable materials include brick, concrete block, stone, or wood. Cyclone fencing is prohibited. The sides and rear of the enclosure shall be screened as described in WMC 21.30.020(4). 

(c) Buildings in the Downtown and Little Bear Creek Corridor study area with 30 or more dwelling units or nonresidential buildings with a gross building floor area over 30,000 square feet shall have an interior service and trash room sufficient to house refuse containers for building uses.


[IMAGE]


Figure 23. Acceptable service enclosure example.


[IMAGE]


Figure 24. Unacceptable example of a service enclosure with cyclone fencing.

(d) Screened trash containers shall be a minimum of 44 feet from the wall of any structure where there is access to the structure for the public.

(e) Mechanical equipment should be located and screened at ground level and attached to structures to reduce visual impacts from streets and adjoining properties.

(f) Service areas should be located and screened to reduce adverse sensory impacts. 

(g) Roof-mounted mechanical equipment should be located and screened so the equipment is not visible within 150 feet of the structure when viewed from the ground level of adjacent properties. Match the color of roof-mounted equipment with the exposed color of the roof to minimize visual impacts when equipment is visible from higher elevations nearby.

(h) Utility Meters, Electrical Conduit, and Other Service Utility Apparatus. These elements shall be located and/or designed to minimize their visibility to the public. Project designers are strongly encouraged to coordinate with applicable service providers early in the design process to determine the best approach in meeting these standards. If such elements are mounted in a location visible from the street, pedestrian pathway, common open space, or shared auto courtyards, they shall be screened with vegetation or by architectural features. 


[IMAGE]


Figure 25. Examples of how to screen roof-mounted mechanical equipment.


[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]


Figure 26. Good and bad utility meter configurations. The examples on the left are consolidated and somewhat screened by landscaping elements, whereas the right examples are exposed and degrade the character of these townhomes.

(Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.40.150 Design standards for outdoor sales lots.

The intent of the standards for outdoor sales lots is to reduce the visual impact of outdoor storage of vehicles or other outdoor sales items, and to encourage the use of landscaping and other site features to improve the site aesthetics. The following standards shall be met for outdoor sales lots where specifically required in Chapter 21.21 WMC:

(1) Buildings should be located abutting the street, in accordance with WMC 21.40.110. The outdoor sales area is encouraged to be to the rear of the main building.

(2) Outdoor sales lots adjacent to streets shall be screened from any street and/or sidewalk by one of the following methods: 

(a) Provide a five-foot-wide planting bed that incorporates a continuous three-foot-tall wall. The wall shall be constructed of brick, stone, decorative concrete or concrete block, or other permanent material that provides visual interest and helps to define the street edge, as determined by the Director. The landscaping shall provide a continuous row of shrubs, trees spaced 25 feet on center, and groundcover that provides continuous coverage within five years.

(b) Provide an elevated planter that is a minimum of five feet wide and between two and three feet in height. The ledges shall be a minimum of six inches in depth. The planter must be constructed of masonry, concrete or other permanent material that effectively contrasts with the color of the sidewalk and combines groundcover and annuals, perennials, ornamental grasses, low shrubs, and/or small trees that provide seasonal interest and winter greenery, as determined by the Director.

(c) Provide a 15-foot-wide area of Type II landscaping in accordance with Chapter 21.43 WMC.

For all of the options above, eye level visibility between the street/sidewalk and parking area shall be maintained for safety. This means that shrubs and other low plantings should be maintained below three feet in height, while trees (once they achieve taller heights) should generally be trimmed up to the eight-foot level. See Figure 10. The planting beds in both options shall be irrigated unless the Director determines it is not necessary for the plant materials selected.

(3) Outdoor sales lots directly abutting a critical area or critical area buffer shall provide a minimum 10-foot-wide area of Type I landscaping outside the buffer.

(4) Lighting for outdoor sales lots shall include fixtures that are nonglare and mounted no more than 25 feet above the ground, with lower fixtures preferable so as to maintain a human scale. Requests for higher lighting fixtures may be considered with the approval of the Director. All fixtures shall be fitted with a full cut-off shield.

(5) Access from streets to outdoor sales lots may be restricted to no more than one entrance lane and one exit lane per 300 linear feet of property as measured horizontally along the street face.

(6) Pedestrian access through outdoor sales lots is required. For this access, provide landscaped, raised pedestrian pathways, pedestrian-scaled lighting and sheltering roofs through sales lot areas. A minimum of one pathway shall be provided. Additional pathways may be required, pursuant to WMC 21.44.100. Pathways shall be designed in accordance with WMC 21.44.100.

(7) Landscaping for sales lots shall meet the requirements for parking lot landscaping in WMC 21.43.070. A minimum of 15 percent of the site, excluding any area within critical areas or buffers, must be landscaped. The minimum requirements in WMC 21.43.110 shall be met for landscaping areas. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.40.160 Design standards for gasoline service stations.

The intent of the standards for gasoline service stations is to protect and enhance the character and quality of commercial districts and adjacent neighborhoods where these stations are allowed; provide for safe pedestrian access; create high quality gasoline service stations in architecture and site design; and maintain and strengthen a recognizable identity and character unique to Woodinville. The following standards shall be met for gasoline service stations where specifically required in Chapter 21.21 WMC:

(1) Building design shall meet the design standards requirements of this chapter, and the following standards:

(a) All portions of a building should express consistent architectural detail and character. All site walls, screen walls and pump island canopies and other outdoor covered areas should be architecturally integrated with the building by using similar material, color and detailing.

(b) Buildings should be located abutting the street, in accordance with WMC 21.40.110. The pump islands are encouraged to be to the rear or the side of the main building. Where the pump islands are located abutting the street, a vertical trellis or screen of not less than 30 inches, with climbing vines or other approved screening materials, shall be provided.

(c) Noise-generating areas, including auto service bays, car wash openings, vacuum stations, loading areas, garbage storage and stacking lanes, shall be located so they are faced away from sensitive uses such as residential uses, and educational services as defined in Chapter 21.21 WMC.

(d) Potential noise impacts shall be buffered with solid attenuations with one of the following: structures, landscaped berms or attenuation fencing (minimum six feet in height) complemented with landscaping.

(e) Enclose all utility equipment within buildings or screen them from streets and private properties. These include utility boxes, garbage and recycling container storage, loading docks and ramps, and air conditioner compressors.

(2) Pedestrian access to the site shall be provided, at a minimum width of five feet and using an alternative paving treatment than is used for the remainder of the site. 

(3) The canopy shall meet the following standards:

(a) The canopy should be integrated with the building. Multiple canopies or canopies that express differing architectural masses are encouraged.

(b) The materials of the canopy shall meet the requirements of WMC 21.40.360, and are encouraged to use heavy timber framing.

(c) Lighted bands or tubes or applied bands of corporate color are prohibited.

(4) The pump islands, including fuel dispensers, refuse containers, payment points, safety bollards, and other appurtenances, shall meet the following standards:

(a) The design of pump islands shall be architecturally integrated with other structures on site using similar colors, materials and architectural detailing.

(b) The use of translucent materials and internally lighted cabinets is prohibited as finishes or as applied treatments at the pump island or on the canopy.

(c) Either a pump island curb or bollard is required for the protections of dispensing units.

(5) Where a car wash is proposed, the following standards shall be met:

(a) Glass windows shall be provided for the portions of the car wash that face public areas.

(6) The landscaping for gas stations shall meet the following standards:

(a) In-ground landscaping should comprise the majority of the landscaping requirement. Raised planters are acceptable when designed to accentuate the architecture and/or create pedestrian seating areas.

(b) Street Frontage Landscaping. Provide a 10-foot width of Type III landscaping, pursuant to Chapter 21.43 WMC.

(c) Perimeter Landscaping. Provide a 10-foot width of Type III landscaping, except for gas stations that abut residential uses, provide a 20-foot width of Type I landscaping, pursuant to Chapter 21.43 WMC.

(d) Interior Landscaping. A minimum of 15 percent of the site, excluding any area within critical areas or buffers, must be landscaped. The minimum requirements in WMC 21.43.110 shall be met for landscaping areas.

(e) Proper maintenance and timely replacement of plant material is expected and required by WMC 21.43.130.

(7) The lighting for gas stations shall meet the following standards:

(a) The site lighting requirements of WMC 21.30.010 shall be met.

(b) All fixtures shall be fitted with a full cut-off shield and aimed downward.

(c) All luminaires should be recessed or shielded so the light source is not directly visible from the property line. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.40.170 Site planning – Integration of LID and stormwater retention.

(1) Intent. To integrate low impact development (LID), including reduction of impervious surfaces and stormwater retention methods such as bioretention facilities, into site design.

(2) Design Principle. Design the site to reduce impervious surfaces and site disturbance to the extent feasible.

(3) Design Principle. Integrate LID techniques such as bioretention swales, cells and planters and vegetated water quality treatment facilities such as biofiltration swales and ponds into the overall site design. Methods of integrating retention and filtration are listed below in order of preference:

(a) Locate bioretention swales, cells or ponds and/or biofiltration swales, ponds, or other approved LID systems as part of a landscape screen. Trees may be planted in or near a bioretention facility and near a grass swale as long as the trees do not substantially shade the vegetation within the facility. The facility should be designed so it does not impede pedestrian circulation or shared parking between two or more properties;

(b) Where topography is favorable, locate a bioretention facility, vegetated water quality facility, or other approved LID system within the paved parking or service area. The facility should be landscaped as part of the required internal parking lot landscaping and oriented so it does not impede pedestrian circulation;

(c) Locate a bioretention facility, vegetated water quality facility, or other approved LID system along the front edge of the property. Incorporate landscaping and screening to visually enhance the facility without reducing maintainability and sun exposure; or

(d) The incorporation of screening elements and/or landscaping into LID facilities and biofiltration swale designs is encouraged if the feature is located and/or designed as a positive landscaping feature with approved design and plant materials. Where possible, native vegetation should be used. It may be counted as part of the required site landscaping.


[IMAGE]


Figure 27. Biofiltration swale designed as an amenity.

(Ord. 634 § 33, 2016; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.40.180 Street corners.

(1) Intent. 

(a) To create and preserve visual images for identification and spatial reference at street corners; and

(b) To enhance the pedestrian environment at street corners.

(2) Design Principle. Enhance the visual quality of corners at the intersections of public streets. Implementing measures:

(a) All development proposals for street corner sites must include at least one of the design treatments described below (in order of preference):

(i) Locate a building towards the street corner (within 15 feet of corner property line);

(ii) Provide pedestrian-oriented space at the corner leading directly to a building entry or entries; 


[IMAGE]


Figure 28. This example includes both a building located towards the street  corner and a small pedestrian-oriented space.


[IMAGE]


Figure 29. Street corner building example.

If subsections (2)(a)(i) and (ii) of this section are not feasible per the Director, consider the following options:

(iii) Install substantial landscaping (at least 30 feet by 30 feet or 900 square feet of ground surface area with trees, shrubs, and/or ground cover). The space may include a special architectural element, such as a trellis, to add identity or demarcation of the area. Such an architectural element may have a sign incorporated into it (as long as such sign does not identify an individual business or businesses);


[IMAGE]


Figure 30. Substantial landscaping (at least 30 feet by 30 feet or 900 square feet adjacent to the street corner).

(iv) Install a decorative screen wall (at least two and one-half feet high), a trellis, or other continuous architectural element, with a length of at least 20 feet along the front property line. Height and location of elements are not to create a visibility or security problem; or


[IMAGE]


Figure 31. Decorative architectural element adjacent to the street corner. 


[IMAGE]


Figure 32. This street corner successfully combines landscaping with architectural elements. Signage demarcates the area, not an individual store.

(v) Other element or method would be considered for approval if the proposed element or method conforms with the intent of this section as determined by the Director.

(b) Parking lots may not be located adjacent to street corners where one or both streets are designated pedestrian-oriented streets. The Director may make exceptions where lots are surrounded by three or more pedestrian-oriented streets or where other more desirable development configurations are possible without strict enforcement of this standard. 

(3) Key Corners in Downtown and Little Bear Creek Study Area. The following additional standards are required for key corners:

(a) Buildings abutting the intersection of NE 175th Street and 135th Avenue NE, NE 173rd Street and 135th Avenue NE, NE 175th Street and 140th Avenue NE or NE 175th Street and 138th Avenue NE (Garden Way) shall incorporate all of the following design elements:

(i) Locate a building towards the street corner (within 15 feet of corner property line);

(ii) Provide an entry at the corner;

(iii) Provide a notch or a cut-out to the building corner. The notch or cut-out must be large enough to create additional sidewalk/pedestrian area adjacent to the corner equaling no less than 75 square feet; and

(iv) Provide a key architectural feature at the corner pursuant to WMC 21.40.340.


[IMAGE]


Figure 33. Examples of notched and cut-out building corners.

(Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.40.190 Site lighting.

(1) Intent.

(a) To encourage the use of lighting as an integral design component to enhance buildings, landscaping, or other site features;

(b) To encourage night sky visibility and to reduce the general illumination of the sky in Woodinville;

(c) To reduce horizontal light glare and vertical light trespass from a development onto adjacent parcels and natural features;

(d) To encourage the judicious use of lighting in conjunction with other security methods to increase site safety; and

(e) To discourage the use of lighting for advertising purposes.

(2) Design Principle. Provide adequate lighting levels in all areas used by pedestrians or automobiles, including building entries, walkways, parking areas, circulation areas, and other open space areas.

New developments shall provide site lighting that meets the following design criteria through implementing measures such as:

(a) All public areas shall be lighted with average minimum and maximum levels as follows:

(i) Minimum (for low or nonpedestrian and vehicular traffic areas) of one-half foot candles;

(ii) Moderate (for moderate or high volume pedestrian areas) of one to two foot candles; and

(iii) Maximum (for high volume pedestrian areas and building entries) of four foot candles.

(b) Lighting shall be provided at consistent levels, with gradual transitions between maximum and minimum levels of lighting and between lit areas and unlit areas. Highly contrasting pools of light and dark areas shall be avoided.

(c) Parking lot lighting fixtures shall be nonglare and mounted no more than 25 feet above the ground, with lower fixtures preferable so as to maintain a human scale. Requests for higher lighting fixtures may be considered with the approval of the Director. All fixtures over 15 feet in height shall be fitted with a full cut-off shield.


[IMAGE]


Figure 34. Acceptable and unacceptable parking lot lighting.

(d) Pedestrian-scaled lighting (light fixtures no taller than 15 feet) is encouraged in areas of pedestrian activity. Lighting shall enable pedestrians to identify a face 45 feet away in order to promote safety. 

(e) Lighting should not be permitted to trespass onto adjacent private parcels nor shall light source (luminaire) be visible at the property line. All building lights shall be directed onto the building itself and/or the ground immediately adjacent to it. The light emissions should not be visible above the roofline of the building. Light fixtures other than traditional cobra heads are encouraged. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.40.200 Site landscaping.

(1) Intent.

(a) To encourage the abundant use of gardens and other landscaping in site and development design to improve site aesthetics, enhance the pedestrian experience, and increase the uniqueness of Woodinville.

(2) Design Principle. All developments shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 21.43 WMC, Landscaping, and demonstrate in their development plans how they meet the intent.


[IMAGE]


Figure 35. Molbak’s landscaping elements are a major character defining element of Woodinville’s downtown.


[IMAGE]


Figure 36. Much of the charm of Willows Lodge is from the colorful and diverse landscape.

Other implementing measures:

(a) Townhomes and all other multifamily dwelling units with private exterior ground-floor entries must provide at least 20 square feet of landscaping adjacent to the entry. This is particularly important for units where the primary entrance is next to private garages off of an interior access road. Such landscaping areas soften the appearance of the building and highlight individual entries. Figure 37 illustrates one example without landscaping and two that would meet the standard. Also, see Figure 38.


[IMAGE]


A. No Landscaping


[IMAGE]


B. Better


[IMAGE]


C. Better

Figure 37. Image “A” is an example where there is no landscaping near the entry. Images “B” and “C” are more desirable examples with individual planting strips that soften the buildings, highlight the individual entries, and help to de-emphasize the garages.


[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]


Figure 38. Another good example. These units face the street and contain their required landscaping in the front yard. Garages are off an alley, where in this case landscaping would not be required.

(Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.40.210 General pedestrian access requirements.

(1) Intent.

(a) In keeping with the City’s commitment to pedestrians, priority treatment is given to pedestrian accommodations in the design of transportation modes for on-site developments using City street standards;

(b) To improve the pedestrian environment by making it easier, safer, and more comfortable to walk between businesses, on street sidewalks, to transit stops, and through parking lots; 

(c) Pedestrian facilities such as sidewalks, crosswalks, and bus shelters should connect all modes of transportation; and

(d) To provide convenient pedestrian circulation connecting all on-site activities to adjacent pedestrian routes and streets.

(2) Design Principle. Provide safe, convenient pedestrian circulation for all users. Specifically:

(a) Provide pedestrian access onto the site from the main street off of which the use is located. Where a use fronts two streets, access shall be provided from the road closest to the main entrance, but preferably from both streets.


[IMAGE]


Figure 39. Provide pedestrian access to the site from the street.

(b) Provide pedestrian access in accordance with WMC 21.44.100, Pedestrian circulation and access, unless otherwise directed by these design standards.

(c) Access shall conform with Federal, State and local codes for the Americans with Disabilities Act.

(d) Provide safe, convenient, on-site pedestrian circulation. 

(i) Provide paved pedestrian path(s) from the street sidewalk to the main entry of all buildings.

(ii) Buildings with entries not facing the street shall have a clear and obvious pedestrian accessway from the street sidewalk to the entry.

(e) Developments should adapt building access to site conditions for level, convenient, clearly identified pedestrian entry. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.40.220 Pathways through parking lots.

 

(1) Intent.

(a) To provide safe and convenient pedestrian paths from the street sidewalk through parking lots to building entries in order to encourage pleasant walking experiences between businesses; and

(b) To provide an inviting, pleasant pedestrian circulation system that integrates with parking and serves as access to nearby businesses.

(2) Design Principle. Provide pathways through parking lots. Specifically: 

(a) Developments must provide specially marked or paved walkways through parking lots in accordance with WMC 21.44.100. Generally, walkways should be provided every four rows and a maximum distance of 150 feet shall be maintained between paths. Where possible, align the pathways to connect with major building entries or other destinations.

(b) Integrate on-site walkways with required parking lot landscaping.


[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]


Figure 40. Parking lot pathway examples.


[IMAGE]


Figure 41. Parking lot pathway configuration.

(Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.40.230 Sidewalks – Size and materials.

(1) Intent. 

(a) To provide safe, convenient and pleasant pedestrian sidewalks for circulation along all streets; and 

(b) To improve the character and identity of commercial areas consistent with the City’s Comprehensive Plan vision.

(2) Design Principle. Utilize appropriate sidewalk widths, materials, designs, and construction standards to enhance pedestrian access and complement city life. Specifically: 

(a) Required minimum sidewalk widths along both sides of streets: 

(i) Twelve feet along pedestrian-oriented streets; and 

(ii) Eight feet along streets not designated as a pedestrian-oriented street. 

(iii) For streets in the Downtown and Little Bear Creek Corridor study area, see Table 2 in WMC 21.40.110(4)(d) for sidewalk dimensions.


[IMAGE]


Figure 42. Sidewalk width on both sides of pedestrian-oriented streets.

(b) Sidewalks must be constructed per Woodinville Public Infrastructure Standards and Specifications unless otherwise directed by these design standards. 


[IMAGE]


Figure 43. An example sidewalk for a pedestrian-oriented street. Note the street trees and pedestrian-style lighting.

(c) The sidewalk materials, colors, and textures shall be determined by the Director, based on the following:

(i) Adopted street improvement plans, where applicable;

(ii) Goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan and adopted subarea plans, where applicable; and

(iii) Sidewalk improvements on the subject property or adjacent sites, when desirable. 


[IMAGE]


Figure 44. This decorative sidewalk pavement adds visual interest and character to the street. Where distinctive sidewalk patterns have been established, new development may be required to extend the pattern onto the project site.

(d) The Director may require street trees to be placed within grates near the curb edge similar to the images in Figures 42 through 44. 

(e) If the City has a programmed street improvement for the public right-of-way in front of a building to be constructed, the required 12-foot minimum width shall be measured from the proposed back of the curb location and may include public right-of-way and private property. Upper building stories may extend to the front property lines as long as they do not restrict pedestrian traffic. All new fences, screen walls, and other obstructions to pedestrian traffic shall also be set back 12 feet from the back of the curb if located on a pedestrian-oriented street.


[IMAGE]


Figure 45. Planting strips are desirable along streets where there is no on-street parking. 

(Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.40.240 Pedestrian amenities.

(1) Intent.

(a) To provide pedestrian spaces that include accommodations for seasonal climate conditions for a variety of activities;

(b) To provide amenities along sidewalks and pathways that enrich the pedestrian environment; and

(c) To encourage walking, both as a recreational activity and as a means of transportation.

(2) Design Principle. Provide pedestrian weather protection in public spaces such as transit stops, building entries, along display windows, and over outdoor dining areas. Specifically:

(a) Weather protection at least six feet deep is required over all primary building, individual business, and individual residence entries. This may include a recessed entry, canopy, porch, marquee, or building overhang.

(b) All buildings located along pedestrian-oriented streets must comply with the standards and guidelines related to weather protection in WMC 21.40.110(2)(b). 

(c) Canopies, awnings, or other similar weather protection features shall not be higher than 15 feet above the ground elevation at the highest point or lower than eight feet at the lowest point. The street-side edge of the canopy or awning shall be at least eight feet above the walking surface.


[IMAGE]


Figure 46. Provide weather protection over building entries.


[IMAGE]


Figure 47. Height standards for weather protection features.

(d) The color, material, and configuration of the pedestrian coverings shall be as approved by the Director. Coverings with visible corrugated metal or corrugated fiberglass are not permitted unless approved by the Director. Fabric and rigid metal awnings are acceptable if they meet the applicable standards. All lettering, color and graphics on pedestrian coverings must conform to the City’s sign code; see Chapter 21.35 WMC, Signs.

(e) Multi-tenant retail buildings are encouraged to use a variety of weather protection features to emphasize individual storefronts and reduce the architectural scale of the building. Figure 48 provides an unacceptable and a better example.


[IMAGE]


Figure 48. The continuous canopy on top is monotonous and de-emphasizes individual storefronts. The bottom example provides a variety of weather protection features and represents a more desirable example.

(f) Pedestrian amenities must be included along all pedestrian-oriented streets. Specifically, one or more of the desired amenities listed below must be included for each 100 lineal feet of street frontage. For multi-story buildings, two different types of amenity features are required for each 100 lineal feet of street frontage. The type, location, and design of chosen amenities must contribute to a well-balanced mix of features on the street, as determined by the Director. Desired amenities include (see Figure 49 for examples):

(i) Pedestrian-scaled lighting (placed between 12 and 14 feet above the ground);

(ii) Pedestrian furniture, such as seating space, approved trash receptacles, consolidated newspaper racks, bicycle racks, and drinking fountains. Seating areas and trash receptacles are particularly important where there is expected to be a concentration of pedestrian activity (such as near major building entrances and transit stops) and may be required by the Director; 

(iii) Planting beds, hanging flower baskets, and/or large semi-permanent potted plants;

(iv) Decorative pavement patterns and tree grates; 

(v) Informational kiosks;

(vi) Transit shelters;

(vii) Decorative clocks;

(viii) Artwork; and

(ix) Other amenities that meet the intent.

Features above that are publicly funded, already required by code, and/or obstruct pedestrian movement will not qualify as an amenity to meet this standard.


[IMAGE]


Figure 49. Examples of desired pedestrian amenities.

(g) Secondary Public Access. Whereas these design standards require businesses on a pedestrian-oriented street within the CBD to front on streets rather than parking lots, a large number of customers use the “secondary” entry off of the parking lot. Such businesses that have secondary public access shall comply with the following measures to enhance secondary public access (applies only to entries used by the public):

(i) Weather protection at least three feet deep is required over each secondary entry. 

(ii) A sign may be applied to the awning; provided, that the sign complies with Chapter 21.35 WMC; awning signs on the building are similar in mounting, location, configuration, materials, and construction; and the sign area does not exceed four and one-half square feet as measured under WMC 21.35.050. 

(iii) Two or more of the following design elements must be incorporated within or adjacent to the secondary entry:

(A) A transparent window or door to allow visibility into the business;

(B) A landscaping bed, planter box, or trellis incorporating landscaping adjacent to the entry;

(C) Decorative architectural treatments that add visual interest to the entry;

(D) Outdoor dining area or pedestrian-oriented space;

(E) Decorative lighting;

(F) Other design elements that meet the intent per the Director; or

(G) Plant containers (planters) that allow for a minimum four-foot passage on walks serving the public access. Planters shall be maintained with viable plant materials or removed. 


[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]


Figure 50. Examples of secondary public access. Note the planters, window sign, and awning.

(Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.40.250 Internal pedestrian paths and circulation.

 

(1) Intent.

(a) To provide safe and direct pedestrian access in commercial areas to accommodate pedestrian movement patterns, to minimize conflicts between pedestrians and vehicular traffic, and to provide pedestrian connections to neighborhoods;

(b) To provide safe routes for the pedestrian and disabled person across parking, to entries, and between buildings;

(c) To accommodate noncompetitive/noncommuter bicycle riders who use bicycles on short trips for exercise and convenience;

(d) To provide attractive internal pedestrian routes that promote walking and enhance the character of the area;

(e) To provide a network of pedestrian pathways that can be expanded over time; and

(f) To encourage pedestrian amenities along pathways, such as artwork, landscaping elements, and architectural details.

(2) Design Principle. Provide safe and direct access in commercial areas for all users. Specifically:

(a) Provide pedestrian circulation routes in accordance with WMC 21.44.100 from building entries of businesses to:

(i) Services within the same development;

(ii) Building entries of nearby residential complexes; and

(iii) Sidewalks along abutting roadways.


[IMAGE]


Figure 51. This development provides clear pedestrian connections from the street,  between buildings, through parking lots, and to adjacent uses.


[IMAGE]


Figure 52. An example of an attractive pedestrian connection through a large development.

(b) Where possible, provide steps and ramps across retaining walls and slopes in accordance with WMC 21.44.100.

(c) Fences shall provide for pedestrian access by gates to shopping and other common activities, especially to transit.

(d) When abutting vacant sites or properties with the potential for redevelopment, new developments shall provide for the opportunity for future pedestrian connections per the Director through the use of pathway stub-outs, building configuration, and/or parking lot layout. New development and redevelopment projects shall provide pedestrian connections per the Director to pathway stub-outs on abutting parcels.

(e) Adjacent landscaping shall not block visibility to and from a path, especially where it approaches a roadway or driveway according to WMC 21.22.190.

(f) Pedestrian walks shall be separated from structures at least three feet for landscaping except where the adjacent building features a pedestrian-oriented facade. The Director will consider other treatments to provide attractive pathways. Examples include sculptural, mosaic, bas-relief artwork, or other decorative treatments that meet the intent (Figure 54 provides one example).


[IMAGE]


Figure 53. Provide landscaping between walkways and structures.


[IMAGE]


Figure 54. Wall treatment to provide interest along a walkway.

(3) Design Principle. Provide wide pathways adjacent to the facades of retail and mixed use buildings where they are not adjacent to the street. Specifically:

(a) Pathways along the facade of mixed use and retail buildings 100 feet or more in length (measured along the facade) that are not located adjacent to a street must be at least 12 feet wide with an eight-foot minimum unobstructed width and include the following:

(i) Street trees, as approved by the Director, should be placed at an average of 30 feet on center and placed in grates. Breaks in the tree coverage will be allowed near major building entries to enhance visibility. However, no less than one tree per 60 lineal feet of building facade must be provided;


[IMAGE]


Figure 55. Pathway standards when adjacent to the facade of a mixed use or retail building 100 feet or more in length.

(ii) Planting strips may be used between any vehicle access or parking area and the pathway; provided, that the required trees are included and the pathway is at least eight feet in width and the combined pathway and planting strip are at least 15 feet in width; and

(iii) Pedestrian-scaled lighting may be used as a substitute to the required street trees subject to Director approval, provided they are used at the same intervals.


[IMAGE]


Figure 56. This off-street multi-tenant retail building incorporates wide walkways with street trees and pedestrian lighting. As a result, it looks more like a traditional city sidewalk rather than a utilitarian strip mall walkway.

(b) For all other interior pathways, the applicant must demonstrate to the Director’s satisfaction that the proposed walkway is of sufficient width to accommodate the anticipated number of users. For example, a 10- to 12-foot pathway can accommodate groups of persons walking four abreast, or two couples passing one another. An eight-foot pathway will accommodate three persons walking abreast, while a five-foot pathway will allow two individuals to pass comfortably. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.40.260 Pedestrian activity and plazas.

(1) Intent. 

(a) To provide a variety of pedestrian areas to accommodate shoppers on designated pedestrian-oriented streets; and

(b) To provide safe, attractive, and usable open spaces that promote pedestrian activity.

(2) Design Principle. Provide pedestrian-oriented open space at key locations.

(a) A “pedestrian-oriented space” is an area that promotes pedestrian activity, subject to the following:

(i) A pedestrian-oriented space must have: 

(A) Visual and pedestrian access (including handicapped access) into the site from a street, private access road, or nonvehicular courtyard;

(B) Paved walking surfaces of either concrete or approved unit paving;

(C) On-site or building-mounted lighting (fixtures no taller than 15 feet) providing at least four foot candles (average) on the ground;

(D) A location in areas with significant pedestrian traffic to provide interest and security, such as adjacent to a building entry; 

(E) Landscaping components that add visual interest and do not act as a visual barrier. This could include planting beds, potted plants, or both; and

(F) At least two feet of seating area (a bench or ledge at least 16 inches deep and appropriate seating height) or one individual seat per 60 square feet of plaza area or open space;

(ii) A pedestrian-oriented space is encouraged to have:

(A) Pedestrian amenities, such as a water feature, site furniture, artwork, drinking fountains, kiosks, etc.;

(B) Adjacent buildings with transparent windows and doors covering 75 percent of the facade between two feet and eight feet above the ground level;

(C) Consideration of the sun angle at noon and the wind pattern in the design of the space; and

(D) Transitional zones along building edges to allow for outdoor seating areas and a planted buffer.

(iii) A pedestrian-oriented space must not have:

(A) Asphalt or gravel pavement;

(B) Adjacent nonbuffered parking lots or service areas;

(C) Adjacent chain-link fences;

(D) Adjacent “blank walls” without “blank wall treatment”; and

(E) Outdoor storage or retail sales that do not contribute to the pedestrian-oriented environment.

(3) Implementing Actions.

(a) Minimum required pathway areas do not qualify as pedestrian-oriented space. However, if pathway and sidewalk widths are widened beyond the required width and the applicable area meets the definition of pedestrian-oriented space, then that area shall qualify as pedestrian-oriented space.

(b) See WMC 21.40.110(2)(b) for frontage treatment options along pedestrian-oriented streets.

(c) See WMC 21.40.130 for pedestrian-oriented space requirements for multiple building and large lot developments.


[IMAGE]


Figure 57. Example of a large pedestrian-oriented space.


[IMAGE]


Figure 58. A variety of successful large and small pedestrian-oriented spaces.


[IMAGE]


Figure 59. Example of a small pedestrian-oriented space.

(Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.40.270 Residential open space.

(1) Intent.

(a) To create usable space that is suitable for leisure or recreational activities for residents; and

(b) To create open space that contributes to the residential setting.

(2) Design Principle. Provide usable and attractive open space for multifamily residential uses. Specifically:

(a) Provide open space. Where there is a conflict with other design standards herein, the Director shall determine which standards apply.

(b) Common open space may be used for all of the required open space. This includes landscaped courtyards or decks, gardens with pathways, children’s play areas, or other multipurpose green spaces. Special requirements and recommendations for common spaces include the following:

(i) Minimum required setback areas will not count towards the open space requirement; 

(ii) Space should be large enough to provide functional leisure or recreational activity per the Director. For example, long narrow spaces (less than 20 feet wide) rarely, if ever, can function as usable common space;

(iii) Consider space as a focal point of development;

(iv) Space must contribute to the residential setting of the development;

(v) Space (particularly children’s play areas) must be visible from dwelling units and positioned near pedestrian activity; 

(vi) Residential units adjacent to the open space should have individual entrances to the space. Preferably, these units include a small area of semi-private open space enclosed by low level landscaping or hedges (no taller than 42 inches);

(vii) Space should feature paths, seating, lighting, and other pedestrian amenities to make the area more functional and enjoyable;

(viii) For large developments, provide for a range of activities that accommodate a range of age groups;

(ix) Space should be oriented to receive sunlight, facing east, west or (preferably) south, when possible; and

(x) Separate common space from ground-floor windows, streets, service areas, and parking lots with landscaping and/or low level fencing. However, care should be used to maintain visibility from dwelling units towards open space for safety.

 

	
[IMAGE]
	
[IMAGE]


	
[IMAGE]
	
[IMAGE]


Figure 60. Good examples of common open space, including street level courtyards (top pictures), a children’s play area (lower left), and a pedestrian corridor (lower right). 

(c) Individual balconies may be used to meet up to 50 percent of the required open space. To qualify as open space, balconies must be at least 35 square feet with no dimension less than four feet to provide a space usable for human activity.

(d) Rooftop decks may count for up to 50 percent of the required open space, but are generally discouraged as a significant source of open space for a development, and may be used only if the following conditions are met.

(i) Space must be accessible (ADA) to all dwelling units.

(ii) Space must provide amenities such as seating areas, landscaping, and/or other features that encourage use as determined by the Director.

(iii) Space must feature hard surfacing appropriate to encourage resident use.

(iv) Space must incorporate features that provide for the safety of residents, such as enclosures and appropriate lighting levels.

(e) Indoor recreational areas may count for up to 50 percent of the required open space only in mixed use buildings where other forms of open space are less feasible or desirable per the Director’s approval. The following conditions must be met:

(i) Indoor spaces must be located in visible areas, such as near an entrance lobby and near high traffic corridors.

(ii) Space must be designed to provide visibility from interior pedestrian corridors and to the outside. Windows should generally occupy at least one-half of the perimeter of the space to make the space inviting and encourage use.

(iii) Space must be designed specifically to serve interior recreational functions and not merely be leftover unrentable space used to meet the open space requirement. Such space must include amenities and design elements that will encourage use by residents as determined by the Director. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.40.280 Vehicular access and circulation.

(1) Intent.

(a) To provide vehicular access routes through large lots by connecting public and/or private roadways as directed by the City to complete the downtown street grid;

(b) To create a safe, convenient network for vehicle circulation and parking;

(c) To mitigate traffic impacts and to conform to the City’s objectives for better traffic circulation;

(d) To enhance the visual character of interior access roads; and

(e) To minimize conflicts with pedestrian circulation and activity.

(2) Design Principles.

(a) Development projects on properties which front on two streets are to conform with applicable City street specifications and standards for access.

(b) Interior vehicular connections between streets may be required as indicated by the applicable City street plans/specifications and standards. Specifically: 

(i) Where abutting developed land provides road stub-outs, easements, or other methods to provide the opportunity for future road connections, the interior network of the new development should be designed to utilize these connections. 

(ii) Developments should provide a safe and convenient network of vehicular circulation that connects to the surrounding road/access network and provides the opportunity for future connections to adjacent parcels, where applicable.


[IMAGE]


Figure 61. Vehicular circulation case study. The aerial photo to the left shows existing conditions around the development site. The site plan below shows how the site can be successfully configured to provide good vehicular access between the sites.

(c) Internal access roads should be designed to look and function more like streets, utilizing street trees and sidewalks (see WMC 21.40.230). Only parallel parking fronting directly on the access road is permitted.

Exception: Alternate internal access road design in the Downtown and Little Bear Creek Corridor study area may be acceptable, subject to Director approval, such as woonerfs and other configurations that provide for attractive and safe pedestrian access as well as vehicle circulation.


[IMAGE]


Figure 62. The roadway through Woodinville Town Center is a good example of an interior access road designed to look and function more like a street.


[IMAGE]


Figure 63. Redmond Town Center’s internal roadways are a good model. Note the on-street parking, crosswalks, wide sidewalks, street trees, signage, and pedestrian lighting.

(Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.40.290 Parking reductions.

(1) Intent.

(a) To reduce impervious surfaces and replace those surfaces with landscaping and pedestrian amenities;

(b) To allow more efficient land utilization;

(c) To reduce adverse impacts of parking;

(d) To encourage shared driveway access to parking areas and parking between adjacent properties; and

(e) To encourage shared parking facilities between adjacent compatible land uses.

(2) Design Principle. Minimize parking areas through joint use and management.

(a) Pursuant to WMC 21.44.050, Reductions to parking requirements, the City shall require the minimum overall parking ratio for development. Parking in excess of the minimum stipulated may be allowed if, through a quantified parking demand analysis prepared by a traffic engineer with requisite qualifications as determined by the Director, it can be demonstrated that the uses on parcels with shared parking require more parking than would be consistent with the requirements of WMC 21.44.030. Applicable design standards, guidelines, and considerations:

(i) A parking space reduction of 10 percent of the required parking is encouraged, provided there is a coordinated design and shared access to consolidated parking areas linked by pedestrian walkways;

(ii) Multiple parcels may be treated as a single development site for parking purposes if owners of all parcels affected sign an agreement for shared parking (this may provide advantages in the design review process);

(iii) In accordance with WMC 21.44.050, reduced parking is encouraged by the use of shared parking between/among primarily nighttime uses, such as theaters, bowling alleys, and restaurants, and primarily daytime uses, such as banks, offices, and retail stores;

(iv) Off-site parking may be considered to meet parking requirements, provided the parking is located within 500 feet of the associated uses and a pedestrian walkway is provided between parking and uses;

(v) Parking ratios may be reduced if the property/business owner has a commuter trip reduction program incorporating transit and carpools approved by the Director;

(vi) Reduced parking ratios will be considered if development is within walking distance of residential development or transit;

(vii) Reduced parking will be considered if the applicant can demonstrate how additional development could occur on the site if parking reductions or joint-use parking can be achieved pursuant to WMC 21.44.050; and

(viii) Maximum parking shall be five parking spaces per 1,000 square feet as computed in WMC 21.44.030 for all uses except restaurants. For restaurants, maximum shall be that prescribed in the table of minimum parking spaces required in Chapter 21.44 WMC.


[IMAGE]


Figure 64. An example of site development that utilizes shared parking.

(3) Design Principle. Encourage underground parking.

(a) The Director may allow greater development intensity (floor area) if structured parking is provided. As a general criterion, one extra square foot of usable building floor area might be allowed for every square foot of structured parking. The Director will consider relaxing other standards herein, provided the project meets the intent of the design standards. 

Structured parking would not count as part of the floor area ratio (FAR) calculation. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.40.300 Vehicle entrances.

(1) Intent. 

(a) To provide safe, convenient access to commercial sites without diminishing quality pedestrian walking or visual experiences; and

(b) To enhance the safety and function of public streets.

(2) Design Principle. Minimize driveway impacts across pedestrian walks. Implementing measures are listed below. For properties within the Downtown and Little Bear Creek Corridor study area, also see Table 1 within WMC 21.40.110(4) for driveway standards specific to each street.

(a) Parking lot entrances, driveways, and other vehicle access routes onto private property from a street may be restricted to no more than one entrance lane and one exit lane per 300 linear feet of property as measured horizontally along the street face.

(b) Properties with less than 300 linear feet of street frontage shall make a genuine effort to negotiate shared access with adjoining property owners. One entry and one exit lane for vehicle access will be allowed after there is demonstrable evidence, acceptable to the Director, that shared access is not feasible.

(c) Vehicular access to corner lots shall be located on the lowest classified roadway and as close as practical to the property line most distant from the intersection.

Exception: Corner lots not on a pedestrian-oriented street may have one entrance per street provided the owner provides evidence acceptable to the Director that they are unable to arrange joint access with an abutting property.

(d) Parking garage entries should not dominate the streetscape. They should be designed and sited to complement, not subordinate, the pedestrian entry. This applies to both public garages and any individual private garages, whether they front on a street or private interior access road. For example, townhouse developments are encouraged to employ tandem garages in conjunction with other architectural and landscaping features to deemphasize the garage on building facades. Alleys used primarily for vehicular access, where the primary pedestrian entry is off of another street, interior access road, or pathway, are exempt from this standard.


[IMAGE]


Figure 65. A good example of a parking garage entry that does not dominate the streetscape.


[IMAGE]


Figure 66. The garages of these townhouse units are de-emphasized through the use of overhanging balconies, landscaping, building materials and color. The tandem parking configuration of the garages also limits their visibility.

(Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.40.310 Building design – Character.

(1) Intent.

(a) To encourage building design that reflects the Northwest woodland character;

(b) To encourage building design that has visual character and creates comfortable human environments;

(c) To incorporate design treatments that reduce the scale of large buildings; and

(d) To encourage building design that is authentic and responsive to site conditions.

(2) Design Principle. Northwest woodland character refers to structures designed in the context of the Northwest’s natural setting, which includes climate, topography, ecosystems, and evolved social organization.

(a) The general form of structures is to be simple, three-dimensional forms. Specifically, structures shall have building forms that express wood framing, have traditional Northwest woodland exterior finishes, and may use exposed, heavy wood timber structural members. 


[IMAGE]


Figure 67. Woodinville City Hall is an example of traditional Northwest woodland character.

(b) Structures with multiple component forms are to be integrated for visual unity.

(c) Those components that support and/or stabilize structures should be visually exposed when compatible with design.


[IMAGE]


Figure 68. The simple three-dimensional forms, exposed timber elements, and proportional arrangement of windows and doors make this building a good example of Northwest woodland character. 

(3) Design Principle. Exterior finishes are to be compatible with Northwest woodland character. Specifically:

(a) Material finishes shall reflect the early 1900s domestic agrarian vernacular of materials. All siding materials should be complemented with wood elements. 

(b) Multi-story buildings in the Downtown and Little Bear Creek Corridor study area may incorporate high quality materials besides those reflecting 19th century agrarian architecture, including: brick and other architecturally treated masonry, extensive use of glazing, and high quality panel systems. 

(c) Exterior finish colors should be neutral shades of natural colors found in Northwest woodlands or colors typical of historic agrarian structures of the Northwest, and may include limited use of compatible accent colors.

(d) The arrangement, proportion, and design of windows and doors (fenestration) shall conform with the following implementing measures:

(i) The height-to-width ratio of opening and group openings are to be proportionately scaled to the wall;

(ii) Door and window details and trim that are suitably scaled to the wall; and

(iii) Developments are encouraged to reduce large expanses of glass used in windows and doors to smaller component windows reminiscent of early 1900s domestic agrarian structures when adjacent to sidewalks or other pedestrian accommodations. 


[IMAGE]


Figure 69. The arrangement, proportion, and design of windows and doors are suitable to the walls on this building.

(4) Design Principle. Franchise and corporate architecture shall not be allowed in the Downtown and Little Bear Creek Corridor study area. The use of stock building plans, typical corporate and/or franchise designs, “regional prototype alternatives,” or other designs which are easily identified with a particular chain or corporation are not allowed, except for signs allowed pursuant to Chapter 21.35 WMC. Besides diluting the City’s identity with corporate (and therefore generic) identities, these buildings are undesirable, because they are not adaptable to other uses when the corporation franchises leave.


[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]


Figure 70. Generic franchise and corporate architecture is not allowed in the Downtown and Little Bear Creek Corridor study area.

(Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.40.320 Human scale.

(1) Intent. 

(a) To encourage the use of building components that relate to the size of the human body; and

(b) To add visual interest to buildings.

(2) Design Principle. Incorporate human scale building elements into new developments. Specifically:

(a) Buildings must employ elements or techniques described in subsection (2)(b) of this section to achieve “human scale.” Specifically:

(i) Buildings less than 14 feet in height and less than 10,000 square feet of gross floor area must incorporate at least three human scale measures;

(ii) Buildings between 14 feet and 35 feet in height or buildings less than 14 feet in height but with more than 10,000 square feet in gross floor area must incorporate at least four human scale measures; 

(iii) Buildings 35 feet or taller must incorporate at least five human scale measures; or

(iv) For large buildings with more than 40,000 square feet of gross floor area, the Director may require additional human scale measures to meet the intent of this section.

(b) Human Scale Measures.

(i) Balconies or decks in upper stories, at least one balcony or deck per upper floor on the facades facing streets, provided they are integrated into the architecture of the building. (Balconies that are merely tacked onto the outer wall of the buildings or “cave balconies” that do not project from the outer wall of the building are not “integrated” into the architecture.) Balconies are encouraged to be at least six feet deep and six feet wide;

(ii) Bay windows or other window treatments that extend out from the building face;

(iii) At least 150 square feet of pedestrian-oriented space for each 100 lineal feet of building facade;

(iv) First-floor individual windows, generally less than 32 square feet per pane and separated from the windows by at least a six-inch molding;

(v) Gable or hipped roof; provided, that the hipped or gable roof covers at least one-half of the building’s footprint and has a slope greater than or equal to three feet vertical in 12 feet horizontal. Use gabled forms at corners, entries, wall modulation points, etc., to adapt large structures to the character described in WMC 21.40.310;

(vi) A porch or covered entry;

(vii) Spatially defining building elements, such as a trellis, overhang, canopy, or other element, that defines space that can be occupied by people;

(viii) Upper story setbacks, provided one or more of the upper stories are set back from the face of the building at least six feet;

(ix) Composing smaller building elements near the entry of pedestrian-oriented street fronts of large buildings (see Figure 74); 

(x) Landscaping components that meet the intent of the guidelines; and/or

(xi) The Director may consider other methods to provide human-scale elements not specifically listed here. The proposed methods must satisfy the intent of the design standards.


[IMAGE]


Figure 71. An example of balconies that have been integrated into the architecture of the building.


[IMAGE]


Figure 72. Illustrating a variety of human scale components on a building.


[IMAGE]


Figure 73. This building uses upper level balconies, an upper story setback, and gabled roof forms to meet human scale guidelines.


[IMAGE]


Figure 74. This mixed use building incorporates decks, upper level setbacks, trellises, and gabled roof forms to meet human scale guidelines.


[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]


Figures 75. Examples of composing smaller building elements near the entry of large buildings. 

(Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.40.330 Architectural scale.

(1) Intent. 

(a) To encourage architectural scale of development that is compatible with nearby commercial areas that have the character of agrarian structures; and

(b) To add visual interest to buildings.

(2) Design Principle. Reduce scale of large buildings.

(a) All new buildings over three stories, or over 2,500 square feet in gross building footprint, shall provide at least three modulations and/or articulation features as described below along any facade that is visible from a street or pedestrian route, and have entries at intervals of no more than 50 feet:

(i) Horizontal Building Modulation. The depth of the modulation should be at least two feet when tied to a change in the roofline and at least six feet in other situations. Balconies may be used to qualify for this option, provided they have a floor area of at least 40 square feet, are integrated with the architecture of the building, and project at least two feet from the building facade and are tied to a change in the roofline. 


[IMAGE]


Figure 76. Building modulation example.

(ii) Modulated Roof Line. Buildings may qualify for this option by modulating the roof line of all facades visible from a street, park, or pedestrian pathway per the following standards:

(A) For flat roofs or facades with a horizontal wave, fascia, or parapet, change the roofline so that no unmodulated segment of roof exceeds 50 feet. Minimum vertical dimension of roof line modulation is the greater of two feet or 0.1 multiplied by the wall height (finish grade to top of wall);

(B) For gable, hipped, or shed roofs, a slope of at least three feet vertical to 12 feet horizontal; or

(C) Other roof forms such as arched, vaulted, dormer, or saw-toothed may satisfy this design standard if the individual segments of the roof with no change in slope or discontinuity are less than 50 feet in width (measured horizontally). 

(iii) Repeating distinctive window patterns at intervals less than the articulation interval.

(iv) Providing a porch, patio, deck, or covered entry for each articulation interval.

(v) Changing the roofline by alternating dormers, stepped roofs, gables, or other roof elements to reinforce the modulation or articulation interval.

(vi) Changing materials with a change in building plane.

(vii) Providing lighting fixtures, trellises, trees, or other landscape feature within each interval.

(viii) For mixed use buildings with pedestrian-oriented facades, the following may also be used as articulation features:

(A) Use of separate weather protection features that reinforce the pattern of small storefront spaces.

(B) Use of vertical piers. Such piers must project at least two inches from the facade and extend from the ground floor to the cornice or roofline. 


[IMAGE]


Figure 77. Building articulation.

(ix) Other design treatments that satisfy the intent of the design standards as determined by the Director. 

Note that the Director may increase or decrease the 50-foot interval for modulation and articulation to better match surrounding structures or to implement an adopted subarea plan, where applicable.


[IMAGE]


Figure 78. These buildings illustrate a combination of horizontal building modulation, roofline modulation, and building articulation to reduce the architectural scale and provide visual interest.


[IMAGE]


Figure 79. This Kirkland development uses a variety of roof forms and heights, different weather protection features, changing building materials and colors, and a modest amount of horizontal building modulation to reduce the overall architectural scale into smaller “storefront” components.

(b) The maximum facade width (the facade includes the apparent width of the structure facing the street and includes required modulation) of multi-story buildings visible from a street, public open space, or pedestrian-oriented space is 120 feet. Buildings exceeding 120 feet in width along the street front shall be divided by a 30-foot-wide modulation of the exterior wall, so that the maximum length of a particular facade is 120 feet. Such modulation must be at least 20 feet or deeper and extend through all floors (the first floor will be exempted if it includes a pedestrian-oriented facade). Decks and roof overhangs may encroach up to three feet (per side) into the modulation. The Director will consider other design methods that are effective at reducing the perceived width of the building.


[IMAGE]


Figure 80. Illustrating maximum facade widths.

(c) Building Height Incentive Potential. Buildings exceeding the allowed base height, pursuant to WMC 21.22.040, with an additional floor (maximum of four, with a height not to exceed 51 feet) can be obtained through the provision of City-approved public open space and at least two of the following:

(i) Exceptional design (see WMC 21.40.380) in architectural features of structures and/or site layout;

(ii) Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) Certification for all structures pursuant to the U.S. Building Council rating system;

(iii) Structured parking for all required parking; or

(iv) Private open space. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.40.340 Building corners.

(1) Intent. To create visual interest and increased activity at public street corners.

(2) Design Principle. Architecturally accentuate building corners at street intersections.

(a) All new buildings located within 15 feet of a property line, at the intersection of streets, public or private, are required to employ two or more of the following design elements or treatments to the building corner facing the intersection:

(i) Provide at least 100 square feet of pedestrian-oriented space between the street corner and the building(s). To qualify for this option, the building(s) must have direct access to the space;

(ii) Provide a corner entrance to courtyard, building lobby, atrium, or pedestrian pathway;

(iii) Include a corner architectural element such as:

(A) Bay window or turret;

(B) Roof deck or balconies on upper stories;

(C) Building core setback “notch” or curved facade surfaces; or

(D) Sculpture or artwork, either bas-relief, figurative, or distinctive use of materials.


[IMAGE]


Figure 81. The second-story component, change in building materials, horizontal modulation, and unique roof form make an architectural statement on this street corner.


[IMAGE]


Figure 82. Corner building treatments.

(iv) Special treatment of the pedestrian weather protection canopy at the corner of the building; and/or

(v) Other similar treatment or element approved by the Director.


[IMAGE]


Figure 83. Corner building example.


[IMAGE]


Figure 84. To emphasize its street corner location, this building uses a cropped corner, change in building materials, decorative facade elements, and a modulated roofline.

(Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.40.350 Building details.

(1) Intent. 

(a) To ensure that buildings have design integrity at all observable distances;

(b) To enhance the character and identity of Woodinville’s commercial areas;

(c) To enhance the pedestrian environment; and

(d) To encourage creativity in the design of storefronts.

(2) Design Principle. Enhance buildings with appropriate design details.

When buildings are seen from a distance, the most noticeable qualities are the overall form and color. A three-story commercial building that is 100 feet wide and 35 feet tall must be observed at least 200 feet away in order for the building to fit within a person’s cone of vision so its overall shape can be perceived. At that distance, windows, doors, and other major features are clearly visible. However, within 60 to 80 feet from the building (approximately the distance across a typical downtown street), a person notices not so much the building’s overall form as its individual elements. Closer, the most important aspects of a building are its design details, texture of materials, quality of its finishes, and small, decorative elements. In a pedestrian-oriented business area, it is essential that buildings and their contents be attractive up close. Therefore, these design standards include implementing measures which require all buildings to incorporate design details and small scale elements into their facades.

(a) All new buildings and individual storefronts shall include on the facades that face a street, park, or pedestrian route at least four of the following design features:

(i) Decorative rooflines, such as an ornamental molding, entablature, frieze, or other roofline device visible from the ground level. If the roofline decoration is in the form of a linear molding or board, then the molding or board must be at least eight inches wide;

(ii) Decorative treatment of windows and doors, such as decorative molding/framing details around all ground-floor windows and doors, decorative glazing, or door designs;


[IMAGE]


Figure 85. A variety of details add visual interest to this building. 

(iii) Decorative light fixtures with a diffuse visible light source, such as a globe or “acorn” that is nonglaring, or a decorative shade or mounting;

(iv) Decorative building materials, including one of the following:

(A) Decorative masonry, shingle, brick or stone;

(B) Individualized patterns or continuous wood details, such as fancy butt shingles (a shingle with the butt end machined in some pattern, typically to form geometric designs), decorative moldings, brackets, wave trim or lattice work, ceramic tile, stone, glass block, carrera glass, or similar materials; or

(C) Other materials with decorative or textural qualities as approved by the Director.

The applicant must submit architectural drawings and material samples for approval;

(v) A planting strip at least 16 inches wide between an adjacent pathway and the building facade; 


[IMAGE]


Figure 86. The use of different building materials, window treatments, and roofline brackets adds to the visual interest of this building.

(vi) Decorative railings, grill work, or landscape guards;

(vii) Landscaped trellises;

(viii) Decorative paving or artwork, which may be freestanding or attached to the building, and may be in the form of mosaic mural, bas-relief sculpture, light sculpture, water sculpture, fountain, freestanding sculpture, art in pavement, or other similar artwork. Painted murals or graphics on signs or awnings do not qualify. All artwork used to satisfy this condition is subject to approval by the Director; or

(ix) Other similar features or treatment that satisfies the intent of the design standards as approved by the Director.


[IMAGE]


Figure 87. The building provides a number of details that enhance the pedestrian environment, including decorative lighting, planter boxes, decorative awnings, historical plaques, and decorative facade elements.

(b) All new buildings must note the year of construction of a building by the installation of a plaque attached to the building. Stone or masonry set integrally with other masonry on the front building elevation facing the principal street may be used in lieu of a plaque. The year of construction is to be noted by numbers not less than six inches high. Other information associated with the building that may have historic interest in the future may be included in addition to the year of construction.

(c) Building facades, when located adjacent to a pedestrian pathway, must contain the following elements:

(i) A pedestrian-oriented facade; and

(ii) Weather protection at least six feet wide along at least 75 percent of the building’s front face (facades containing a public building entrance). The weather protection may be in the form of awnings, marquees, canopies, or building overhangs. 

Exceptions will be considered by the Director that meet the intent of the standards. For example, the Director may allow reduced weather protection elements on north-facing facades to allow more daylight into buildings. Reduced window transparency may be allowed in exchange for other desirable pedestrian amenities or building elements (see Figure 88). 

Also see WMC 21.40.250(2)(f), internal pedestrian paths and circulation, for related standards and illustrations.


[IMAGE]


Figure 88. While the treatment of this facade would not meet the definition of a “pedestrian-oriented facade,” the wall’s combination of design details successfully adds visual interest to the space. Weather protection features would not be required in this case since this is not the building’s primary facade (containing public building entry).


[IMAGE]


Figure 89. An example of a pedestrian-oriented facade.

(Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.40.360 Materials.

(1) Intent. To encourage the use of a variety of high-quality compatible materials that will upgrade the visual image of commercial areas of Woodinville.

(2) Design Principles.

(a) Property owners are encouraged to retain existing vernacular facades that reflect the heritage of the City. Facades of vintage buildings may be adapted to contemporary use with the compatible materials, provided they meet the design standards herein.

(b) Buildings shall employ materials that reflect the City’s Northwest woodland character, such as:

(i) Wood (as used in agrarian structures);

(ii) Masonry;

(iii) Stone;

(iv) Shake roofs; or

(v) Other materials subject to approval by the Director.

Use of metal screening, plastic, plywood, sheet wood products, or fiberglass to cover over existing facades is discouraged. Wood should not be used to cover existing brick or cast stone masonry.


[IMAGE]


Figure 90. Use compatible building materials that reflect the City’s Northwest woodland character. 

(3) Materials requiring special detailing when visible from a street, pedestrian pathway, or park:

(a) Concrete Block Walls. Concrete block construction must be architecturally treated in one or more of the following ways:

(i) Use of textured blocks with surfaces such as split face or grooved;

(ii) Use of other masonry types, such as brick, glass block, or tile in conjunction with concrete blocks; and/or

(iii) Use of decorative coursing to break up blank wall areas. 

Use matching colored mortar where color is an element of architectural treatment for any of the options above.

(b) Requirements for Exterior Insulation and Finish System (EIFS) and Similar Troweled Finishes.

(i) EIFS should be trimmed in wood or masonry and should be sheltered from extreme weather by roof overhangs or other methods; 

(ii) EIFS may only be used in conjunction with other approved building materials. Generally, the use of EIFS for more than 50 percent of the building facade is discouraged; and 

(iii) EIFS is prohibited within two vertical feet of the sidewalk or ground level.


[IMAGE]


Figure 91. This storefront effectively combines EIFS and concrete block with wood trim and metal detailing. 


[IMAGE]


Figure 92. City Hall is a good example, combining EIFS, decorative concrete block, wood siding and trim work, glass, and metal roofing. 

(c) Prohibited Materials.

(i) Mirrored glass;

(ii) Corrugated fiberglass;

(iii) Chain-link fencing (except for temporary purposes such as a construction site); 

(iv) Crushed colored rock or tumbled glass;

(v) Metal siding. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.40.370 Blank walls.

(1) Intent.

(a) To reduce the visual impact of large, undifferentiated walls;

(b) To reduce the apparent size of large walls through the use of various architectural and landscaping treatments;

(c) To enhance the character and identity of Woodinville’s commercial areas; and

(d) To ensure that all visible sides of buildings provide visual interest.

(2) Design Principle. All blank walls within 50 feet of the street, pedestrian pathway, park, or adjacent lot, and visible from that street, pedestrian pathway, park, or adjacent lot, shall be treated in one or more of the following measures: 

(a) Install a vertical trellis in front of the wall with climbing vines or plant materials. For large blank wall areas, the trellis must be used in conjunction with other treatments described below;

(b) Provide a landscaped planting bed at least eight feet wide or a raised planter bed at least two feet high and three feet wide in front of the wall. Plant materials that will obscure or screen at least 50 percent of the wall’s surface within four years are to be planted in the planting bed;

(c) Provide a landscaped bioretention swale or bioretention planter with plant materials that will obscure or screen at least 50 percent of the wall’s surface within four years of installation; 

(d) Provide artwork (mosaic, mural, sculpture, relief, etc.) over at least 50 percent of the blank wall surface; and/or

(e) Other method as approved by the Director. For example, landscaping or other treatments may not be necessary on a wall that employs high quality building materials (such as brick) and provides desirable visual interest. See Figure 95 for an example.

Treatment of blank walls must be proportional to the wall.


[IMAGE]


Figure 93. Blank wall treatments.


[IMAGE]


Figure 94. Terraced planting beds effectively screen a large blank wall.


[IMAGE]


Figure 95. Special blank wall treatments may not be needed on the side of a building where high quality brickwork is used.

(Ord. 634 § 34, 2016; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.40.380 Definitions.

“Access street” means a private street that is independent of parking lot circulation and connects public rights-of-way or provides primary access to and within a site.

“Agrarian structures” means buildings or other structures created to satisfy a well-stated function, usually associated with land-oriented activities, such as farming. The structures exhibit simple geometric forms, and were created with available materials and without frills.

Examples of agrarian structures include primitive barns, early sawmill structures and historic wood covered bridges.

“Art, artwork” means a device, element, or feature whose primary purpose is to express, enhance, or illustrate an aesthetic quality, feeling, physical entity, idea, local condition, historical or mythical happening, or cultural or social value. Examples of artwork include sculpture, bas-relief sculpture, mural, or unique specially crafted lighting, furniture, pavement, landscaping, or architectural treatment that is intended primarily, but not necessarily exclusively, for aesthetic purposes. Signs, upon approval by the Director, may be considered artwork provided they exhibit an exceptionally high level of craftsmanship, special material, or construction, and include decorative devices or design elements that are not necessary to convey information about the business or product. Signs that are primarily names or logos are not considered art.

“Balcony” means an outdoor space built as an above ground platform projecting from the wall of a building and enclosed by a parapet or railing.

“Bas-relief” means a sculptural carving, embossing, or casting that projects very little from the background.

“Bay window” means a window that protrudes from the main exterior wall. Typically, the bay contains a surface which lies parallel to the exterior wall, and two surfaces which extend perpendicularly or diagonally out from the exterior wall. To qualify as a bay, the bay must contain a window pane which extends at least 60 percent of the length and 35 percent of the height of the surface of the bay which lies parallel to the exterior wall. There need not be windows in the surfaces which extend out from the exterior wall. 

Blank Walls. Walls subject to “blank wall” requirements meet the following criteria:

(1) Any wall or portion of a wall that has a surface area of 400 square feet of vertical surface without a window, door, or building modulation or other architectural feature.

(2) Any ground level wall surface or section of a wall over four feet in height at ground level that is longer than 15 feet as measured horizontally without having a transparent window or door lying wholly or in part within that 15-foot section.


[IMAGE]


Figure 96. Unacceptable blank wall.

“Courtyard” means a landscaped space enclosed on at least three sides by a single structure.

“Curb cut” means a depression in the curb for the purpose of accommodating a driveway that provides vehicular access between private property and the street.

“Deck” means a roofless outdoor space built as an above ground platform projecting from the wall of a building and connected to the ground by structural supports.

“Director” means the Director of Development Services or the City Manager in the case of his or her absence. 

“Exceptional design,” as used in the code, refers to architectural features of a structure and/or site layout that meet all of the following criteria as determined by the Director. These exceptional design criteria are further illustrated through photos and drawings within this chapter.

(1) Extensive pedestrian network connected to the City’s Non-Motorized Transportation Plan and Transportation Master Plan with lighting, landscaping, and amenities that provides clear pedestrian connections from the street, between buildings, through parking lots and to adjacent sites. See Figure 51 and Figure 52 for circulation examples and WMC 21.40.250.

(2) Creative and effective vehicular circulation system that minimizes the frequency of conflicts between pedestrians, bicycles and automobiles.

(3) A unique multi-use central open space with special amenities and activities, accessible, open and available to the general public.

(4) Increased use of structured parking.

(5) Enhanced off-street pedestrian/bike routes that connect to the existing/planned trail system.

(6) Special accommodation of transit services.

(7) Extensive environmental restoration and/or tree retention.

(8) Environmental certification (LEED) of all structures pursuant to U.S. Building Council rating system.

(9) Include uses that will expand the range of activities in downtown. Such uses might include a cultural or performing arts facility, public assembly areas, and similar uses that will encourage pedestrian activity and/or support for other business or community activities, consistent with WMC 21.40.260, Pedestrian activity and plazas.

(10) Pedestrian-oriented space at a rate of two percent of the project site plus two percent of the building footprint.

(11) When new development fronts on a pedestrian street as defined in WMC 21.40.110(2) and on a corner as defined in WMC 21.40.180, require pedestrian open space and the building’s primary entrance at the street corner.

(12) Surface and structured parking along street frontages shall be located so that it is not visible from the street except for driveway access where these are necessary consistent with WMC 21.40.300(2)(d).

(13) Use of gabled roof, sloped or green roofs as described in WMC 21.40.320.

“Facade” means any portion of an exterior elevation of a building extending from the grade of the building to the top of the parapet wall or eaves, for the entire width of the building elevation.

Franchise and Corporate Architecture. “Franchise architecture” is a building design that is trademarked, branded, or easily identified with a particular chain or corporation and is ubiquitous in nature. Some typical issues and negative impacts often associated with national chain or commercial franchise designs include:

(1) Large logos and/or colors used over large expanses of a building;

(2) Branded buildings are difficult to reuse if vacated by the primary business, promoting vacancies and blight; and

(3) Buildings lack architectural elements and design consistent with the local community’s architectural composition, character, vernacular, and historic context.

“Front yard” means the area between the street and the nearest building facade.

Frontage. As used in the code, “frontage” refers to the length of a property line along a street.

Landscaping. An area is considered to be landscaped if it is:

(1) Planted with vegetation in the form of hardy trees, shrubs, or grass or evergreen ground cover maintained in good condition;

(2) Bioretention and other vegetated LID facilities with sufficient aesthetic similarities to the definition of landscaping in this section;

(3) Occupied by sculptures, fountains or pools, benches, or other outdoor furnishings; 

(4) See also the definition for landscaping provided in WMC 21.11.140.

“Large lot development” means a proposed or existing development of two acres or more.

“Major exterior remodel” means a proposed improvement to any existing building structure or property that changes the exterior appearance of the property and meets either of the criteria below:

(1) Estimated value of construction exceeds 50 percent of the value of the existing built facilities as determined by the City’s building valuation procedure; or

(2) Construction includes an addition to extension of an existing building.

“Minor exterior remodel” means any improvement that changes the visual appearance or exterior configuration of a building structure or property, and which has a value less than 50 percent of the existing built facilities as determined by the City’s building valuation procedure. Painting and restorative maintenance are not considered minor remodels. 

Modulation. In the design standards, “modulation” is a stepping back or projecting forward of portions of a building face within specified intervals of building width and depth, as a means of breaking up the apparent bulk of a structure’s continuous exterior walls.

“Northwest woodland character” means the character of early development of the Northwest that balanced the use of local materials (such as timber, high quality aggregates, and/or recycled or manufactured materials made to resemble natural materials) to construct buildings with the natural environment, including native trees and other vegetation. Examples and illustrations of buildings and developments having Northwest woodland character are included in WMC 21.40.390.

“Pedestrian-oriented building facades” means ground-floor facades which employ at least one of the following characteristics:

(1) Transparent window areas or window displays along at least 75 percent of the ground-floor facade. The window area must cover the area between two feet and eight feet above the sidewalk or walkway surface; or

(2) A combination of sculptural, mosaic, or bas-relief artwork, and transparent window areas or window displays (as described above) over at least 75 percent of the ground-floor facade.

“Pedestrian-oriented space” means an area between a building and a street, access road, or along a pedestrian path which promotes visual and pedestrian access onto the site and which provides pedestrian-oriented amenities and landscaping to enhance the public’s use of the space for passive activities such as resting, reading, picnicking, etc. To qualify as a pedestrian-oriented space, an area must have:

(1) Visual and pedestrian access (including handicapped access) into the site from a street, private access road, or nonvehicular courtyard;

(2) Paved walking surfaces of either concrete or approved unit paving;

(3) On-site or building-mounted lighting (fixtures no taller than 15 feet) providing at least four foot candles (average) on the ground;

(4) A location in areas with significant pedestrian traffic to provide interest and security, such as adjacent to a building entry; 

(5) Landscaping components that add visual interest and do not act as a visual barrier. This could include planting beds, potted plants, or both; and

(6) At least two feet of seating area (a bench or ledge at least 16 inches deep and appropriate seating height) or one individual seat per 60 square feet of plaza area or open space.

A pedestrian-oriented space shall have:

(1) Pedestrian amenities, including two or more elements such as a water feature, site furniture, artwork, drinking fountains, kiosks, clock tower, etc.;

(2) Adjacent buildings with transparent windows and doors covering 75 percent of the facade between two feet and eight feet above the ground level;

(3) Consideration of the sun angle at noon and the wind pattern in the design of the space; and

(4) Transitional zones along building edges to allow for outdoor seating areas and a planted buffer.

A pedestrian-oriented space shall not have:

(1) Asphalt or gravel pavement;

(2) Adjacent nonbuffered parking lots or service areas;

(3) Adjacent chain-link fences;

(4) Adjacent blank walls without blank wall treatment; and

(5) Outdoor storage or retail sales that do not contribute to the pedestrian-oriented environment.

Pedestrian-Oriented Street. “Pedestrian-oriented streets” include:

(1) NE 175th Street, 133rd Avenue NE, 135th Avenue NE, 138th Avenue NE, and 140th Avenue NE within the CBD zone. 

(2) SR 202 located in the Tourist District Overlay described in WMC 21.26.010. 

(3) An undefined north/south corridor connecting NE 171st Street and Woodinville-Snohomish Road in the vicinity of 135th Avenue NE.

“Pedestrian-oriented use (or business)” means a commercial enterprise whose customers commonly arrive by foot; or whose signage, advertising, window display, and entryways are oriented toward pedestrian traffic. Pedestrian-oriented businesses may include restaurants, retail shops, personal service businesses, travel services, banks (except drive-through windows), and similar establishments.

“Rain garden” means a planted depression that allows rainwater runoff from impervious urban areas like roofs, driveways, walkways, and compacted lawn areas the opportunity to be absorbed.

“Scale, architectural” means the perceived relative height and bulk of a building relative to that of neighboring buildings. A building’s apparent height and bulk may be reduced by modulating facades.

“Scale, human” means the perceived size of a building relative to a human being. A building is considered to have “good” human scale if there is an expression of human activity or use that indicates the building’s size. For example, traditionally sized doors, windows, and balconies are elements that respond to the size of the human body, so these elements in a building indicate a building’s overall size.

Streetscape. The “streetscape” is the visual character of a street as determined by various elements such as structures, greenery, open space, views, etc.

“TRC (Technical Review Committee)” means an administrative review panel composed of department heads or designated representatives that conduct development review for the City.

“Vernacular facade” means a unique expression of a building facade that is representative of a popular architectural expression that evolved in a specific geographic area or place during a particular period of time. (Ord. 634 § 35, 2016; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.40.390 Northwest woodland character design standards illustrative guide.

A. Amenities – Examples of Northwest Woodland Character.

Figure 97. Way finding signage.
[IMAGE]


Figure 98. Bike rack.
[IMAGE]


Figure 99. Unique street furniture with pavement color details – Building lighting on side of building.
[IMAGE]


Figure 100. Bench with tree fence as well as waste receptacle.
[IMAGE]


Figure 101. Fountains.
[IMAGE]


Figure 102. Drinking fountain.
[IMAGE]


Figure 103. Pedestrian scale lighting and rain protection (example of intermittent sheltering roof).
[IMAGE]


Figure 104. Public art – Accessible.
[IMAGE]


B. Colors – Examples of Northwest Woodland Character.

Figure 105. Colors – Use of color in quality aggregates.
[IMAGE]


Figure 106. Use of color.
[IMAGE]


Figure 107. Examples of the use of color.
[IMAGE]


C. Landscaping – Examples of Northwest Woodland Character.

Figure 108. Robust landscaping using a variety of plantings.
[IMAGE]


Figure 109. Landscaping examples.
[IMAGE]


D. Materials – Examples of Northwest Woodland Character.

Figure 110. The elements incorporated into the eaves or protected entrance of the building.
[IMAGE]


Figure 111. Wood materials incorporated into large format store.
[IMAGE]


Figure 112. Wood and metal incorporated in a building.
[IMAGE]


Figure 113. Metal materials incorporated into a building.
[IMAGE]


Figure 114. Brick and metal panels combination.
[IMAGE]


E. Form of the Building – Examples of Northwest Woodland Character.

Figure 115. Wood accents at main entrances.
[IMAGE]


F. Additional Building Forms – Larger Buildings.

Figure 116. Form of the building using a variety of materials.
[IMAGE]


Figure 117. Agrarian building shapes.
[IMAGE]


Figures 118 and 119. Examples of wide awnings that evoke Northwest woodland character.
[IMAGE]


Figure 120. Example of awnings with sufficient width for seating and walking.
[IMAGE]


Figure 121. Example of adequately sized awning that helps activate the street.
[IMAGE]


Figure 122. Site planning – Relationship to street front – Example of an active street with defined pedestrian areas (walking and seating).
[IMAGE]


Figure 123. Examples of mature trees and landscaping in planters that provide good separation between pedestrians and moving traffic.
[IMAGE]


Figure 124. Examples demonstrating a mix of native and ornamental plants, small groves of trees, and the use of stone for sitting.
[IMAGE]


Figure 125. This decorative sidewalk pavement adds visual interest and character to the street. Where distinctive sidewalk patterns have been established, new development may be required to extend the pattern onto the project site.
[IMAGE]


Figure 126. Example of street design that emphasizes the pedestrian.
[IMAGE]


Figure 127. Planting strips are desirable along streets where there is no on-street parking.
[IMAGE]


Figure 128. The continuous canopy on top is monotonous and de-emphasizes individual storefronts. The bottom example provides a variety of weather protection features and represents a more desirable example.
[IMAGE]


Figure 129. Examples of desired pedestrian amenities.
[IMAGE]


Figure 130. Examples of pedestrian weather protection.
[IMAGE]


Figure 131. Examples of pedestrian shelters.
[IMAGE]


Figure 132. A variety of successful large and small pedestrian-oriented spaces.
[IMAGE]


Figure 133. Good example of Northwest image including the retention of native evergreen trees.
[IMAGE]


Figure 134. Example of Northwest woodland architecture and Northwest woodland landscaping using native trees, plants and large native stone.
[IMAGE]


Figure 135. An example of a building that uses a variety of materials to evoke the Northwest woodland character.
[IMAGE]


Figure 136. Unacceptable blank wall.
[IMAGE]


Figure 137. Large format retail store design standards.
[IMAGE]


(Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


Chapter 21.41 INDUSTRIAL DESIGN GUIDELINES

Sections:

21.41.010    Adopted.


21.41.010 Adopted. 

Attachment A of Ordinance 278*, Industrial Design Guidelines, is hereby adopted by this reference as if set forth in full. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)

*Code reviser’s note: Ordinance 572, Section 4 amends Exhibit A of Ordinance 278 in its entirety.


Chapter 21.42 RESIDENTIAL DESIGN STANDARDS

Sections:

21.42.010    Purpose.

21.42.020    General layout standards.

21.42.030    Lot segregations – Zero lot line development.

21.42.040    Lot segregations – Clustered development.

21.42.050    Townhome development.

21.42.060    Attached dwellings and group residences – Applicability.

21.42.070    Attached dwellings and group residences – Design standards.

21.42.080    Attached dwellings and group residences – Vehicular access and parking location.

21.42.090    Attached dwellings and group residences – Building facade modulation.

21.42.100    Attached dwellings and group residences – Roofline variation.

21.42.110    Easements – Regional utility corridors.

21.42.120    Mobile home parks – Standards for existing parks.

21.42.130    Mobile home parks – Standards for new parks.

21.42.140    Mobile home parks – Alternative design standards.


21.42.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to improve the quality of urban development by providing building and site design standards that:

(1) Reduce the visual impact of large residential buildings from adjacent streets and properties;

(2) Enhance the aesthetic character of large residential buildings;

(3) Contain sufficient flexibility of standards to encourage creative and innovative site and building design; and

(4) Meet the on-site recreation needs of project residents. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.42.020 General layout standards.

For residential developments in the R zones: 

(1) The maximum length of blocks shall be 1,320 feet.

(2) Except for corner lots, lots for single detached dwellings shall not have street frontage along two sides unless one of said streets is a neighborhood collector street or an arterial street.

(3) The layout of residential developments should not result in new residences facing arterial streets whenever practical. The Development Services Director may require that roads internal to a new subdivision or short plat be designed to provide access to homes in lieu of those homes gaining access onto an arterial street. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.42.030 Lot segregations – Zero lot line development.

In any R zone, interior setbacks may be modified during subdivision or short subdivision review as follows: 

(1) If a building is proposed to be located within a normally required interior setback:

(a) An easement shall be provided on the abutting lot of the subdivision that is wide enough to ensure a 10-foot separation between the walls of structures on adjoining lots, except as provided for common wall construction;

(b) The easement area shall be free of structures and other obstructions that would prevent normal repair and maintenance of the structure’s exterior;

(c) Buildings utilizing reduced setbacks shall not have doors that open directly onto the private yard areas of abutting property. Windows in such buildings shall not be oriented toward such private yard areas unless they consist of materials such as glass block, textured glass, or other opaque materials, and shall not be capable of being opened, except for clerestory-style windows or skylights; and 

(d) The final plat or short plat shall show the approximate location of buildings proposed to be placed in a standard setback area.

(2) In the R zones, setbacks on existing individual lots may be modified; provided, that the standards set forth in subsection (1)(a) of this section are met. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.42.040 Lot segregations – Clustered development.

(1) When residential lot clustering is proposed, the following provisions shall be met: Any open space resulting from lot clustering shall not be altered or disturbed except as specified on recorded documents creating the open space. Such open spaces may be retained under ownership by the subdivider, conveyed to residents of the development, or conveyed to a third party; 

(2) Lots abutting an agriculturally zoned area shall be clustered so as to provide a minimum 100-foot buffer from the agriculturally zoned property. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.42.050 Townhome development.

In the R-4 through R-8 zones, a building that contains a grouping of attached townhome units shall not exceed a 120-foot maximum length without a separation of at least 20 feet from other groupings or rows of townhomes. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.42.060 Attached dwellings and group residences – Applicability.

The standards of WMC 21.42.070 through 21.42.100 shall apply to all new apartment developments exceeding four dwelling units, new townhome development and new group residences (community residential facilities) with more than four units. Expansions of existing development that involve four or more dwelling units shall be subject to compliance with WMC 21.42.080 to 21.42.100. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.42.070 Attached dwellings and group residences – Design standards.

(1) Attachment A of Ordinance 302*, Multi-family Design Guidelines, is hereby adopted by this reference as if set forth in full.

(2) New townhomes, apartments, and group residences of more than four dwelling units shall be subject to the City’s adopted design standards for multifamily developments. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)

*Code reviser’s note: Ordinance 572, Section 5 amends Attachment A of Ordinance 302.


21.42.080 Attached dwellings and group residences – Vehicular access and parking location. 

(1) On sites abutting an alley constructed to a width of at least 20 feet, apartment and townhome development and all group residences except community residential facilities shall have parking areas placed to the rear of buildings with primary vehicular access via the alley, except when waived by the Development Services Director due to physical site limitations.

(2) When alley access is provided, no additional driveway access from the public street shall be allowed except as necessary to access parking under the structure.

(3) When common parking facilities for attached dwellings and group residences exceed 30 spaces, no more than 50 percent of the required parking shall be permitted between the street property line and any building, except when authorized by the Development Services Director due to physical site limitations. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.42.090 Attached dwellings and group residences – Building facade modulation.

Apartment and townhome developments and all group residences shall provide building facade modulation on facades exceeding 60 feet in length. The following standards shall apply:

(1) The maximum wall length without modulation shall be 30 feet;

(2) The minimum modulation depth shall be three feet; and

(3) The minimum modulation width shall be eight feet. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.42.100 Attached dwellings and group residences – Roofline variation.

Apartments and townhome developments and all group residences shall provide roofline variation on rooflines exceeding 60 feet according to the following standards:

(1) The maximum roof length without variation shall be 30 feet;

(2) The minimum horizontal or vertical offset shall be three feet;

(3) The minimum variation length shall be eight feet; and

(4) Roofline variation shall be achieved using one or more of the following methods:

(a) Vertical off-set in ridge line;

(b) Horizontal off-set in ridge line; 

(c) Variations of roof pitch; 

(d) Gables;

(e) False facades; or

(f) Any other technique approved by the Development Services Director that achieves the intent of this section. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.42.110 Easements – Regional utility corridors.

(1) In subdivisions and short subdivisions, areas used as regional utility corridors shall be contained in separate tracts.

(2) In other types of land development permits, easements shall be used to delineate such corridors. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.42.120 Mobile home parks – Standards for existing parks. 

(1) Mobile home parks established prior to the effective date of this code shall continue to be governed by all standards relating to density, setbacks, landscaping and off-street parking in effect at the time they were approved.

(2) Placement of new accessory structures and replacement mobile homes, either standard or nonstandard, in these mobile home parks shall be governed by the dimensional standards in effect when the parks were approved, unless two or more replacement mobile homes are proposed to be installed adjacent to each other under the flexible setback option set forth in WMC 21.42.140. Where internal setbacks are not specified, the average of the prevailing setbacks on the pads to either side of the proposed new or replacement structure shall apply. 

(3) No spaces or pads in an existing mobile home park shall be used to accommodate recreational vehicles (RVs), except when the spaces or pads were specifically for RVs at the time the park was established.

(4) An existing mobile home park may be enlarged; provided the proposed enlargement meets the standards set forth in WMC 21.42.130 and 21.42.140. 

(5) Both insignia and noninsignia mobile homes may be installed in established parks; provided, that all mobile homes supported by piers shall be fully skirted, and that nonstandard mobile homes shall meet the minimum livability and safety requirements set forth in the Uniform Building Code. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.42.130 Mobile home parks – Standards for new parks.

New mobile home parks shall be developed subject to the following standards:

(1) A mobile home park shall be at least three acres in area; 

(2) The allowable residential density in a mobile home park shall be the base density of the zone in which the park is located;

(3) Both insignia and noninsignia mobile homes may be installed in mobile home parks; provided, that noninsignia mobile homes shall meet the minimum livability and safety requirements set forth in the Uniform Building Code; 

(4) A mobile home park shall be exempt from the building coverage and impervious surface limits set forth in Chapter 21.22 WMC; 

(5) At least one of the off-street parking spaces required for each mobile home shall be located on or adjacent to each mobile home pad; 

(6) Internal roads and sidewalks shall provide access to each mobile home space and shall be constructed in accordance with the adopted City of Woodinville street standards for residential minor access streets; 

(7) There shall be a minimum of 10 feet of separation maintained between all mobile homes on the site, unless the flexible setback option set forth in WMC 21.42.140 is used. Accessory structures shall be located no closer than:

(a) Ten feet to mobile homes on adjacent spaces, unless constructed of noncombustible materials, in which case the minimum setback shall be five feet;

(b) Five feet to accessory structures of mobile homes on adjacent spaces; and 

(c) Five feet to the mobile home or other accessory structures on the same space, except a carport or garage may be attached to the mobile home, and the separation may be waived when such structures are constructed of noncombustible materials; 

(8) All mobile homes and RVs supported by piers shall be fully skirted; and 

(9) A mobile home park may include a storage area for RVs owned by residents of the park; provided the storage area contains no utility hook-ups and no RV within the storage area shall be used as living quarters. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.42.140 Mobile home parks – Alternative design standards.

As an alternative to the building separation and internal street standards of WMC 21.42.130:

(1) Building separation requirements or setbacks between mobile homes and accessory structures on adjacent spaces may be modified, provided:

(a) The common walls meet the fire protection standards set forth in Chapter 15.04 WMC, Building Codes, and the standards set forth in Chapter 15.15 WMC, Fire Code, for duplexes, multifamily and condominium developments, as applicable; and

(b) Rental agreement clauses, bylaws or other legal mechanisms stipulate maintenance responsibilities for structures, fences and yards; 

(2) Private streets may be used with a minimum driving surface of 22 feet in width, provided: 

(a) The streets comply in all other respects with the City of Woodinville adopted street standards;

(b) All required parking is located off-street and as specified in WMC 21.42.130(5); and 

(c) Such streets shall not:

(i) Directly connect two or more points of vehicular access to the park; or 

(ii) Serve over 100 dwelling units within the park. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


Chapter 21.43 LANDSCAPING

Sections:

21.43.010    Purpose and intent.

21.43.020    Applicability.

21.43.030    Landscaping submittal requirements.

21.43.040    Landscaping – General requirements.

21.43.050    Perimeter landscaping.

21.43.060    Landscape – Types.

21.43.070    Surface parking areas.

21.43.080    Alternative compliance.

21.43.090    Landscaping adjacent to public trails, utilities and other publicly used lands.

21.43.100    Landscape and tree protection during construction.

21.43.110    Landscaping – Irrigation.

21.43.120    Landscaping – Planting and installation.

21.43.130    Landscape maintenance.

21.43.140    Bonds – Security.

21.43.150    Penalties.


21.43.010 Purpose and intent.

(1) Introduction and Purpose. Landscaping is a key component of Woodinville’s northwest woodland character. The purpose of this chapter is to preserve and improve the aesthetic character and environmental quality of Woodinville’s neighborhoods through retaining and protecting existing vegetation and significant trees when possible; promoting of proper plant selection and continuous maintenance; reducing the impacts of development on drainage systems and natural habitats; increasing privacy for low-density zones; providing visual relief from parking lots and service areas; softening perceived building scale; and providing transition between different zones. (Ord. 622 § 4, 2016; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.43.020 Applicability.

(1) General. Any construction, site disturbance, or landscape removal within multifamily, commercial, industrial, and public/institutional zones (R-12 through R-48, CBD, NB, GB, I, or TB zones) or nonresidential development in residential zones shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. The City has established three thresholds to gauge the extent of construction work and set requirements based on the level of improvement. Where a project qualifies for multiple thresholds, the requirement providing the largest area of landscaping improvement shall qualify. 

(a) Major Construction. All development qualifying as major construction shall be subject to all of the provisions of this chapter for the entire site or lot. Major construction shall include projects where:

(i) A new development project is subject to land use project approval permit pursuant to WMC 21.80.140; or

(ii) New, removed, or replaced impervious surfaces on the site total more than 50 percent.

(b) Minor Construction. All development qualifying as minor construction shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter for the impacted areas only. Minor construction shall include projects where:

(i) New, removed, or replaced impervious surfaces on the site total less than 50 percent. Projects shall be subject to all of the provision of this chapter only within the limits of disturbance. The limits of disturbance shall include portions of the site 10 feet beyond the area of construction, grading, site disturbance, or dripline for tree removal; or

(ii) A remodel or tenant improvement to an existing building exceeds 25 percent of the fair market value of all structures on the site. Sites not meeting the landscaping standards shall be required to provide additional landscaping on the site equal to 25 percent of the cost of construction.

(c) Pruning and Maintenance. On sites with no construction, impacted area shall be replanted to meet the landscaping type as provided in this chapter. The impacted area shall be considered the dripline of any removed shrub or the critical root zone of any removed tree. Enlargement of landscape areas shall not be required. Pruning shall be subject to WMC 21.43.130 and 21.50.130. 

(i) A tree removal permit shall be required on sites where significant trees greater than six inches at diameter-at-breast-height are proposed for removal.

(ii) A tree removal permit shall not be required on sites where shrubs, groundcovers, or nonsignificant trees are proposed for removal.

(2) Emergency Removal. Any tree that poses an imminent threat to life or property, due to a storm event such as a windstorm or ice storm, may be removed without first obtaining a permit. The party removing the tree shall contact the City Tree Official within seven days of removal to provide documentation of threat for approval of exemption.

(3) Deviations. Deviation requests from these standards may be granted by the City Tree Official where strict application of these standards will conflict with existing development or landscaping, and are contrary to the purpose and intent of this chapter. (Ord. 622 § 4, 2016; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.43.030 Landscaping submittal requirements.

(1) Submittal Materials. The following materials must be submitted as part of applications for construction permits. The City Tree Official shall have the authority to waive certain application materials if the item is not necessary to evaluate a specific proposal for consistency with this chapter. 

(a) Site plan prepared by a licensed certified landscape architect or arborist, showing the following:

(i) Location of all existing and proposed structures, construction limits, easements, utility lines, and construction protection barriers consistent with WMC 21.43.120;

(ii) Location of all trees six inches or greater at diameter-at-breast height (DBH) within 50 feet of the construction limits, including size and species;

(iii) Identification of all trees to be removed and/or relocated;

(iv) Existing and proposed topography at five-foot intervals; and

(v) Location of all critical areas and buffers.

(b) Replanting plan, showing the following:

(i) Location of proposed structures and retained trees;

(ii) Location of proposed replacement trees and/or vegetation, including species, size, and spacing;

(iii) Location and design of other landscape restoration measures; 

(iv) A planting schedule that indicates species, quantity, size, spacing, and tree density calculations for replanted trees; and

(v) Irrigation system, including location and specifications;

(c) Arborist report or professional recommendation, evaluating the following:

(i) Inventory of all impacted trees, including size, species, dripline, and critical root zone. The inventory must include all trees proposed for removal and any trees within 50 feet of the construction limits. Written evaluation of anticipated impacts to tree health and viability resulting from construction, including any impacts to critical root zones;

(ii) Information on compliance with coverage requirements, including a calculation of tree canopy or replanting schedule;

(iii) Evaluation of impacts on dripline and critical root zone of trees on adjoining properties;

(iv) Suggested location and species of supplemental trees, maintenance, and planting specifications consistent with WMC 21.43.120 and 21.43.130;

(v) Recommendations on tree protection measures consistent with WMC 21.50.120 and corresponding to the site plan in subsection (1)(a) of this section;

(vi) Special instructions for working within the protection area, including but not limited to, hand-digging, tunneling, root pruning, and minimizing grade changes;

(vii) Information on any required on-site supervision during construction;

(viii) Information on maintenance including duration, benchmarks for success, cost estimates, and financial guarantees/bonding; and

(ix) If applicable, assessment and designation of a hazard or nuisance tree. (Ord. 622 § 4, 2016; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.43.040 Landscaping – General requirements.

Landscape designs shall conform to the following provisions:

(1) Minimum Landscape Area. At least ten percent of the total site area, excluding areas dedicated as right-of-way, shall be landscaped pursuant to this chapter. Where no landscaping type is specified in this chapter, landscaping shall be Type III or greater;

(2) Planting Selection. Plant species shall be selected that enhance the City’s Northwest woodland character. Plant species must be either native or non-invasive naturalized species to the coastal region of the Pacific Northwest. Species shall be selected from the City of Woodinville Plant Species List or be suitable in the USDA Plant Hardiness Zone 8. At least 60 percent of new landscaping materials shall consist of drought-tolerant species, except where site conditions within the required landscape areas assure adequate moisture for growth. Drought-tolerant and nondrought-tolerant species shall be distributed and irrigated in a manner that uses water efficiently;

(3) Retention of Existing Vegetation. Healthy native vegetation shall be preserved to the greatest extent feasible. New vegetation should be replanted in between existing vegetation consistent with the required landscape type in random patterns where possible;

(4) Continuity. Landscaping shall be designed to provide continuity between adjoining properties;

(5) Pedestrian Areas. Building entries, pedestrian plazas and walkways shall be emphasized with special landscaping and/or paving in combination with landscaping;

(6) Staggered Rows. When the width of any landscape strip is 25 feet or greater, the required trees shall be staggered in two or more rows;

(7) Maximum Hardscape. No more than 15 percent of the width of any required landscaping areas shall be covered with walkways, driveways, or other impervious surfaces necessary for access. No other impervious surfaces or hardscapes are permitted in required landscaping areas;

(8) Areas of a site designated for landscape area shall be protected from disturbance during grading and construction to the extent feasible; 

(9) Turf may be used as groundcover in landscape areas; provided, that the turf area:

(a) Constitutes no more than 30 percent of Type I and II landscape areas; and

(b) Is at least five feet wide at the smallest dimension;

(10) Bioretention facilities are allowed and encouraged to be located within landscaping areas. Landscaping shall be designed to be consistent with landscaping types and widths identified in this chapter. Where bioretention is used, shrub height shall be limited to four feet above the grade surrounding the facility and the spacing of trees and shrubs adjacent to the facility may be relaxed to help ensure adequate sunlight to the facility and to avoid leaf drop;

(11) All fences shall be placed on the inward side of any required perimeter landscaping;

(12) Berms shall not exceed a slope of three horizontal feet to one vertical foot for lawns and shall not exceed a slope of two horizontal feet to one vertical foot for other plant materials;

(13) Soils in landscape areas shall be amended with compost in accordance with Chapter 13.05 WMC;

(14) Landscape areas shall be covered with at least two inches of mulch to minimize evaporation. Mulch shall consist of materials such as yard waste, sawdust and/or manure that is fully composted;

(15) Required street landscaping may be placed within City of Woodinville street rights-of-way subject to the City’s street design standards with the permission of the Public Works Director, provided adequate space is maintained along the street line on site to replace the required landscaping should subsequent street improvements require the removal of landscaping within the rights-of-way; and

(16) A qualified tree professional, as defined in WMC 21.11.190, shall be on-site during any site work affecting preserved trees. (Ord. 634 § 36, 2016; Ord. 622 § 4, 2016; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.43.050 Perimeter landscaping.

(1) Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, landscaping along property lines shall be provided based on zoning districts set forth in this section. If listed in Table 21.43.050(1), perimeter landscaping shall be required for the subject street frontage or along the interior lot line identified in parentheses.

Table 21.43.050(1) – Perimeter Landscaping Requirements  

	Zoning District of Subject Property	Required Perimeter Landscaping

	Street Frontage	Interior Lot Lines	Special Standards and Notes

	Nonresidential Development in Single-Family Zones (R-1 through R-8)	10 feet Type III (all streets)	20 feet Type I (R-1 through R-8 zones)	1. For single-family uses, refer to Chapter 21.50 WMC, Development Standards – Tree Protection.

	Multifamily (R-12 through R-48)	10 feet Type III (all streets)	20 feet Type II (single-family zones)

10 feet Type II (other multifamily zones)	 

	General Business (GB)	25 feet Type II (SR 522)

10 feet Type II (all other streets)	10 feet Type I (Public Park/Open Space)	2. For lots adjacent to SR 522, 0 – 25 feet Type II landscaping required per WMC 21.43.050(4).

	Neighborhood Business (NB)	10 feet Type III (all streets)	20 feet Type I (R-1 through R-8 zones)	 

	Industrial (I)	See Notes 3 through 6

25 feet Type II (SR 202)

10 feet Type II (all other streets)	20 feet Type I (R-1 through R-8 zones)

10 feet Type II (Industrial)

15 feet Type II (public trails or other publicly used lands)	3. Refer to Industrial Design Standards for additional requirements.

4. For properties in the Tourist District Overlay, refer to WMC 21.26.010.

5. Interior landscaping abutting industrial or public trails may be reduced to 5 feet depending on the intensity of the use to be screened, visual impacts, and if development is integrated with the subject abutting property through provision of pedestrian connections. Exceptions may be made for those developments meeting Section IV.F of the Industrial Design Guidelines and Standards.

	Tourist Business (TB)	See Notes	See Notes	6. Refer to WMC 21.26.010. 

	Central Business District (CBD)	See Notes	20 feet Type I (R-1 through R-8 zones)	7. Refer to Chapter 21.40 WMC, Commercial Design Standards.

	Public Park/Open Space (P)	 	10 feet Type I (R-1 through R-8 zones)	 

	Public Institutional (P/I)	10 feet Type II (all streets)	20 feet Type I (R-1 through R-8 zones)	 

(2) Frontage Landscaping. Required street frontage landscaping may be placed within City of Woodinville street rights-of-way subject to the City’s street design standards with the permission of the Public Works Director, provided adequate space is maintained along the street line on site to replace the required landscaping should subsequent street improvements require the removal of landscaping within the rights-of-way.

(3) Street Trees. Street trees shall be planted in the right-of-way for all development fronting a public street at an average rate of one tree per 25 lineal feet. Street tree species shall be approved by the City Tree Official in accordance with the City of Woodinville Plant Species List or adopted street tree plan, if applicable. The trees may be spaced at irregular intervals in order to accommodate sight distance requirements for driveways and intersections.

(4) State Route 522. All developments shall provide a minimum of 25 feet of Type III landscaping adjacent to a SR 522 right-of-way. Developments may reduce the required landscaping width to zero feet provided the following requirements are met:

(a) A development agreement between the City and property owner is required, in which the property owner agrees to construct and maintain at the property owner’s expense a landscape buffer in the State of Washington Department of Transportation (DOT) right-of-way. 

(b) The agreement shall be at the City’s discretion and would include provisions allowing the City to conduct the landscape maintenance, in which case a fee for these maintenance services will be agreed upon between the property owner and the City prior to acceptance of the agreement by the City Council. 

(c) The provisions of the agreement shall be designated as covenants running with the land of the property owner binding the successors and assigns of the property owner, including mortgagees and beneficiaries of a deed of trust.

(d) An agreement will be required by DOT to allow the installation and maintenance of the landscaping in the DOT right-of-way. Typically, this agreement would be between DOT and the City. 

(5) Site Constraints. The landscaping requirement may be modified when existing conditions on or adjacent to the site, such as significant topographic differences, vegetation, structures or utilities would render application of this chapter ineffective or result in scenic view obstruction. When an existing structure precludes installation of the total amount of required site perimeter landscaping, such landscaping material shall be incorporated on another portion of the site.

(6) Averaging. The width of the perimeter landscaping may be averaged, provided the minimum width is not less than five feet.

(7) Sites Under Common Ownership. Adjoining parcels under a binding site plan or those designed under common ownership may have perimeter landscaping located at the project limits and not the joint property lines. (Ord. 622 § 4, 2016; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.43.060 Landscape – Types.

(1) Landscaping Types. The types, arrangement, and quantity of plants shall be appropriate to the size and intent of the landscaping as indicated in Table 21.43.060(1). Alternative landscaping options in WMC 21.43.080 meeting the intent of subject landscape type may be substituted. 

Table 21.43.060(1) – Landscape Types  

	 	Type I	Type II	Type III

	Intent	A “full screen” that functions as a visual barrier. Type I landscaping shall consist of a mix of primarily evergreen trees and shrubs placed to form a continuous screen.	A “filtered screen” that functions as a visual separator. Type II landscaping shall consist of a mix of evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs spaced to create a filtered screen.	A “see-through buffer” that functions as a partial visual separator to soften the appearance of parking areas and building elevations. Type III landscaping shall consist of a mix of evergreen and/or deciduous trees spaced to create a continuous canopy.

	Tree ratio	Minimum 70 percent evergreen trees	At least 50 percent deciduous trees and at least 30 percent evergreen trees	At least 70 percent deciduous trees

	Tree size and spacing	Trees spaced no further than 20 feet on center.

Deciduous trees shall be at least 2-inch caliper.

Evergreen trees shall be at least 6 feet in height.

Multi-stemmed trees shall be at least seven feet in height.	Trees spaced no further than 25 feet on center.

Deciduous trees shall be at least 2-inch caliper.

Evergreen trees shall be at least 6 feet in height.

Multi-stemmed trees shall be at least seven feet in height.	Trees spaced no further than 25 feet on center.

Deciduous trees shall be at least 2-inch caliper.

Evergreen trees shall be at least 6 feet in height.

Multi-stemmed trees shall be at least seven feet in height.

	Shrubs	Evergreen shrubs spaced no further than five feet apart.

Shrubs shall be at least 24 inches in height.	Shrubs spaced no further than seven feet apart.

Shrubs shall be at least 24 inches in height.	Shrubs, that do not exceed a height of four feet, spaced no further than four feet apart.

Shrubs shall be at least 24 inches in height.

	Groundcovers	Four-inch pots spaced 24 inches on center.

Turf may constitute no more than 30 percent.	Four-inch pots spaced 24 inches on center.

Turf may constitute no more than 30 percent.	Four-inch pots spaced 24 inches on center.

Turf may constitute no more than 30 percent.

(Ord. 634 § 37, 2016; Ord. 622 § 4, 2016; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.43.070 Surface parking areas.

(1) General. Surface parking lots shall be landscaped to break up large areas of asphalt and to provide visual relief from the street.

(2) Required Plantings. Landscaping shall be provided within surface parking lots at a rate of 20 square feet per parking stall. Landscaping shall be designed and maintained to provide clear sight distance between three and one-half feet and eight feet above the existing street grade pursuant to WMC 21.22.190. Surface parking lot landscaping shall be planted as follows:

(a) Deciduous trees shall be planted at a rate of one tree per every seven stalls; 

(b) Shrubs planted no more than four feet apart; and

(c) Groundcovers planted no more than 24 inches apart.

(3) Landscape Spacing. Landscape islands shall be spaced no further than 10 parking stalls and at the end of each parking row. Landscaping strips may be placed in between rows of parking stalls.

(4) Size. Landscape islands or strips shall be a minimum of four feet wide and shall have an area of at least 75 square feet.

Figure 21.43.070 Parking Lot Landscaping
[IMAGE]


(5) Bioretention Facilities. Parking area landscaping may be used for stormwater management as approved by the Public Works Director. The requirements for plant sizes and spacing in subsection (2) of this section may be relaxed for bioretention facilities upon recommendations provided by an arborist, landscape architect, or other qualified professional. 

(6) Vertical Curbs. Landscape islands or planters shall be surrounded by a standard vertical curb or a similar barrier to protect the plantings from vehicle overhang. Gaps in the curb are permitted for stormwater drainage.

(7) Parking Perimeter Landscaping. If no perimeter landscape standard is listed in WMC 21.43.050 and if permitted, parking lots adjacent to sidewalks or streets shall be screened with a minimum of 10 feet of Type III landscaping or five feet of Type III landscaping with a three-foot-tall decorative wall, unless otherwise required by this title. (Ord. 634 § 38, 2016; Ord. 622 § 4, 2016; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.43.080 Alternative compliance.

(1) The following alternative landscape options may be allowed only if they accomplish or exceed the intent of the landscaping type and are subject to Development Services Director approval: 

(a) Landscaping areas may be used for stormwater management as approved by the Public Works Director. The requirements for plant sizes and spacing may be relaxed upon recommendations provided by an arborist, landscape architect, or other qualified professional.

(b) Development with green roofs or rooftop gardens covering at least 50 percent of all building roofs may reduce the required landscaping area by 10 percent.

(c) Development with living walls or green walls covering at least 15 percent of all building walls may reduce the required landscaping area by five percent. 

(d) The width of the perimeter landscape strip may be reduced up to 25 percent along any portion where: 

(i) Berms at least three feet in height or architectural barriers at least four feet in height are incorporated into the landscape design; and

(ii) The landscape materials are incorporated elsewhere on site.

(e) Sites retaining 10 significant trees per acre or a grove per acre may reduce required landscape area by up to 10 percent. 

(f) Street perimeter landscaping may be waived, provided a site plan is approved that provides a significant amount of other pedestrian-related amenities and the landscaping is incorporated elsewhere on site.

(g) Alternative landscape spacing under the recommendation of a landscape architect or arborist may be approved if spacing will ensure long-term landscape health and provide equivalent screening. (Ord. 622 § 4, 2016; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.43.090 Landscaping adjacent to public trails, utilities and other publicly used lands.

(1) All developments adjacent to publicly used trails and other public lands shall provide landscaping adjacent to and along the building facade that faces the trail or land at the rate of at least one tree per 50 feet of facade. Exceptions may be made for those developments meeting Section IV.F of the City’s Design Guidelines and Standards.

(2) All development shall provide, at a minimum depending upon the intensity of use to be screened, Type III landscape screening from public areas, etc., to reduce off-site visual impacts. The applicant shall propose the type of landscaping to be provided for approval by the City Tree Official.

(3) Utility purveyors within the City of Woodinville are required to maintain and plant landscaping within their right-of-way as follows:

(a) Limited disturbance of vegetation to that necessary for safety and maintenance of transmission lines;

(b) Prune trees to direct growth away from utility lines using accepted pruning practices identified in the public tree care standards manual;

(c) Phase replacement of vegetation located improperly in the right-of-way;

(d) Use approved soil amending techniques to assure water retention and general tree health;

(e) Prune trees in an aesthetic manner according to the professional arboricultural specifications and standards;

(f) Select tree species recommended by the City’s Tree Board or Public Spaces Commission or as approved by the City Tree Official that are compatible with utility lines, and plant using adequate recommended spacing;

(g) Provide the City with a copy of the utility’s policies and guidelines regarding tree pruning; and

(h) Present the City with a tree-pruning plan at least one week prior to tree-pruning activities. (Ord. 675 § 15, 2018; Ord. 634 § 39, 2016; Ord. 622 § 4, 2016; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.43.100 Landscape and tree protection during construction. 

(1) Tree protection measures shall be installed prior to development activity or initiating vegetation removal on the site. These standards must be adhered to and included on grading and building plans as necessary. A pre-construction meeting on-site between the City Tree Official and the contractor shall be held prior to site disturbance.

(2) Tree protection measures shall include, but are not limited to, the following:

(a) Protective Barrier. A visible temporary protective fencing extending to the edge of the critical root zone of all retained trees shall be installed prior to site disturbance and maintained until removal is authorized by the City Tree Official. Visible signs shall be spaced no further than 25 feet along the entirety of the protective tree fence. Said signs must be approved by the City Tree Official and shall state at a minimum “Tree Protection Area, Entrance Prohibited” and provide the City phone number for code enforcement to report violations.

(b) Construction Activities. No excavation, storage, parking, construction vehicle access, dumping of toxic or polluted materials, or other potentially damaging activity is allowed within the protective barrier. If construction activity within the protective barrier is unavoidable, the City Tree Official may allow such activities approved by and the following activities under the supervision of a qualified tree professional retained by the applicant:

(i) Equipment may be authorized to operate within the critical root zone, if no other alternative is feasible. The areas adjoining the critical root zone of a tree shall be covered with mulch to a depth of at least six inches, or with plywood, metal or similar material in order to protect roots from damage caused by heavy equipment.

(ii) Utility trenches should be located outside of the critical root zone of trees. If utilities must be placed within the critical root zone, a qualified tree professional shall review the proposal to ensure the long-term viability of the trees. The work shall minimize root damage by excavating a two-foot-deep trench, at edge of critical root zone, to cleanly sever the tree roots.

(iii) Corrective pruning may be performed on protected trees in order to avoid damage from machinery or building activity.

(iv) Site grading within the critical root zone shall be the minimum necessary. The applicant’s qualified tree professional shall establish the maximum amount of earthwork allowable in the critical root zone that will not imperil the survival of the tree. Suitability of activities shall be based on construction techniques, erosion potential, damage to the critical root zone, stabilization techniques, and other similar factors.

(c) Exposed Soils. Trees and other vegetation to be retained shall be protected from erosion and sedimentation. Clearing activities shall be conducted so as to expose the smallest practical area of soil to erosion for the least possible time. To control erosion, it is encouraged that shrubs, groundcovers, and stumps be maintained on the individual lots, where feasible.

(d) Directional Felling. Directional felling of trees shall be used to avoid damage to trees designated for retention. Any trees designated for preservation, per the approved tree plan, that are significantly damaged or destroyed during felling of trees approved for removal shall be replaced per WMC 21.50.060.

(e) Additional Requirements. The City Tree Official may require additional protection measures that are consistent with accepted urban forestry practices. (Ord. 622 § 4, 2016; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.43.110 Landscaping – Irrigation. 

(1) Landscape areas shall have permanent irrigation systems unless the applicant can demonstrate that temporary irrigation will be sufficient to establish plantings within two growing seasons. Temporary irrigation systems shall be removed after 24 months or two growing seasons, whichever occurs first; provided, that the plantings are established;

(2) Areas of undisturbed existing vegetation or areas where existing site conditions assure adequate soil moisture for growth within the required landscape area shall have temporary irrigation systems only as required to sustain new plantings and shall be determined on a case-by-case basis by the Development Services Director; and

(3) Areas of undisturbed existing vegetation, low areas with existing high soil moisture conditions, or landscape areas consisting of drought-tolerant vegetation shall not have permanent irrigation systems. Permanent irrigation systems may be permitted within all other required landscape areas; provided such systems shall be designed by a licensed landscape architect or certified irrigation designer and with: 

(a) Moisture or precipitation sensors;

(b) Automatic timers set for operation during periods of minimum evaporation and that assure adequate moisture levels;

(c) Head-to-head spacing, if sprinkler heads are proposed;

(d) Pressure regulating devices;

(e) Backflow prevention devices; and

(f) Separate irrigation zones for:

(i) Turf and planting beds; and 

(ii) Other nondrought-tolerant species. (Ord. 622 § 4, 2016; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.43.120 Landscaping – Planting and installation. 

(1) Plant Size and Spacing. The required minimum size for any installed tree is two-inch caliper or greater and for any installed shrub is number two size. Trees shall be spaced appropriately based on the Woodinville Tree Species List.

(2) Installation. All required plantings shall be installed according to sound horticultural practices in a manner designed to encourage quick establishment and healthy plant growth.

(a) Placement. All supplemental trees shall be located at least seven feet from the property lines, and shall be installed in the ground and not in aboveground containers. 

(b) Grading. Berms shall not exceed a slope of two horizontal feet to one vertical foot (2:1).

(c) Soil Specification. Soils in planting areas shall have adequate porosity to allow root growth and adequate drainage. Compacted soils shall be loosened to a minimum depth of 24 inches or to the depth of the largest plant root ball, whichever is greater. Imported topsoils shall be tilled into existing soils to prevent a distinct soil interface from forming. Existing soils shall be augmented with a two-inch layer of fully composted organic material rototilled a minimum of six inches deep.

(d) Soil Fertility. The organic content of soils in any planting area shall be as necessary to provide adequate nutrient and moisture-retention levels for the establishment of plantings. Additional fertilization shall be the minimum necessary.

(e) Mulch. Landscape areas shall be covered with at least two inches of mulch to minimize evaporation. Mulch shall consist of materials such as yard waste, sawdust, bark or wood chips, and/or organic compost. All mulches shall be kept at least six inches away from the trunks of shrubs and trees.

(f) Grass and groundcover areas shall contain at least two inches of composted organic material at finish grade.

(g) Protection. All required trees must be protected from potential damage by adjacent uses and development, including parking and storage areas. Protective devices such as bollards, wheel stops, trunk guards, and root guards, shall be required as needed to protect required trees.

(3) Supervision. A qualified tree professional, as defined in WMC 21.11.190, shall be on-site during any site work affecting preserved trees.

(4) Timing. Landscaping shall be installed prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the project or project phase. The time limit for compliance may be extended to allow installation of landscaping during the next planting season or deferred due to diseased soil or pest infestation. A determination shall be made at the discretion of the City Tree Official. Deferred installation shall be secured with a performance bond pursuant to Chapter 15.42 WMC and WMC 21.43.140. (Ord. 634 § 40, 2016; Ord. 622 § 4, 2016; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.43.130 Landscape maintenance.

(1) The following maintenance requirements apply to all landscaping planted or preserved consistent with this chapter:

(a) Responsibility for Regular Maintenance. The applicant, landowner, or successors in interest shall be responsible for regular maintenance of landscaping and trees. Maintenance of all landscaping installed as part of a development project within the right-of-way shall be the responsibility of the abutting property owner unless alternative conditions are approved by the City. Maintenance of the vegetation and mulch within an LID facility installed as part of a development project within the right-of-way shall be the responsibility of the abutting property owner unless alternative conditions are approved by the City.

(b) Replacement. Planting materials that are dead shall be removed and replaced in-kind by the property owner, unless necessary for vegetation thinning. Plantings shall be replaced within three months or during the next planting season if the loss does not occur in a planting season.

(c) Maintenance Duration. All landscaping and trees shall be maintained for the life of the project. A maintenance guarantee pursuant to Chapter 15.42 or 21.60 WMC shall be secured for a period of three years following the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or plat recording.

(d) Non-native Invasive and Noxious Plants. It is the responsibility of the property owner to remove non-native invasive plants and noxious plants from the vicinity of any tree or other vegetation planted or preserved consistent with this chapter. Removal must be performed in a manner that will not harm the tree or other vegetation that the City has required to be planted or protected.

(e) Pruning. All landscape materials and trees shall be pruned as necessary to maintain a healthy growing condition, to prevent primary limb failure, and to maintain adequate sight distance. Topping or pruning to the extent that would constitute tree removal as defined in Chapter 21.11 WMC is prohibited. If a required tree smaller than six inches in diameter-at-breast-height is topped, it must be replaced. If a tree six inches or larger in diameter-at-breast-height is topped, the property owner may be subject to enforcement actions pursuant to WMC 21.50.140. Trees may be windowed or limbed up using best management practices. This method of tree pruning shall maintain the health of the tree.

(f) Landscape areas shall be kept free of weeds, trash, and debris.

(g) Maintenance of the vegetation and mulch within an LID facility installed as part of a development project within the right-of-way shall be the responsibility of the abutting property owner unless alternative conditions are approved by the City. (Ord. 634 § 41, 2016; Ord. 622 § 4, 2016; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.43.140 Bonds – Security.

(1) Performance Bond. A financial guarantee in the form of bond, cash deposit, or assignment of funds shall be submitted prior to issuance of any construction permits with landscaping improvements. The performance bond shall be equal to 150 percent of the estimated total cost of landscaping, including labor and materials. Prior to release of the performance bond, a maintenance and defect guarantee shall be in place.

(2) Maintenance Bond. Maintenance bonds or other appropriate security (including letters of credit and set-aside letters) shall be required for a period of three years after the planting or transplanting of vegetation to insure proper installation, establishment and maintenance. (Ord. 622 § 4, 2016; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.43.150 Penalties.

In accordance with enforcement regulations of Chapters 1.06 and 21.50 WMC, any person violating these regulations shall be subject to civil penalty procedures and fines. Each tree removed or damaged shall be considered a separate violation. (Ord. 622 § 4, 2016; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


Chapter 21.44  PARKING AND CIRCULATION

Sections:

21.44.010    Purpose.

21.44.020    Applicability.

21.44.030    Minimum off-street parking requirements by use.

21.44.040    Off-street parking plan design standards.

21.44.050    Reductions to parking requirements.

21.44.060    Bicycle parking requirements.

21.44.070    Loading space requirements.

21.44.080    Stacking spaces for drive-through facilities.

21.44.090    Transit and carpool/vanpool provisions.

21.44.100    Pedestrian circulation and access.

21.44.110    Electric vehicle (EV) charging stations.

21.44.120    Off-street parking construction standards.


21.44.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide adequate off-street parking, increase traffic safety, maintain smooth traffic flow, reduce demand for parking by encouraging alternative means of transportation including public transit, carpool/vanpool and bicycles, and increase pedestrian mobility in urban areas. These standards are also designed to achieve safe and efficient vehicular and nonmotorized circulation and reduce visual impact of parking lots. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.44.020 Applicability.

(1) General. All new construction, expansion of an existing use, or a change of use shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter.

(a) An expansion to an existing use shall include adding or increasing the footprint (size) or internal floor area, floors and/or mezzanines to an existing building. In the case where an expansion is proposed, the provisions of this chapter only apply to the expansion area.

(b) In a case where a change of use is proposed, the provisions of this chapter only apply if the proposed use has a higher parking requirement than the previous permitted use.

(2) Unspecified Parking Standards. If a parking requirement for a land use is not specified, the Development Services Director shall establish the minimum requirement based on a study of the nearest comparable parking demand. In the study, the applicant shall provide sufficient information to demonstrate that the parking demand for a specific land use will be satisfied. Parking studies shall be prepared by a professional engineer with expertise in traffic and parking analyses, unless an equally qualified individual is authorized by the Development Services Director.

(3) Shell Building Permits. When the City receives a shell building permit application, off-street parking requirements shall be based on the possible tenant improvements or uses authorized by the zone designation and compatible with the limitation of the shell permit. In industrial developments, a minimum of 20 percent of gross floor area shall be assumed as office when calculating parking requirements. When the range of possible uses result in different parking requirements, the Development Services Director will establish the amount of parking based on a likely range of uses. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.44.030 Minimum off-street parking requirements by use.

(1) Minimum Required. Off-street parking areas shall contain the minimum number of parking stalls as stipulated in Table 21.44.030.

(2) Calculation. Off-street parking ratios shall be based on the usable or net square footage of floor area exclusive of nonoccupiable areas. Nonoccupiable areas include, but are not limited to, building maintenance areas, storage areas, closets, stairs, elevators, hallways, or restrooms. If the formula for determining the number of off-street parking stalls results in a fraction, the number of off-street parking stalls shall be rounded to the nearest whole number with fractions of 0.50 or greater rounding up and fractions below 0.50 rounding down.

(3) Maximum Distance. Where the off-street parking areas do not abut the buildings they serve, the maximum distance as measured from the nearest building entrance shall be as follows:

(a) For all commercial, industrial and public uses, at least a portion of parking areas shall be located within 500 feet.

(b) For all single detached dwellings, the parking stalls shall be located on the same lot they are required to serve.

(c) For all other residential dwellings, at least a portion of parking areas shall be located within 100 feet from the building(s) they are required to serve.

(d) For all nonresidential uses permitted in residential zones, the parking stalls shall be located on the same lot they are required to serve and at least a portion of parking areas shall be located within 150 feet from the nearest building entrance they are required to serve.

Table 21.44.030 – Minimum Parking Requirements  

	Land Use	Minimum Parking Spaces Required

	21.21.030 Residential Land Uses

	Single-family detached	2 stalls per dwelling

	Multifamily (apartment, townhouse)	1 stall per unit, plus 1 stall per 4 units for guest parking

	Accessory dwelling unit	1 additional stall

	21.21.040 Recreational/Cultural Land Uses

	Sports club	1 stall per 300 square feet

	Places of public assembly (including, but not limited to, churches, temples and synagogues)	1 stall per 5 fixed seats, or 1 stall per 50 square feet of gross floor area used for assembly without fixed seats

	21.21.050 General Services Land Uses

	All general and personal service uses	1 stall per 300 square feet

	Exceptions:	Funeral home/crematory	1 stall per 50 square feet of chapel area

	 	Daycare I	2 stalls per facility

	 	Daycare II	2 stalls per facility, plus 1 stall for each 20 children

	 	Hotel, motel, and bed and breakfast	1.1 stalls per room

	 	Automotive repair or service	1 stall per 500 square feet of indoor repair areas

	 	Medical/veterinary clinics	1 stall per 300 square feet of office, labs and examination rooms

	 	Nursing, personal care facility and community residential facility (CRF)	1 stall per 4 beds

	 	Hospital	1 stall per bed

	 	Elementary and middle/junior high schools	1 stall per classroom, plus 1 stall per 50 students

	 	High schools	Per parking study

	 	Vocational schools	1 stall per classroom, plus 1 stall per 5 students

	 	Specialized instruction schools	1 stall per classroom, plus 1 stall per 2 students

	21.21.060 Institutional Land Uses

	All institutional uses	1 stall per 300 square feet

	Exceptions:	Public agency or utility yard	1 stall per 300 square feet of offices, plus 1 stall per 1,000 square feet of indoor storage or repair areas

	 	Public agency archives	1 stall per 1,000 square feet of storage area, plus 1 stall per 50 square feet of waiting/reviewing areas

	 	Courts	3 stalls per courtroom, plus 1 stall per 50 square feet of fixed seat or assembly areas

	 	Police facility	Per parking study

	 	Fire facility	Per parking study

	21.21.070 Business Services Land Uses

	All business services uses	1 stall per 300 square feet

	Exceptions:	Construction and trade	1 stall per 300 feet of office, plus 1 stall per 3,000 square feet of storage area

	 	Warehousing and storage	1 stall per 1,000 square feet

	 	Self-service storage	1 stall per 3,500 square feet of storage area

	 	Heavy equipment repair	1 stall per 1,000 square feet of indoor repair areas

	21.21.080 Retail/Wholesale Land Uses

	All retail trade uses or wholesale trade mixed retail	1 stall per 300 square feet

	All wholesale trade uses	1 stall per 1,000 square feet

	Exceptions:	Gasoline service stations without grocery	3 stalls per facility, plus 1 per service bay

	 	Gasoline service stations with grocery, no service bays	1 stall per facility, plus 1 stall per 300 square feet of store

	 	Bulk retail (including furniture and home furnishings)	1 stall per 500 square feet

	 	Restaurants	1 stall per 75 square feet in dining and lounge area

	 	Tasting rooms	1 stall per 75 square feet in tasting area*

	21.21.090 Manufacturing Land Uses

	All manufacturing uses	1 stall per 1,000 square feet

	Exceptions:	Winery/brewery/distillery	1 stall per 1,000 square feet of manufacturing, plus 1 stall per 75 square feet of tasting area and retail*

	21.21.100 Resource Land Uses

	Resource uses	Per parking study

	21.21.110 Regional Land Uses

	Regional uses	Per parking study

*    Unless clearly delineated with a permanent, physical barrier, the entire area used for tasting and sales shall be designated as tasting area.

(4) Maximum allowable parking spaces shall be 110 percent of the minimum number of parking spaces required. An applicant may request a modification of the maximum number of parking spaces by providing a study that substantiates the parking demand. Said study shall be prepared by a qualified professional approved by the Development Services Director. (Ord. 634 § 42, 2016; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.44.040 Off-street parking plan design standards.

(1) Parking Stall Dimensions. The minimum parking stall and aisle dimensions are identified below for surface parking lots and for structured parking lots. For parking angles other than those shown on the chart, the minimum parking stall and aisle dimensions shall be determined by the Development Services Director. Figure 21.44.040(1) identifies the different dimensions in the tables. No compact stalls are permitted.

Figure 21.44.040(1) – Parking Stall and Aisle Dimensions
[IMAGE]


(a) Surface Parking Lots. When parking stalls are located in a surface parking lot, the following parking stall and aisle dimensions in Table 21.44.040(1)(a) shall apply:

Table 21.44.040(1)(a) – Dimensional Requirements for Surface Parking Lots  

	A	B	C	D	E

	Parking Angle	Stall Width	Curb Length	Stall Depth	Aisle Width

	One-Way	Two-Way

	0°	9 feet	22.5 feet	22.5 feet	12 feet	20 feet

	45°	9 feet	12.5 feet	19 feet	12 feet	20 feet

	60°	9 feet	11 feet	20.5 feet	18 feet	20 feet

	90°	9 feet	9 feet	18 feet	24 feet	24 feet

(b) Structured Parking. When parking stalls and aisles are located entirely within structured parking, the following parking stall and aisle dimensions in Table 21.44.040(1)(b) shall apply. Structural columns may encroach up to six inches in a parking stall; provided, that placement does not interfere with door swing or maneuverability in and out of the stall.

 

Table 21.44.040(1)(b) – Dimensional Requirements for Structured Parking  

	A	B	C	D	E

	Parking Angle	Stall Width	Curb Length	Stall Depth	Aisle Width

	One-Way	Two-Way

	0°	8.5 feet	22.5 feet	22.5 feet	12 feet	20 feet

	45°	8.5 feet	12 feet	19 feet	12 feet	20 feet

	60°	8.5 feet	10 feet	20 feet	18 feet	20 feet

	90°	8.5 feet	8.5 feet	18 feet	24 feet	24 feet

(2) Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided for parking facilities pursuant to Chapter 21.43 WMC.

(3) Clearance Area. Any parking stalls abutting a landscaped area shall provide an additional 12 inches above the minimum stall width requirement to provide a place to step other than in the landscaped area. The additional width shall be separated from the adjacent parking stall by a parking stall division stripe.

(4) Parking Lot Lighting. Adequate lighting shall be provided for safety of traffic and pedestrian circulation on the site, pursuant to WMC 21.40.190. Lighting shall be designed to minimize direct illumination of abutting properties and adjacent streets. The Development Services Director shall have the authority to waive the requirement to provide lighting.

(5) Residential Parking. Tandem or end-to-end parking is allowed in residential developments. Driveways crossing required setback areas may be used for parking when serving single detached dwellings but shall not be considered for purposes of calculating required parking. Apartment/townhome developments may have tandem parking areas for each dwelling unit but shall not combine parking for separate dwelling units in tandem parking areas.

(6) No dead-end alley may provide access to more than eight required off-street parking stalls.

(7) Off-street parking and access shall be designed using standards set forth in Washington State regulations for barrier free facilities. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.44.050 Reductions to parking requirements.

(1) Parking in Mixed-Use and Multiple-Tenant Projects. In commercial and/or industrial mixed-use and multiple-tenant projects which contain at least three land uses per Table 21.44.030 and contain a minimum of 30,000 square feet of gross floor area, the required minimum parking may be determined using the following formula:

(a) Primary use, i.e., that with the largest proportion of total floor area within the development, at 100 percent of the minimum vehicle parking required for that use;

(b) Secondary use, i.e., that with the second largest proportion of total floor area within the development, at 85 percent of the minimum vehicle parking required for that use;

(c) Tertiary use, i.e., that with the third largest proportion of total floor area within the development, at 75 percent of the minimum vehicle parking required for that use;

(d) All other uses at 65 percent of the minimum vehicle parking required for that use.

(e) The following uses in mixed-use or multi-tenant projects shall not qualify for a reduction and shall be calculated at 100 percent of the minimum vehicle parking required:

(i) Restaurants;

(ii) Tasting rooms; and

(iii) Residential uses.

(2) Shared Parking Facilities. The amount of off-street parking may be reduced by an amount determined by the Development Services Director when shared parking facilities for two or more uses are proposed, provided:

(a) The total parking area exceeds 5,000 square feet;

(b) The parking areas are designed and developed as a single on-site common parking facility, or as a system of on-site and off-site facilities, if all facilities are connected with improved pedestrian facilities and no building or use involved is more than 800 feet from the furthest shared facility;

(c) The amount of the reduction shall not exceed 10 percent for each use, unless:

(i) The normal hours of operation for each use are separated by at least one hour; or

(ii) A parking demand study is prepared by a professional traffic engineer documenting that the hours of actual parking demand for the proposed uses will not conflict and that uses will be served by adequate parking if shared parking reductions are authorized;

(iii) The Development Services Director will determine the amount of reduction; provided, that the total number of parking stalls in the common parking facility is not less than the minimum required stalls for any single use.

(d) A covenant, written contract, or agreement for shared parking between the cooperating property owners is approved by the Development Services Director. The agreement shall include a site plan showing the stalls that are part of this agreement. This covenant or contract must be recorded with the County as a deed restriction on the title to all applicable properties and cannot be modified or revoked without the authorization of the Development Services Director; and

(e) If any requirements for shared parking are violated, the affected property owners must provide a remedy satisfactory to the Development Services Director or provide the full amount of required off-street parking for each use, in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.

(3) Parking Study. An applicant may request up to a 50 percent reduction of the minimum number of required parking stalls through a parking demand study. The study shall be prepared by a professional traffic engineer approved by the Development Services Director. At minimum, the study shall contain the following information:

(a) Parking utilization data collected from the site or similar sites that show the parking counts during peak days and times;

(b) Hours of operation and number of employees or customers;

(c) Parking generation rates as determined by the Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE) or other professional parking manual;

(d) Details of any on-site parking management programs or transit incentives;

(e) Access to transit, bike routes, or other methods of transportation and utilization rates of these alternatives; and

(f) A calculation of parking generation for all uses for average and peak hours based on data from subsections (3)(a) through (e) of this section.

(4) Frequent Transit Service Parking Reduction. The Development Services Director may reduce the number of required off-street parking stalls when one or more scheduled transit routes provide service within 660 feet of the site. Developments using this parking reduction shall provide transit shelters if transit routes adjoin the site. The amount of reduction shall be based on the number of scheduled transit trips between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. each business day up to a maximum reduction as follows:

(a) Four percent for each trip serving institutional, business services, and manufacturing land uses up to a maximum of 30 percent; and

(b) Two percent for each run serving recreational/cultural, general services and retail/wholesale land uses, up to a maximum of 20 percent. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.44.060 Bicycle parking requirements.

(1) Minimum Stalls Required. In any development required to provide six or more vehicle parking stalls, bicycle parking shall be provided as follows:

Table 21.44.060(1) – Minimum Bicycle Parking and Storage Requirements  

	Use	Parking	Lockers/Enclosed Storage

	21.21.030 Residential Land Uses

	Multifamily (apartment, townhouse)	1 stall per 20 units	1 stall per 2 units, unless garages are provided for each unit

	21.21.070 Business Service Land Uses

	All business service uses	1 stall per 5,000 square feet	1 stall per 10,000 square feet

	21.21.080 Retail/Wholesale Land Uses

	All retail trade	1 stall per 2,000 square feet	1 stall per 4,000 square feet

	Restaurants and tasting rooms	1 stall per 2,000 square feet	1 stall per 4,000 square feet

	All other uses	1 stall per 20,000 square feet	1 stall per 40,000 square feet

(a) Design. Bicycle parking shall be bike rack or locker-type parking facilities unless otherwise specified and shall be designed to allow either a bicycle frame or wheels to be locked to a structure attached to the pavement.

(b) Location. Bicycle parking facilities shall be located within 100 feet of the building entrance and located in safe, visible areas that do not impede pedestrian or vehicle traffic flow, and shall be well lit for nighttime use.

(c) Bicycle Parking Reductions. The Development Services Director may reduce bike rack parking facilities when it is demonstrated that bicycle activity will not occur at that location. For multifamily developments, a reduction may be granted if shared indoor storage facilities are available to all residents.

(d) Additional Bicycle Parking Required. The Development Services Director may require additional stalls when it is determined that the use or its location will generate a high volume of bicycle activity. Such a determination will include but not be limited to the following uses:

(i) Park/playfield;

(ii) Library/museum/arboretum;

(iii) Elementary/secondary school;

(iv) Sports clubs; or

(v) Retail business (especially when located along a developed or projected bicycle trail or designated bicycle route). (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.44.070 Loading space requirements. 

(1) Every nonresidential building, excluding self-service storage facilities, shall provide loading spaces in accordance with the table below:

Table 21.44.070(1) – Loading Space Requirements  

	Gross Floor Area	Required Number of Loading Spaces

	10,000 – 40,000 square feet	1

	40,001 – 70,000 square feet	2

	70,001 – 100,000 square feet	3

	100,001 – 140,000 square feet	4

	140,001 – 200,000 square feet	5

	200,001 – 260,000 square feet	6

	For each additional 140,000 square feet	1 additional

(2) Each loading space required by this section shall be a minimum of 10 feet wide, 30 feet long, and have an unobstructed vertical clearance of 14 feet six inches, and shall be surfaced, improved and maintained as required by this chapter. Loading spaces shall be located so that trucks shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicle traffic movement or project into any right-of-way. All loading space areas shall be separated from required parking areas and shall be designated as truck loading spaces.

(3) Any loading space located within 100 feet of areas zoned for residential use shall be screened and operated as necessary to reduce noise and visual impacts. Noise mitigation measures may include architectural or structural barriers, beams, walls, or restrictions on the hours of operation.

(4) Multistory self-service storage facilities shall provide two loading spaces, and single-story facilities one loading space, adjacent to each building entrance that provides common access to interior storage units. Each loading berth shall measure not less than 25 feet by 12 feet with an unobstructed vertical clearance of 14 feet six inches, and shall be surfaced, improved and maintained as required by this chapter. Any floor area additions or structural alterations to a building shall be required to provide loading space or spaces as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.44.080 Stacking spaces for drive-through facilities. 

(1) Stacking Space. Stacking spaces with direct access to a service window shall be provided for drive-through facilities. A stacking space shall be a minimum of eight feet by 20 feet and located to prevent any vehicles from extending onto the right-of-way, or interfering with any pedestrian circulation, traffic maneuvering, or other parking areas. Stacking spaces for drive-through or drive-in uses may not be counted as required parking spaces.

(2) Minimum Required. Uses providing drive-up or drive-through services shall provide vehicle stacking spaces as follows:

(a) For each drive-up window of a bank/financial institution, business service, espresso stand, or other drive-through use not listed, a minimum of four stacking spaces shall be provided; and

(b) For each service window of a drive-through restaurant, a minimum of seven stacking spaces shall be provided. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.44.090 Transit and carpool/vanpool provisions.

(1) All institutional, business services, and manufacturing land uses shall be required to reserve one parking stall of every 20 required stalls for carpool/vanpool parking as follows:

(a) The parking stalls shall be located closer to the primary employee entrance than any other employee parking except handicapped;

(b) Reserved areas shall have markings and signs indicating that the stall is reserved; and

(c) Parking in reserved areas shall be limited to vanpools and carpools established through ride share programs by public agencies and to vehicles meeting minimum rideshare qualifications set by the employer.

(2) Dimensional Standards. All stalls shall have a minimum vertical clearance of seven feet three inches to accommodate van vehicles if designated vanpool/carpool parking stalls are located in a parking structure.

(3) All uses which are located on an existing transit route and are required under the computation for required off-street parking stalls in WMC 21.44.030 to provide more than 200 parking stalls may be required to provide transit shelters, bus turnout lanes or other transit improvements as a condition of permit approval. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.44.100 Pedestrian circulation and access. 

(1) All uses, except single-family detached homes, shall provide pedestrian access onto the site. Pedestrian access points shall be provided at all pedestrian arrival points to the development including the property edges, adjacent lots, abutting street intersections, crosswalks, and at transit stops. Pedestrian access shall be located as follows:

(a) Access points at property edges and to adjacent lots shall be coordinated with existing development to provide circulation patterns between developments; and

(b) Residential developments shall provide links between cul-de-sacs or groups of buildings to allow pedestrian access from within the development and from adjacent developments to activity centers, parks, common tracts, open spaces, schools or other public facilities, transit stops and public streets;

(2) Pedestrian walkways shall form an on-site circulation system that minimizes the conflict between pedestrians and traffic at all points of pedestrian access to on-site parking and building entrances. Pedestrian walkways shall be provided when the pedestrian access point or any parking stall is more than 75 feet from the building entrance or principal on-site destination and as follows:

(a) All developments which contain more than one building shall provide walkways between the principal entrances of the buildings;

(b) All nonresidential buildings set back more than 100 feet from the public right-of-way shall provide for direct pedestrian access from the building to buildings on adjacent lots; and

(c) Pedestrian walkways across parking areas shall be located as follows:

(i) Walkways running parallel to the parking rows shall be provided for every four rows. Rows without walkways shall be landscaped or contain barriers or other means to encourage pedestrians to use the walkways; and

(ii) Walkways running perpendicular to the parking rows shall be no further than 20 parking stalls. Landscaping, barriers or other means shall be provided between the parking rows to encourage pedestrians to use the walkways;

(3) Pedestrian access and walkways shall meet the following minimum design standards:

(a) Access and walkways shall be well lit and physically separated from driveways and parking stalls by landscaping, berms, barriers, grade separation or other means to protect pedestrians from vehicular traffic;

(b) Access and walkways shall be a minimum of 60 inches of unobstructed width and meet the surfacing standards in the most current Transportation Infrastructure Standards and Specifications (TISS);

(c) Access shall be usable by mobility impaired persons and shall be designed and constructed to be easily located by the sight impaired pedestrian by either grade change, texture or other equivalent means;

(d) A crosswalk shall be required when a walkway crosses a driveway or a paved area accessible to vehicles;

(e) Wherever walkways are provided, raised crosswalks or speed bumps shall be located at all points where a walkway crosses the lane of vehicle travel; and

(4) Blocks in excess of 900 feet shall be provided with a crosswalk at the approximate midpoint of the block. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.44.110 Electric vehicle (EV) charging stations.

(1) Electric Vehicle Charging Station Stalls. Where provided, electric vehicle charging stations shall be subject to the following provisions.

(2) Minimum Parking Requirements. An electric vehicle charging station stall may be included in the calculation for minimum required parking stalls that are required pursuant to other provisions of code.

(3) Location and Design Criteria. The provision of electric vehicle parking will vary based on the design and use of the primary parking lot. Where provided, parking for electric vehicle charging purposes is required to include the following:

(a) Signage. Each charging station stall shall be posted with signage indicating the stall is only for electric vehicle charging purposes. Days and hours of operations shall be included if time limits or tow away provisions are to be enforced. Examples of signage include:

Figure 21.44.110(3) – Electric Vehicle Signage Examples
[IMAGE]


(b) Maintenance. Charging station equipment shall be maintained in all respects, including the functioning of the charging equipment. A phone number or other contact information shall be provided on the charging station equipment for reporting when the equipment is not functioning or other problems are encountered.

(c) Accessibility. Where charging station equipment is provided within an adjacent pedestrian circulation area, such as a sidewalk or accessible route to the building entrance, the charging equipment shall be located so as not to interfere with accessibility requirements of WAC 51-50-005.

(d) Lighting. Where charging station equipment is installed, adequate site lighting shall exist, unless charging is for daytime use only.

(e) Notification. Information on the charging station, identifying voltage and amperage levels and any time of use, fees, or safety information.

(4) Accessible Electric Vehicle Charging Stations. Where electric vehicle charging stations are provided in parking lots or parking garages, accessible electric vehicle charging stations shall be provided at same rate required by Washington State regulations for barrier-free facilities.

(5) Accessible electric vehicle charging stations should be located in close proximity to the building or facility entrance and shall be connected to a barrier-free accessible route of travel. It is not necessary to designate the accessible electric vehicle charging station exclusively for the use of disabled persons. Below are two options for providing for accessible electric vehicle charging stations:

Figure 21.44.110(4) 1 – Off-Street Accessible Electric Vehicle Charging Station – Option 1
[IMAGE]


Figure 21.44.110(4) 2 – Off-Street Accessible Electric Vehicle Charging Station – Option 2
[IMAGE]


(6) On-Street Electric Vehicle Charging Stations. On-street electric vehicle charging stations may be allowed as part of a development, subject to the City’s Infrastructure Standards as adopted in WMC 12.09.010, and as approved by the Public Works Director. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.44.120 Off-street parking construction standards. 

(1) Offstreet parking areas shall have dustfree, allweather surfacing. Parking areas shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the City of Woodinville Transportation Infrastructure Standards and Specifications. 

(2) Grading work for parking areas shall meet the requirements of Chapter 15.05 WMC. Drainage and erosion/sedimentation control facilities shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 13.05 WMC. (Ord. 634 § 43, 2016; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


Chapter 21.45 RECREATION AND TRAIL CORRIDORS

Sections:

21.45.010    On-site recreation – Maintenance of recreation space or dedication.

21.45.020    On-site recreation – Fee in lieu of recreation space.

21.45.030    On-site recreation – Acceptance criteria for fee in lieu of recreation space.

21.45.040    On-site recreation – Determination of fee in lieu of space.

21.45.050    On-site recreation – Collection and expenditure of fee in lieu of space.

21.45.060    Trail corridors – Applicability.

21.45.070    Trail corridors – Design standards.

21.45.080    Trail corridors – Maintenance of trail corridors/improvements.


21.45.010 On-site recreation – Maintenance of recreation space or dedication. 

(1) Unless the recreation space is dedicated to City of Woodinville pursuant to subsection (2) of this section, maintenance of any recreation space retained in private ownership shall be the responsibility of the owner(s) or other separate entity (homeowner’s association) capable of long-term maintenance and operation in a manner acceptable to the Parks and Recreation Director, provided:

(a) A provision for the maintenance of the recreation space must be provided in the covenants of the development, or in some other binding document; and

(b) Any recreation space not maintained to the City’s standards shall be maintained by the City at the homeowners’ expense. 

(2) Recreation space may be dedicated as a public park when the following criteria are met:

(a) The dedicated land provides one or more of the following: 

(i) Shoreline access,

(ii) Regional trail linkages,

(iii) Habitat linkages,

(iv) Recreation facilities, or

(v) Heritage sites.

(b) The entire dedicated area is located less than one mile from the project site. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.45.020 On-site recreation – Fee in lieu of recreation space.

If on-site recreation space is not provided, the applicant shall pay a fee in lieu of actual recreation space. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.45.030 On-site recreation – Acceptance criteria for fee in lieu of recreation space.

City of Woodinville acceptance of this payment is discretionary, and may be permitted if:

(1) The proposed on-site recreation space does not meet the criteria of WMC 21.45.010(2); or

(2) The recreation space provided within a public park in the vicinity will be of greater benefit to the prospective residents of the development.

In the case of either subsection (1) or (2) of this section, the fee must be approved by the Development Services Director. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.45.040 On-site recreation – Determination of fee in lieu of space. 

(1) Fees provided in lieu of on-site recreation space shall be determined annually by the Parks and Recreation Director on the basis of the typical market value of the recreation space prior to development.

(2) Any recreational space provided by the applicant shall be credited towards the required fees. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.45.050 On-site recreation – Collection and expenditure of fee in lieu of space.

The fee in lieu of recreation space shall be:

(1) Paid to the City of Woodinville prior to issuance of building permits for all residential or mixed use development;

(2) Used by the City for the acquisition and improvement of City parks or public recreational facilities to serve the development; and 

(3) Expended through the City Council’s capital budget and program appropriations. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.45.060 Trail corridors – Applicability.

Trail easements shall be provided by any development, except for single detached residential permits, when such developments are located within any community or regional trail corridor identified by the Comprehensive Plan as a part of a local and/or regional trail systems. The residents or tenants of the development shall be provided access to the trail easement. The area of the trail easement is included in density and floor area calculations. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.45.070 Trail corridors – Design standards.

Trail design shall be reviewed by the Development Services Director for consistency with adopted standards for:

(1) Width of the trail corridor;

(2) Location of the trail corridor on the site;

(3) Surfacing improvements; and

(4) Use(s) permitted within the corridor. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.45.080 Trail corridors – Maintenance of trail corridors/improvements.

Maintenance of any trail corridor or improvements, retained in private ownership, shall be the responsibility of the owner or other separate entity capable of long-term maintenance and operation in a manner acceptable to the Parks and Recreation Director, provided:

(1) A provision for the maintenance of the recreation space must be provided in the covenants of the development, or in some other binding document; and

(2) Any recreation space not maintained to the City’s standards shall be maintained by the City at the homeowners’ expense. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


Chapter 21.50 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS – TREE PROTECTION

Sections:

21.50.010    Purpose and intent.

21.50.020    Applicability.

21.50.030    Exemptions.

21.50.040    City Tree Fund established.

21.50.050    Tree permit.

21.50.060    Minimum tree density.

21.50.070    Tree removal on single-family sites with no construction.

21.50.080    Tree removal for subdivisions or short subdivisions.

21.50.090    Tree removal in critical areas.

21.50.100    Supplemental tree planting requirements.

21.50.110    Alternative compliance.

21.50.120    Tree protection during construction.

21.50.130    Tree maintenance requirements.

21.50.140    Additional enforcement.


21.50.010 Purpose and intent.

(1) Introduction. Trees are integral to Woodinville’s community character and protect public health, safety, and general welfare. Protecting, enhancing, and maintaining healthy trees, groves of trees and vegetation are key community values. The City’s goal is to achieve an overall tree canopy coverage of 40 percent. Healthy trees and vegetation contribute to Woodinville’s quality of life through reducing soil erosion and land instability; improving air quality; providing protection from severe weather conditions; providing habitat and food supply for fish and wildlife; enhancing property values and contributing to Woodinville’s natural beauty, aesthetic character, and livability.

(2) Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to establish processes and standards to provide for the retention, protection, preservation, replacement, proper maintenance, and use of significant trees and woodlands located in the City of Woodinville. The intent of this chapter is to:

(a) Maintain and enhance canopy coverage provided by native trees for their benefits;

(b) Preserve and enhance the City of Woodinville’s environmental, economic, and community character with mature landscapes;

(c) Promote site development practices that work to avoid removal, destruction, or disturbance to significant trees, groves of trees, and the City’s natural vegetation;

(d) Mitigate the consequences of required tree removal in land development through on- and off-site native or naturalized tree replacement to achieve an overall healthy tree canopy cover of 40 percent citywide over time;

(e) Encourage tree retention efforts by allowing flexibility with respect to certain other development requirements;

(f) Implement the goals and objectives of the City’s Comprehensive Plan;

(g) Implement the goals and objectives of the State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA). (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016; Ord. 589 § 2, 2016)


21.50.020 Applicability.

(1) General. Tree removal, trimming, or vegetation clearing within the City limits shall be conducted in accordance to this chapter regardless of whether a permit is required.

(2) Permit Required. Removal of trees not exempted in WMC 21.50.030 shall require a tree permit. Tree permits shall be processed as a Type I project permit pursuant to Chapter 21.83 WMC. 

(3) Trimming and Maintenance. Tree trimming, pruning, or maintenance conducted in conformance with WMC 21.50.130 shall not require a tree permit. 

(4) Removal of heritage or specimen trees shall not be permitted except under the City’s Heritage Tree Program. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016; Ord. 589 § 2, 2016)


21.50.030 Exemptions.

(1) Exemptions. The following activities are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:

(a) Any tree that poses a high or extreme risk according to ISA tree risk assessment to life or property, due to a storm event such as a wind storm or ice storm, may be removed without first obtaining a permit. The party removing the tree shall document the high or extreme risk assessment and contact the City Tree Official within seven days of removal to provide documentation of threat for approval of exemption. 

(b) Trees may be removed by the City or utility provider in situations involving immediate danger to life or property, interruption of services provided by a utility, or if the necessary utility clearance pruning will remove greater than 50 percent of the tree canopy.

(c) A nursery or tree farm owner may remove trees that are grown for commercial Christmas or landscape tree sales.

(d) Removal of trees with a diameter-at-breast-height of less than two inches.

(e) Removal of nonsignificant trees (diameter-at-breast-height of less than six inches) with a combined maximum of diameter-at-breast height of less 40 inches within a 12-month period. 

(f) Trees within the public right-of-way, and trees removed as part of a City construction project, shall be subject to the requirements of Chapter 2.24 WMC.

(g) Remodels or maintenance activities that do not remove trees and do not alter or expand to the footprint of a structure, provided tree protection measures are in place consistent with this chapter.

(h) Tree removal in multifamily, commercial, industrial, and public/institutional zones (R-12 through R-48, CBD, NB, GB, I, or TB zones), except for heritage and specimen trees, shall be subject to Chapter 21.43 WMC. 

(i) Tree trimming, pruning, or maintenance conducted in conformance with WMC 21.50.130. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016; Ord. 589 § 2, 2016)


21.50.040 City Tree Fund established.

(1) Fund Established. A City Tree Fund is established for the collection of any funds used for the purpose and intent set forth by this chapter.

(2) Funding Sources. The following funding sources may be allocated to the City Tree Fund: payments received in lieu of supplemental plantings; civil penalties collected pursuant to this chapter; agreed-upon restoration payments or settlements in lieu of penalties; sale of trees or wood from City property; donations and grants for tree purposes; sale of seedlings by the City; and other monies allocated by City Council.

(3) Funding Purposes. The Public Spaces Commission shall provide recommendations with each budget to the City Council for approval of how the fund will be allocated. The City shall use money received pursuant to this section for the following purposes:

(a) Acquiring, maintaining, and preserving wooded areas within the City;

(b) Planting and maintaining trees within the City;

(c) Identification and maintenance of heritage trees;

(d) Establishment of a holding public tree nursery;

(e) Urban forestry education;

(f) Urban forest canopy coverage assessment; or

(g) Other purposes relating to tree and woodland protection and enhancement as determined by the City Council. (Ord. 675 § 16, 2018; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016; Ord. 589 § 2, 2016)


21.50.050 Tree permit.

(1) When Required. Unless otherwise exempted in WMC 21.50.030, a development project requiring a construction permit or any proposal to remove trees subject to this chapter shall obtain a tree permit. 

(2) Submittal Materials. The following materials are required to obtain a tree permit. The City Tree Official shall have the authority to waive certain application materials if the item is not necessary to evaluate a specific proposal for consistency with this chapter. 

(a) Tree permit application, completed and signed by the property owner.

(b) Site plan prepared by an engineer, surveyor, arborist, or other qualified professional, showing the following:

(i) Location of all existing and proposed structures, construction limits, easements, utility lines, and construction protection barriers consistent with WMC 21.43.120;

(ii) Location of all trees above three inches at diameter-at-breast-height (DBH) within 50 feet of the construction limits, including size and species;

(iii) Identification of all trees to be removed and/or relocated;

(iv) Location of temporary tree protection fencing, signage, material storage, silt fencing, and other construction details as necessary;

(v) Existing and proposed topography at five-foot intervals; and

(vi) Location of all critical areas and buffers.

(c) Replanting plan, showing the following:

(i) Location of proposed structures and retained trees;

(ii) Location of proposed replacement trees and/or vegetation, including species, size, and spacing;

(iii) Location and design of other landscape restoration measures; 

(iv) A planting schedule that indicates species, quantity, size, spacing, and tree density calculations for replanted trees; and

(v) Irrigation system, including location and specifications; and

(d) Arborist report or professional recommendation, evaluating the following:

(i) Inventory of all impacted trees, including size, species, dripline, and critical root zone. The inventory must include all trees proposed for removal, any trees within 50 feet of the construction limits on the subject property and any neighbor’s trees with canopy overhanging the construction limits. Written evaluation of anticipated impacts to tree health and viability resulting from construction, including any impacts to critical root zones;

(ii) Information on compliance with coverage requirements, including a calculation of tree canopy or replanting schedule;

(iii) Evaluation of impacts on dripline and critical root zone of trees on adjoining properties;

(iv) Suggested location and species of supplemental trees, maintenance, and planting specifications consistent with WMC 21.50.100;

(v) Recommendations on tree protection measures consistent with WMC 21.43.120 and corresponding to the site plan in subsection (2)(b) of this section;

(vi) Special instructions for working within the protection area, including, but not limited to, hand-digging, tunneling, root pruning, and minimizing grade changes; 

(vii) Information on any required on-site supervision during construction;

(viii) Information on maintenance including duration, benchmarks for success, cost estimates, and financial guarantees/bonding; and

(ix) If applicable, assessment and designation of a hazard or nuisance tree. (Ord. 589 § 2, 2016)


21.50.060 Minimum tree density. 

(1) Minimum Tree Density Required. Any proposal subject to a tree permit pursuant to WMC 21.50.050(1), except as provided for single-family lots subject to WMC 21.50.070, shall be required to meet minimum tree density of 70 tree credits per acre for residential zone R-1 and 50 tree credits per acre for residential zones R-4 through R-8. Minimum tree density shall be calculated by multiplying the required tree density by the lot area. Nonresidential uses are required to meet the landscape standards pursuant to Chapter 21.43 WMC.

(2) Area Calculation. For the purposes of calculating required minimum tree density, right-of-way, and areas to be dedicated as right-of-way, shall be excluded from the lot area used for calculation of tree density.

(3) Tree Density Credit Calculation. The minimum tree density credits are calculated through a tree credit calculation using Table 21.50.060(3). The tree credit calculation is the sum of all retained existing trees and any supplemental tree plantings. If a site falls below the minimum tree density with existing trees, supplemental planting shall be required pursuant to WMC 21.50.090. The tree credit value shall correspond with diameter-at-breast-height in Table 21.50.060(3):

Table 21.50.060(3) – Tree Credit Calculation 

	Tree Diameter Inches	Total Credit

	Minimum	Maximum

	2.0	2.9	0.50

	3.0	5.9	0.75

	6.0	8.9	1.5

	9.0	14.9	2.0

	15.0	17.9	3.0

	18.0	23.9	4.0

	24.0	35.9	6.0

	36.0 and above	8.0

(a) Tree diameter inches shall be determined in diameter-at-breast-height, which is the diameter of the tree as measured four and one-half feet off the ground for existing trees and six inches off the ground for new plantings. The measured tree diameter shall be its size at the time of permit submittal.

(b) For multi-trunk trees splitting at the ground level, the tree diameter inches shall be determined by taking the square root of the sum of all squared stem caliper.

(c) Existing trees transplanted to an area on the same site may count toward the required density if approved by the City Tree Official based on transplant specifications provided by a qualified tree professional that will ensure a good probability for survival.

(d) Trees shall be planted in accordance with WMC 21.50.100. On sites where additional plantings are not feasible due to spacing or other site constraints, an applicant may satisfy the minimum tree density requirement through payment into the City Tree Fund pursuant to WMC 21.50.100(4)(f). (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016; Ord. 589 § 2, 2016)


21.50.070 Tree removal on single-family sites with no construction.

(1) Sites with No Construction. This section shall apply only to lots located within single-family residential zones (R-1 through R-8) where no exterior construction or demolition, grading, material storage, or other development activity is proposed, and no development permit application is pending or approved for the subject property.   

(2) Performance Requirements. Tree removal on single-family residential zone sites with no construction shall meet the following:

(a) On any single legal parcel, up to two trees may be removed per 12-month period or four trees per 24-month period. Tree removal shall comply with minimum tree density requirements of this chapter or complete replacement plantings; provided, that no replacement planting or minimum tree density compliance is required for the first two tree removal permits issued under this subsection, regardless of any change in ownership, after December 1, 2016, provided the following is met: 

(i) Tree removal does not include heritage or specimen trees; and

(ii) Tree removal is located outside of all critical areas and its buffer, NGPA or shared ownership tracts subject to WMC 21.50.090.

(b) Removal of more than two trees per 12-month period or four trees per 24-month period shall only be permitted under the discretion of the Development Services Director for the purposes of tree thinning or removal of dead, nuisance, hazard trees. Tree thinning is the selective removal of trees to improve health of remaining trees, and shall apply to existing trees planted less than seven feet on-center or at the recommendation of an arborist. Tree removal shall require compliance with the minimum tree density or replacement at a rate of three trees per each removed tree. 

(3) Future Development. Any development triggering a construction permit on a single-family lot shall be required to comply with this chapter. If tree removal under this section results in a site that falls below the minimum tree density, supplemental plantings meeting the requirements of WMC 21.50.100 shall be required. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016; Ord. 589 § 2, 2016)


21.50.080 Tree removal for subdivisions or short subdivisions.

(1) Subdivisions and Short Subdivisions. This section applies to tree removal associated with applications for subdivision or short subdivision. 

(2) Performance Requirements. Tree removal on lots undergoing subdivision or short subdivision shall meet all of the following:

(a) The overall site must achieve the minimum tree density pursuant to WMC 21.50.060.

(b) The site shall retain at least 10 percent of the tree density credits of all existing healthy, viable significant trees within the property boundaries prior to subdivision or construction work. 

(i) This requirement may be reduced for preservation of groves with five or more trees consistent with WMC 21.50.110. 

(ii) In certain circumstances where tree removal results in less than 10 percent of tree density credits retained due to site conditions, infrastructure conflicts, or other conditions beyond the applicant’s control, the City Tree Official may grant an exception. The applicant shall pay for the remaining tree density credits at double the rate specified in WMC 21.50.100(4)(f) in addition to any other payment required by this chapter.

(c) Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy or plat recording, the proponent shall provide a final as-built tree plan and an agreement to maintain and replace all trees that are required by the City.

(d) The applicant shall submit a preservation and maintenance agreement for trees located in common areas, including streets, drainage features, parks, or other jointly maintained spaces. The document shall be approved and recorded prior to occupancy, recording, or final inspection.

(e) When forest or critical areas are preserved in a Native Growth Protection Area (NGPA) tract pursuant to WMC 21.51.150, any remaining tree credits within the NGPA above the required minimum tree density may be applied towards the entire subdivision. The remaining tree credits will be equally divided among the total number of lots. Where the tree credits in the NGPA have not been determined, the minimum tree density shall apply to each lot within the subdivision.

(f) A final arborist report shall be submitted at the end of the project verifying the total trees removed, retained, and planted, prior to release of the performance bond.

(g) Street trees shall be planted at an average of 25 feet on center consistent with WMC 2.24.100.

(h) Subdivisions that abut arterial streets shall provide additional tree plantings at a rate of one tree per 25 feet in the street setback for the arterial. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016; Ord. 589 § 2, 2016)


21.50.090 Tree removal in critical areas.

(1) Tree Removal in Critical Areas. Within critical areas or critical area buffers, only hazard, nuisance, or dead trees may be removed or trimmed. If more than two trees are removed, the City Tree Official may require submittal of a critical areas alteration pursuant to Chapter 21.50 WMC. 

(a) Tree removal proposed within a NGPA or an area under common ownership shall meet tree density requirements pursuant to WMC 21.50.060. The applicant shall obtain signatures from a majority of owners who hold interest in the land or if applicable, approval from the homeowner’s association.

(b) The priority action for a tree proposed for removal is to create a “snag” or wildlife tree. If creating a snag or wildlife tree is not feasible, the felled tree shall be left in place. 

(c) Supplemental trees shall be planted consistent with WMC 21.50.060 and 21.50.100. The requirements may be modified if a qualified tree professional determines to the satisfaction of the City Tree Official that equal or better habitat function and values can be achieved through the following:

(i) Native understory plantings are installed;

(ii) Invasive species removal is conducted;

(iii) A coverage analysis is submitted stating that the replanted trees will have equal or better coverage than the trees removed within 15 years; and

(iv) A replanting plan is submitted. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016; Ord. 589 § 2, 2016)


21.50.100 Supplemental tree planting requirements.

(1) Supplemental Trees. Sites and activities requiring supplemental trees shall be planted to achieve the required minimum tree density. Tree density credits for supplemental trees shall be calculated pursuant to WMC 21.50.060.

(2) Tree Species. The tree species chosen for the supplemental plantings shall either be trees of the same mix of species as the removed trees or mix of species listed in the Woodinville Plant Species List. Trees should be selected and sited to produce a hardy and drought-resistant landscape area. 

(3) Tree Size and Spacing. The required minimum size for any supplemental tree is two-inch caliper or greater for deciduous species and six feet or taller for coniferous species. Trees shall be spaced appropriately based on the Woodinville Plant Species List.

(4) Tree Location. In designing a development and in meeting the required minimum tree density, the trees shall be planted in the following order of priority:

(a) Adjacent to preserved groves, critical areas or its buffers;

(b) Adjacent to stormwater facilities, within entrance landscaping, traffic islands, and other common areas in residential subdivisions that have enough area to support mature trees of the planted species;

(c) Site perimeter and/or required landscaped setbacks;

(d) Individual building lots;

(e) Off site, when room is not available on site to ensure long-term health and viability for the trees. Trees shall be planted at another location within 2,500 feet of the subject site where the trees were removed and as approved by the City Tree Official; and

(f) If trees cannot be planted in accordance with subsections (4)(a) through (e) of this section, the applicant may satisfy the requirements by paying into the City Tree Fund $500.00 per tree credit. 

(5) Installation. All required trees shall be installed according to sound horticultural practices in a manner designed to encourage quick establishment and healthy plant growth.

(a) Timing. All trees shall be installed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or plat recording. The time limit for compliance may be extended to allow installation during the next planting season or deferred due to diseased soil or pest infestation. A determination shall be made at the discretion of the City Tree Official. Deferred installation shall be secured with a performance bond pursuant to Chapter 15.42 or 21.60 WMC.

(b) Placement. All supplemental trees shall be located at least seven feet from the property lines, and shall be installed in the ground and not in aboveground containers. 

(c) Grading. Berms shall not exceed a slope of two horizontal feet to one vertical foot (2:1).

(d) Soil Specification. Soils in planting areas shall have adequate porosity to allow root growth and adequate drainage. Compacted soils shall be loosened to a minimum depth of 24 inches or to the depth of the largest plant root ball, whichever is greater. Imported topsoils shall be tilled into existing soils to prevent a distinct soil interface from forming. 

(e) Soil Fertility. The organic content of soils in any planting area shall be as necessary to provide adequate nutrient and moisture-retention levels for the establishment of plantings. Additional fertilization shall be the minimum necessary.

(f) Irrigation. Irrigation system shall be designed to ensure plant establishment. Irrigation shall be designed to conserve water by using best management techniques available, including, but not limited to: drip irrigation; moisture sensors; automatic controllers; spacing designed to minimize overspray; and separate zones for different planting areas.

(i) Within rights-of-way and common areas, permanent irrigation with an automatic controller shall be installed for tree plantings. Temporary irrigation, providing sufficient water to ensure plant survival and establishment, may be approved at the discretion of the City Tree Official. 

(ii) For individual residential lots, the applicant may choose permanent irrigation, temporary irrigation, or irrigation by hand. 

(iii) Modifications to the irrigation requirement may be approved by the City Tree Official for less water-intensive strategies such as planting native vegetation that does not require supplemental irrigation, low impact development, established native plant material, or where natural appearance is acceptable or desirable to the City. 

(g) Mulch. Required plantings shall be covered with two inches or more of organic mulch to minimize evaporation and runoff. Mulch shall consist of materials such as yard waste, sawdust, bark or wood chips, and/or organic compost. All mulches shall be kept at least six inches away from the trunks of shrubs and trees.

(h) Protection. All required trees must be protected from potential damage by adjacent uses and development, including parking and storage areas. Protective devices such as bollards, wheel stops, trunk guards, and root protection barriers shall be required in the right-of-way or in common areas as needed to protect required trees. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016; Ord. 589 § 2, 2016)


21.50.110 Alternative compliance.

(1) Additional Density Credits. The applicant may earn additional tree density credits through alternate measures or procedures that will be equal to or better than the provisions in this chapter. If the City Tree Official determines that the proposal meets the purpose and intent of the code through alternative compliance, the Official may grant tree density credits for alternative measures.

(2) Criteria. The City Tree Official shall review each alternative compliance request based on the following criteria:

(a) The alternative is designed to ensure the long-term health and maturity of the tree; 

(b) The alternative will provide increased environmental benefits including natural function and value beyond the standard requirements;

(c) If applicable, the alternative will enhance or improve critical areas or NGPA areas;

(d) The alternative will not increase soil erosion, slope instability, nor create drainage issues; and

(e) The alternative provides equivalent or greater compliance with the tree code.

(3) Qualifying Activities. The following activities or strategies may qualify for alternative compliance:

(a) Retention of specimen or heritage trees and groves of at least five trees may earn up to an additional 10 percent of the tree credits of the subject tree or grove.

(b) Green roofs may earn up to one tree credit for every 200 square feet up to a maximum of 10 tree credits.

(c) Planting 200 square feet of understory landscaping within the canopy area of each supplemental tree may earn up to 15 percent of the tree credits for the subject tree. Understory landscaping must include shrubs that will mature to a full range of understory plant heights, 18 inches to 15 feet tall or greater. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016; Ord. 589 § 2, 2016)


21.50.120 Tree protection during construction.

(1) Tree protection measures shall be installed prior to development activity or initiating tree removal on the site. These standards must be adhered to and included on grading and building plans as necessary. A pre-construction meeting on site between the City Tree Official and the contractor shall be held prior to site disturbance.

(2) Tree protection measures shall include, but are not limited to, the following:

(a) Protective Barrier. A visible temporary protective fencing extending to the edge of the critical root zone of all retained trees shall be installed prior to site disturbance and maintained until removal is authorized by the City Tree Official. Fences shall be constructed of chain link and be at least four feet high, unless other type of fencing is authorized by the City Tree Official. Visible signs shall be spaced no further than 25 feet along the entirety of the protective tree fence. Said signs must be approved by the City Tree Official and shall state at a minimum “Tree Protection Area, Entrance Prohibited” and provide the City phone number for code enforcement to report violations.

(b) Construction Activities. No excavation, storage, parking, construction vehicle access, dumping of toxic or polluted materials, or other potentially damaging activity is allowed within the protective barrier. If construction activity within the protective barrier is unavoidable, the City Tree Official may allow such activities approved by and the following activities under the supervision of a qualified tree professional retained by the applicant:

(i) Equipment may be authorized to operate within the critical root zone, if no other alternative is feasible. The areas adjoining the critical root zone of a tree shall be covered with mulch to a depth of at least six inches, or with plywood, metal or similar material in order to protect roots from damage caused by heavy equipment.

(ii) Utility trenches should be located outside of the critical root zone of trees. If utilities must be placed within the critical root zone, a qualified tree professional shall review the proposal to ensure the long-term viability of the trees. The work shall minimize root damage by excavating a two-foot-deep trench, at edge of critical root zone, to cleanly sever the tree roots.

(iii) Corrective pruning may be performed on protected trees in order to avoid damage from machinery or building activity.

(iv) Site grading within the critical root zone shall be the minimum necessary. The applicant’s qualified tree professional shall establish the maximum amount of earthwork allowable in the critical root zone that will not imperil the survival of the tree. Suitability of activities shall be based on construction techniques, erosion potential, damage to the critical root zone, stabilization techniques, and other similar factors. 

(c) Exposed Soils. Trees and other vegetation to be retained shall be protected from erosion and sedimentation. Clearing activities shall be conducted so as to expose the smallest practical area of soil to erosion for the least possible time. To control erosion, it is encouraged that shrubs, ground covers, and stumps be maintained on the individual lots, where feasible.

(d) Directional Felling. Directional felling of trees shall be used to avoid damage to trees designated for retention. Any trees designated for preservation, per the approved tree plan, that are significantly damaged or destroyed during felling of trees approved for removal shall be replaced per WMC 21.50.060.

(e) Additional Requirements. The City Tree Official may require additional tree protection measures that are consistent with accepted urban forestry practices. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016; Ord. 589 § 2, 2016)


21.50.130 Tree maintenance requirements.

(1) The following maintenance requirements apply to all trees planted or preserved consistent with this chapter:

(a) Responsibility for Regular Maintenance. The applicant, landowner, or successors in interest shall be responsible for the regular maintenance of the trees. Maintenance of all landscaping installed as part of a development project within the right-of-way shall be the responsibility of the abutting property owner unless alternative conditions are approved by the City.

(b) Replacement. Trees that are dead and removed shall be replaced in-kind by the property owner, unless the site meets the tree density credit. Plantings shall be replaced within three months or during the next planting season if the loss does not occur in a planting season. 

(c) Maintenance Duration. Trees shall be maintained for the life of the development. A maintenance guarantee pursuant to Chapter 15.42 or 21.60 WMC shall be secured for a period of three years following the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or plat recording.

(d) Maintenance of Preserved Grove. Any applicant who has a grove of trees identified for preservation on a site plan shall provide prior to occupancy or plat recording the legal instrument acceptable to the City to ensure preservation of the grove and associated vegetation. The agreement may be extinguished if the City Tree Official determines that preservation is no longer appropriate.

(e) Non-Native Invasive and Noxious Plants. It is the responsibility of the property owner to remove non-native invasive plants and noxious plants. Removal must be performed in a manner that will not harm the tree or other vegetation that the City has required to be planted or protected.

(f) Pesticides, Herbicides, and Fertilizer. The use of pesticides, herbicides, or fertilizer shall be by special approval of the City Tree Official only.

(2) Planting Plans and Utility Plans. Planting plans and utility plans shall be coordinated. In general, the placement of trees should be adjusted based on the tree’s mature size and to the location of utility routes both above and below ground. 

(3) Tree Pruning. Topping or pruning to the extent that would constitute tree removal as defined in Chapter 21.11 WMC is prohibited. If a supplemental tree smaller than six inches in diameter-at-breast-height is topped, it must be replaced pursuant to the standards in WMC 21.50.100. If a supplemental tree six inches or larger in diameter-at-breast-height is topped, the property owner may be subject to enforcement actions pursuant to WMC 21.50.140. Trees may be windowed or limbed up using best management practices. This method of tree pruning shall maintain the health of the tree.

(4) Pruning Techniques. The following techniques for healthy pruning shall be used. No permit is required for pruning; however, all pruning should be done under the direction of a qualified tree professional and adhere to the ANSI A300 pruning standards.

Table 21.50.130(4) – Pruning Techniques 

	Healthy Pruning Techniques	Improper Pruning Techniques

	Crown Cleaning – removing dead, dying, diseased, crowded, weakly attached, or low-vigor branches in a manner that should not reduce the canopy.	Topping – the cutting of a trunk or main branch to the point where there is no branch large enough and vigorous enough to become the new leader.

	Crown Thinning – selective removal of branches throughout the crown of the tree to improve interior light and air. Remaining branches should be well-distributed and balanced.	Stripping – removing the branches from the inner section of the trunk or branch. Can cause structural imbalances and potential failure.

	Crown Raising – removal of the lower branches of the tree to provide height clearance, typically 8 feet for pedestrians and 16 feet for vehicles.	Imbalance – removing portions of the tree and creating an imbalance in the structure of the tree. Can cause cracking damage from the wind through twisting or weak new growth.

	Windowing – removing several branches symmetrically within an area of the tree’s crown to enhance views.	Excessive Pruning – removing portions of the tree to a point where it can kill the tree. Can invite decay and disease. 

(Ord. 589 § 2, 2016)


21.50.140 Additional enforcement.

In addition to the enforcement provisions set forth in Chapters 1.06 and 21.12 WMC, the following shall apply to enforcement of the tree code:

(1) Tree Restoration. A restoration plan and arborist report shall be submitted that results in a site condition that, to the greatest extent practical, equals the site condition that would have existed in the absence of the violation(s). The restoration plan shall be prepared in accordance with WMC 21.50.070 and include supplemental trees equal to the number of tree credits illegally removed.

(a) In the event the violators cannot restore the unlawfully removed or damaged trees due to site conditions as determined by the Director, the violators shall make payment to the City Tree Fund. Unless otherwise determined to base the restoration costs on appraised value, the amount paid will be the City’s unit cost for a restoration tree as calculated in WMC 21.50.100(4)(f). 

(b) Violators of this chapter or of a permit issued thereunder shall be responsible for restoring unlawfully damaged areas in conformance with this chapter.

(c) In cases where the violator intentionally or knowingly violated this chapter or committed previous violations of this chapter, restoration costs shall be paid at the discretion of the Director. Restoration costs may be based on the City-appraised tree value of the subject trees in which the violation occurred, utilizing the industry standard trunk formula method in the current edition of “Guide for Plant Appraisal.” If diameter of removed tree is unknown, determination of the diameter size shall be made by the Director by comparing size of stump and species to similar trees in similar growing conditions. The amount of costs above the approved restoration plan will be paid into the City Tree Fund.

(2) Failure to Restore or Pay Fines. The City shall not approve any application for a subdivision, short subdivision, or any other development permit or approval or issue a certificate of occupancy for property on which a violation of this chapter has occurred until the violation is cured by restoration or other means accepted by the Director and by payment of any penalty imposed for the violation. (Ord. 685 § 22, 2019; Ord. 589 § 2, 2016)


Chapter 21.51 CRITICAL AREAS

Sections:

21.51.010    Purpose.

21.51.020    Applicability.

21.51.030    Critical area maps and inventories.

21.51.040    Complete exemptions.

21.51.050    Nonconforming development.

21.51.060    Public agency and utility critical areas exceptions.

21.51.070    Reasonable use permits.

21.51.080    Subdivisions and density calculations within critical areas.

21.51.090    Disclosure and notice on title.

21.51.100    Critical area determination.

21.51.110    Critical areas report requirement.

21.51.120    Mitigation requirements.

21.51.130    Maintenance, monitoring, and contingency.

21.51.140    Critical area markers and signs.

21.51.150    Native growth protection areas and designations on site plans.

21.51.200    Critical aquifer recharge areas – Designation.

21.51.210    Critical aquifer recharge areas – Development standards.

21.51.220    Critical aquifer recharge areas – Permitted activities.

21.51.230    Critical aquifer recharge areas – Critical areas report additional requirements.

21.51.250    Geologically sensitive areas – Designation.

21.51.260    Geologically sensitive areas – Erosion and landslide hazards.

21.51.270    Geologically sensitive areas – Seismic hazard areas and other hazard areas.

21.51.300    Wetlands – Designation and rating.

21.51.310    Wetlands – Development standards.

21.51.320    Wetlands – Permitted activities.

21.51.330    Wetlands – Critical areas report additional requirements.

21.51.340    Wetlands – Mitigation.

21.51.350    Frequently flooded areas – Designation.

21.51.360    Development requirements within frequently flooded areas.

21.51.370    Repealed.

21.51.380    Frequently flooded areas – Critical areas report additional requirements.

21.51.400    Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas – Designation.

21.51.410    Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas – Development standards.

21.51.420    Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas – Permitted activities.

21.51.430    Fish and wildlife habitat conservation area – Critical areas report additional requirements.

21.51.440    Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas – Mitigation.

21.51.450    Repealed.

21.51.460    Repealed.

21.51.470    Repealed.

21.51.480    Repealed.

21.51.490    Repealed.


21.51.010 Purpose.

(1) Introduction. The purpose of this chapter is to designate and classify ecologically critical areas, to protect these areas and their functions and values, and to supplement the development regulations contained within the Woodinville Municipal Code through best available science and additional controls as required by the Growth Management Act. Additionally, this chapter is intended to encourage development that meets the goals and policies of the City of Woodinville Comprehensive Plan. These goals include:

(a) Goal E-1: To preserve and enhance aquatic and wildlife habitat.

(b) Goal E-2: To protect the public from natural hazards resulting from disturbance of the environment.

(c) Goal E-3: To protect and improve water quality and management of water quantity.

(d) Goal E-4: To promote the preservation of Woodinville’s Northwest woodland character.

(e) Goal E-5: To protect air quality, and proactively address climate change adaptation and mitigation.

(f) Goal E-6: To promote environmental sustainability and conservation in Woodinville and the Puget Sound region.

(2) Scope. Critical areas include critical aquifer recharge areas, geologically sensitive areas, wetlands, frequently flooded areas, and fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas. The City of Woodinville recognizes that critical areas provide a variety of valuable and beneficial biological and environmental functions that benefit the City and its residents, but that some critical areas may pose a threat to public safety and property. The standards established in this chapter are intended to protect critical areas while providing property owners with reasonable use of their property. This chapter seeks to:

(a) Protect members of the public and public resources and facilities from injury, loss of life, property damage or financial loss due to flooding, erosion, landslides, seismic events, soil subsidence or steep slope failures;

(b) Maintain and protect healthy, functioning ecosystems through the protection of unique, fragile, and valuable elements of the environment, including ground and surface waters, wetlands, and fish and wildlife and their habitats, and conservation of the biodiversity of plant and animal species;

(c) Direct activities not dependent on critical areas resources to less ecologically sensitive areas and mitigate unavoidable impacts to critical areas by regulating alterations in and adjacent to critical areas;

(d) Prevent cumulative adverse environmental impact to water quality and availability, net loss of wetlands, streams, lakes, frequently flooded areas, and fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas;

(e) Meet the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program and maintain the City of Woodinville as an eligible community for Federal flood insurance benefits;

(f) Alert members of the public including, but not limited to, appraisers, owners, potential buyers, or lessees, to the development limitations of critical areas;

(g) Provide for public enjoyment of critical areas by encouraging, when feasible and sensible, multiple use of critical area buffers; and

(h) Serve as a basis for exercise of the City’s substantive authority under the State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA) and the City’s SEPA rules. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.51.020 Applicability.

(1) Compliance with This Chapter. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all land uses and activities in the City limits, and all persons within the City limits shall comply with the requirements of this chapter. No permit or authorization shall be approved or issued to alter the condition of any land, water, or vegetation, or to construct or alter any structure or improvement without first assuring compliance with the requirements of this chapter.

(2) Alterations. Any human activity that results or is likely to result in an impact upon the existing condition of a critical area or its buffer is an alteration that is subject to specific limitations as specified by this chapter. Alterations include, but are not limited to, grading, filling, channelizing, dredging, clearing (vegetation), construction, compaction, excavation, or any other activity that changes the character of the critical area. Alterations do not include walking, fishing, any other passive recreation, or other similar activities.

(3) Conflict of Provisions. When another provision of the Woodinville Municipal Code conflicts with this chapter or when the provisions of this chapter are in conflict, that provision which provides greater environmental protection to critical areas shall apply, unless specifically provided otherwise in this chapter or such provision conflicts with Federal or State laws or regulations.

(4) Forest Practices. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all forest practices over which the City has jurisdiction pursuant to Chapter 76.09 RCW and WAC Title 222. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.51.030 Critical area maps and inventories.

(1) Critical Areas Maps. The approximate location and extent of critical areas are shown on the City’s adopted critical areas maps. The latest critical areas maps are available from the Development Services Department. The maps do not provide a final critical area determination. Adopted critical areas maps shall include, but are not limited to, the current adopted version of the following:

(a) Federal Emergency Management Administration flood insurance rate maps;

(b) U.S. Geological Survey landslide hazard, seismic hazard, and volcano hazard maps;

(c) Washington Department of Natural Resources seismic hazard maps for Western Washington;

(d) Washington Department of Natural Resources slope stability map;

(e) National Wetlands Inventory;

(f) Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife Priority Habitat and Species maps;

(g) Other critical area maps adopted by the City of Woodinville, including the Critical Aquifers Recharge Areas map and Geologically Sensitive Areas map.

(2) Reference Only. Maps showing critical areas are to be used for guidance purposes only and may be continuously updated as new critical areas are identified. If there is a conflict among the maps, inventory and site-specific features, the actual presence or absence of the features defined as critical areas in this chapter shall govern. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.51.040 Complete exemptions.

(1) The following activities are exempt from the provisions of this chapter, provided they are otherwise consistent with other local, State, and Federal law requirements:

(a) Emergency actions necessary to prevent an immediate threat to public health, safety and welfare or that pose an imminent risk of damage to public or private property. Alterations undertaken pursuant to this subsection shall be reported to the City immediately. The impacted critical areas and their buffers shall be fully restored in accordance with a critical areas report and mitigation plan;

(b) Agricultural activities in existence before March 31, 1993, as follows:

(i) Mowing of hay, grass, or grain crops;

(ii) Tilling, dicing, planting, seeding, harvesting and related activities for pasture, food crops, grass seed, or sod if such activities do not take place on steep slopes;

(iii) Normal and routine maintenance of existing irrigation and drainage ditches not used by fish species and not draining directly into salmon-bearing water bodies; and

(iv) Normal and routine maintenance of farm ponds, fish ponds, manure lagoons and livestock watering ponds;

(c) Modifications to local collection and distribution utility lines, mains, equipment, appurtenances, including electric facilities with an associated voltage of 55,000 volts or less, not including substations; public sewer local collection; public water local distribution; natural gas; cable communications; or telephone facilities. Modifications to local collection and distribution utilities may be allowed in critical areas or their buffers, as follows:

(i) Normal and routine maintenance or repair of existing utility structures; and

(ii) Replacement, operation, repair, modification, installation, relocation, or construction when such facilities are located within an improved public road right-of-way or City-authorized private roadway;

(d) Maintenance, operation, repair or replacement of publicly improved roadways or recreation areas, provided any such alteration does not involve the expansion of structures or related improvements into previously unimproved areas;

(e) Removal of nonnative invasive species, limited to hand removal of nonnative invasive species, unless permits from affected regulatory agencies have been obtained for approved biological or chemical treatments;

(f) Passive recreation, educational and scientific research that does not degrade critical areas or buffers, such as fishing, hiking and bird watching, not including trail building or clearing. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.51.050 Nonconforming development.

(1) Nonconforming Developments. Alterations to legally established developments not conforming to critical areas, buffers, or setbacks pursuant to this chapter, including those approved under a reasonable use exception or variance may be permitted; provided, that the provisions of this chapter are met. Alterations shall include expansion, repair, modification, or replacement, but shall not include work where the alteration constitutes a substantial improvement under WMC 21.11.210.

(a) Single-family detached residences may be altered, provided all of the following are met:

(i) Expansion within a critical area buffer or building setback is limited to 1,000 square feet beyond the existing footprint;

(ii) No portion of the modification, addition, or replacement is located closer to or extends farther into the critical area or its buffer;

(iii) The proposal includes on-site mitigation to offset any impacts to critical areas consistent with the provisions of this chapter;

(iv) The proposal preserves the functions and values of wetlands, fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas, and their buffers; and

(v) The proposal will not significantly affect any landslide hazards on neighboring properties, stream bank stability, drainage capabilities, or flood potential.

(b) All other structures, except single-family detached residences, may be altered, provided all of the following are met:

(i) Expansion does not increase the existing footprint of the structure lying within a critical area buffer or building setback area;

(ii) No portion of the modification, addition, or replacement is located closer to or extends farther into the critical area or its buffer;

(iii) The proposal includes on-site mitigation to offset any impacts to critical areas consistent with the provisions of this chapter; and

(iv) The proposal will not significantly affect any landslide hazards on neighboring properties, fish and wildlife habitat, stream bank stability, drainage capabilities, and flood potential.

(c) Structures located within geologically sensitive areas that do not meet the development or design standards in WMC 21.51.260(1) and (3) and 21.51.270(1) may be maintained or repaired, provided all of the following are met:

(i) The maintenance or repair does not increase the footprint of the structure; and

(ii) The proposal does not increase risk to life or property as a result of the proposed maintenance or repair. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.51.060 Public agency and utility critical areas exceptions.

(1) General. If the application of this chapter would prohibit a development proposal by a public agency or public utility, the agency or utility may apply for a critical area exception pursuant to this section.

(a) The critical area exception shall be reviewed as a Type III project permit, pursuant to Chapters 21.80 through 21.89 WMC. The Hearing Examiner shall make a decision based on the following criteria:

(i) There is no other practical alternative to the proposed development with less impact on the critical area;

(ii) The application of this chapter would unreasonably restrict the agency’s or utility’s ability to provide services to the public;

(iii) Any impacts permitted to the critical area are mitigated in accordance with WMC 21.51.120 to the greatest extent possible;

(iv) The proposed development protects and/or enhances critical areas and buffer functions and values consistent with best available science; and

(v) The proposed development is consistent with other applicable regulations and requirements.

(b) This exception shall not allow the use of the following critical areas for regional retention/detention facilities except where the applicant clearly demonstrates that the facility will protect public health and safety or repair damaged natural resources:

(i) Type S stream and its buffers;

(ii) Category I or II wetland and its buffers with plant associations of infrequent occurrence; or

(iii) Category I or II wetland and its buffers, which provide critical or outstanding habitat for herons, raptors, or State or Federal designated endangered or threatened species unless clearly demonstrated by the applicant that there will be no impact on such habitat. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.51.070 Reasonable use permits.

(1) General. If the application of this chapter would deny all reasonable use of the property, the applicant may apply for a reasonable use permit pursuant to this section:

(a) The reasonable use permit shall be reviewed as a Type III project permit, pursuant to Chapters 21.80 through 21.89 WMC. The Hearing Examiner shall make a decision based on the following criteria:

(i) The application of this chapter would deny all reasonable use of the property;

(ii) The proposed development does not pose an unreasonable threat to the public health, safety, or welfare on or off the development proposal site;

(iii) Any alterations to the critical area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for reasonable use of the property;

(iv) Any impacts permitted to the critical area are mitigated in accordance with WMC 21.51.120 to the greatest extent possible;

(v) The proposed development protects critical areas and/or buffer functions and values consistent with best available science; and

(vi) The proposed development is consistent with other applicable regulations and requirements.

(b) Any authorized alteration of a critical area under this section shall be subject to conditions established by the Hearing Examiner to safeguard public health, safety, or welfare. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.51.080 Subdivisions and density calculations within critical areas.

(1) Intent. The intent of this section is to provide for the preservation of critical areas and their buffers, flexibility in design, and consistent treatment of different types of development proposals.

(2) Subdivisions in Critical Areas. The subdivision and short subdivision of land including landslide and erosion hazard areas, frequently flooded areas, wetlands, streams, and fish or wildlife habitat conservation areas shall be subject to the following:

(a) Land that is located wholly within a critical area or its buffer may not be divided.

(b) Land that is located partially within a critical area or its buffer may be divided; provided, that the developable portion of each new lot and its access is located outside of the critical area or its buffer. Each resulting lot shall meet the minimum lot size and have sufficient buildable area outside of, and will not affect, the critical area or its buffer; and

(c) Access roads and utilities serving the proposed subdivision or short subdivision may only be permitted within the critical area and its buffers if the City determines that no other feasible alternative exists and when consistent with this chapter.

(3) On-Site Density Credits. For single-family residential subdivisions and short subdivisions on sites with critical areas or buffers, on-site density credits may be transferred from the critical area to a developable site area. In some cases, the maximum density credits may not be attainable due to other site constraints including, but not limited to, acreage constraints of the developable site area.

(a) For sites where up to 50 percent of the site is constrained by critical areas, up to 100 percent of the density that could be achieved on the constrained area portion of the site can be transferred to the developable portion of the property.

(b) For sites that are over 50 percent constrained by critical areas, up to 50 percent of the density that could be achieved on the constrained area portion of the site can be transferred to the developable portion of the property.

(4) Density Transfer. On-site density transfer is subject to the following:

(a) The density credit can only be transferred within the development proposal site. The on-site density transfer provided for in this section shall not be applied to allow density from a constrained site to be transferred to an unconstrained parcel, lot, or site when combined with a constrained site by subdivision, binding site plan, boundary line adjustment, or other means of land assemblage or arrangement for development.

(b) No additional density is allowed over the base density of the underlying zone.

(c) The minimum lot size and other dimensional requirements of the underlying zoning classification may be reduced to accommodate the transfers in densities per the following table:

Table 21.51.080(4)(c) – Reduced Dimensional Standards  

	Zone	Minimum Lot Size	Maximum Building Coverage	Minimum Landscape Coverage	Lot Width at Street

	R-1	31,000 sf	15%	75%	100 ft/ 75 ft on cul-de-sac

	R-4	7,200 sf	35%	50%	60 ft

	R-6	5,000 sf	50%	25%	50 ft

	R-8	4,600 sf	55%	20%	30 ft

(d) All other applicable dimensional requirements pursuant to WMC 21.22.030 shall be met.

(e) The area to which the density is transferred shall not be constrained by another critical area regulation.

(f) No portion of the critical area shall be included as part of the minimum lot size.

(g) The lot sizes shall not be averaged pursuant to WMC 21.22.170.

(h) No panhandle lots are permitted.

(5) Except as allowed by WMC 21.34.100, in no event shall a lot be less in size than specified by subsection (4) of this section. (Ord. 634 § 44, 2016; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.51.090 Disclosure and notice on title.

(1) Disclosure. The applicant shall disclose to the City the presence of critical areas on the project area and any mapped or identifiable critical areas within 200 feet of the subject property.

(2) Notice. The owner of any property containing critical areas or buffers on which a development proposal is submitted, except a public right-of-way or the site of a permanent public facility, shall file for record with the King County Auditor a notice approved in form by the City. The notice shall state the presence of critical areas or buffers on the property, of the application of this chapter to the property, and that limitations on actions in or affecting such critical areas or buffers may exist. The notice shall run with the land and failure to provide such notice to any purchaser prior to transferring interest in the property shall be a violation of this chapter.

(3) Submittal of Proof. The applicant shall submit proof to the City that the notice has been filed prior to approval of a development proposal for the property or, in the case of subdivisions, short subdivisions, and binding site plans, at or before recording.

(4) Indemnity and Hold Harmless for Work in Landslide and Erosion Hazard Areas. Where development is proposed within landslide and erosion hazard areas, the applicant shall provide assurance, which at the City’s discretion, shall include one or more of the following:

(a) Liability insurance, including coverage for earth movement for the proposed development, naming the City as an additional insured under that liability insurance with respect to liability arising out of applicant’s activities; or

(b) An agreement indemnifying and holding harmless the City, which shall be recorded as covenant and noted on the face of the deed or plat. The agreement shall provide for liability insurance through a contractual liability endorsement to the applicant’s policy, to the extent reasonably available on the commercial market. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.51.100 Critical area determination.

(1) Determination. The City shall perform a critical area determination for any development permit application or other request for permission to proceed with an alteration on a site that includes a critical area or is within an identified critical area buffer. As part of the critical area determination, the City shall:

(a) Determine whether any critical area exists on the property and confirm its nature and type;

(b) Determine whether a critical areas report is required;

(c) Evaluate the critical areas report;

(d) Determine whether the development proposal is consistent with this chapter;

(e) Determine whether any proposed alteration to the critical area is necessary; and

(f) Determine if the mitigation and monitoring plans and bonding measures proposed by the applicant are sufficient to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, consistent with the goals, purposes, objectives, and requirements of this chapter.

(2) Appeals. The critical areas determination may be appealed pursuant to Chapter 21.85 WMC. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.51.110 Critical areas report requirement.

(1) General. An application for a development proposal that includes a critical area or its buffer shall include a critical areas report that uses the best available science to evaluate the proposal and all probable impacts.

(2) Waiver. The Director may waive the requirement for a report or specific contents of the report if the applicant demonstrates that:

(a) There will be no alteration of the critical area or its buffer;

(b) The development proposal will not have an impact on the critical area or its buffer in a manner contrary to the goals, purposes, objectives and requirements of this chapter; and

(c) The minimum standards required by this chapter are met.

(3) Report Format. The critical areas report shall be in the form of a written document. A critical areas report may be combined with any studies required by other laws and regulations. If necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter, additional information from the applicant may be required, separate from the critical areas report.

(4) Area Limits. If the development proposal will affect only a part of the development proposal site, the Director may limit the scope of the required special report to include only that part of the site that may be affected by the development.

(5) Report Contents. A critical areas report shall evaluate the proposed project area and critical areas within 200 feet of the project area or that have the potential to be affected by this proposal. A critical areas report shall include the following information:

(a) Existing conditions of the critical area, including an assessment of habitat and ecological functions and values;

(b) Assessment of the impacts of any alteration proposed for a critical area or buffer;

(c) A scale map of the project area. If only a portion of the development site has been mapped, the unmapped portion shall be clearly identified and labeled on the site plans. The site plans shall be attached to the notice on title required by WMC 21.51.090;

(d) Project narrative describing the proposal; anticipated temporary and permanent impacts to critical areas or their buffers; construction activities and sequencing; restoration, enhancement, or mitigation measures; and other relevant information; and

(e) Additional report requirements for each type of critical area or its buffer affected by the development proposal pursuant to WMC 21.51.230, 21.51.260, 21.51.270, 21.51.330, 21.51.380, and 21.51.430.

(6) Site and construction plans showing the following:

(a) Site diagrams, cross-sectional drawings;

(b) Slope gradients, and existing and final grade elevations at two-foot intervals;

(c) Type and extent of all critical areas and buffers on, adjacent to, or within 200 feet of, or that are likely to impact, the proposal;

(d) Location of springs, seeps, surface water runoff features, or other surface expressions of ground water on or within 200 feet of the project area;

(e) Proposed development, including the location of existing and proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and clearing limits with dimensions indicating distances to the critical area, if available; and

(f) Other drawings to demonstrate construction techniques and anticipated final outcomes.

(7) Mitigation. A description of proposed mitigation actions and mitigation site selection criteria. Mitigation shall be designed to achieve no net loss of ecological function consistent with WMC 21.51.120 and mitigation requirements for each type of affected critical area.

(8) Multiple Critical Areas Affected. Critical areas reports for two or more types of critical areas must meet the report requirements for each type of affected critical area.

(9) Previously Adopted Reports. A permit or approval sought as part of a development proposal for which multiple permits are required may adopt a previously approved critical areas report if:

(a) There is no material change in the development proposal since the prior review;

(b) There is no new information available that would change the evaluation of the critical area review of the site or particular critical area;

(c) The permit or approval under which the prior review was conducted has not expired, or if no expiration date exists, no more than five years have lapsed since the issuance of that permit or approval; and

(d) The prior permit or approval, including any conditions, has been met. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.51.120 Mitigation requirements.

(1) General. Mitigation, maintenance, and monitoring measures shall be in place to protect critical areas and buffers from alterations resulting from proposed development.

(2) Mitigation Measures. Mitigation shall be in kind and on site where feasible, and shall be designed to maintain and enhance ecological functions and values, and to prevent risk from hazards posed by the critical area. Mitigation measures shall evaluate goals and objectives of proposed mitigation relating to impact to functions and values. Review of best available science supporting the proposed mitigation is required.

(3) Mitigation Sequencing. When an alteration to a critical area is proposed, such alteration shall be avoided, minimized, or compensated for, as outlined by WAC 197-11-768, in the following order of preference:

(a) Avoiding the impact altogether by not taking a certain action or parts of actions;

(b) Minimizing impacts by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action and its implementation by using appropriate technology, or by taking affirmative steps to avoid or reduce impacts;

(c) Rectifying the impact by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the affected environment;

(d) Reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation and maintenance operations during the life of the action;

(e) Compensating for the impact by replacing or providing substitute resources or environments; and/or

(f) Monitoring the impacts and taking appropriate corrective measures. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.51.130 Maintenance, monitoring, and contingency.

(1) Maintenance and Monitoring. A maintenance and monitoring program shall be included as part of a mitigation plan. The program shall include the following, unless an alternative program is recommended under the guidance of a biologist and is approved by the City:

(a) Performance standards for mitigation or restoration sites, including:

(i) One hundred percent survival of installed vegetation and less than 10 percent of the mitigation area covered in invasive species within the first two years of planting;

(ii) At least 50 percent vegetation coverage for installed vegetation after three years or more;

(iii) Less than 20 percent of the mitigation area covered in reed canary grass, Himalayan blackberry, or other invasive species after three years or more;

(iv) No infestation of knotweed at any time during the duration of the program period;

(b) Contingency plan identifying a course of action and corrective measures to be taken if monitoring or evaluation indicates that the performance measures have not been met;

(c) A schedule for site monitoring, which includes at minimum one monitoring or inspection every 12 months;

(d) Monitoring period necessary to ensure that the performance standards have been met, not to be less than 10 years for forested or shrub wetland mitigation and no less than five years for all other mitigation projects; and

(e) Information on maintenance bonds or financial guarantees to ensure that the mitigation plan is implemented.

(2) Performance Guarantee. A performance bond or other security equal to or greater than 150 percent of the actual cost of mitigation shall be posted in a form acceptable to the City prior to issuance of construction permits. Actual costs shall include all labor and materials associated with the mitigation activity. The security shall be sufficient to guarantee that all required mitigation measures will be completed in a timely manner in accordance with this chapter.

(3) Maintenance Guarantee. A maintenance/monitoring bond or other security equal to or greater than 20 percent of the cost of mitigation shall be posted in a form acceptable to the City prior to final inspection, occupancy, or release of the performance bond, whichever comes first. The security shall be sufficient to guarantee satisfactory workmanship on, materials in and performance of or related to structures and improvements allowed or required by this chapter for a period of up to five years. The duration of maintenance/monitoring obligations shall be established by the Director, based upon the nature of the proposed mitigation, maintenance or monitoring, and the likelihood and expense of correcting mitigation or maintenance failures.

(4) Corrective Measures. Where monitoring reveals a significant deviation from predicted impacts or a failure of mitigation or maintenance measures, the applicant shall be responsible for appropriate corrective action which, when approved, shall be subject to further monitoring.

(5) Restoration. Performance and maintenance/monitoring bonds or other security shall also be required for restoration of a critical area or buffer not performed as part of a mitigation or maintenance plan, except that no security shall be required for minor stream restoration carried out pursuant to this chapter. The bond or other security shall be in a form and amount deemed acceptable by the Director.

(6) Time Limit. Performance and maintenance/monitoring bonds or other security authorized by this section shall remain in effect until the City determines, in writing, that the standards bonded for have been met.

(7) Obligation. Depletion, failure, or collection of security funds shall not discharge the obligation of an applicant or violator to complete required mitigation, maintenance, monitoring, or restoration. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.51.140 Critical area markers and signs.

(1) Survey Stakes. Permanent survey stakes delineating the boundary between the adjoining property and native growth protection area (NGPA) shall be set, using iron or concrete markers as established by current survey standards.

(2) When Required. Signage and fencing shall be required for all wetlands and fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas, unless otherwise specified in this chapter. The City shall determine if fencing and permanent signage is necessary to protect other types of critical areas. Signage and fencing shall be located along the outer boundary of a critical area buffer in order to protect the critical area.

(3) Permanent Signs. Signs shall be made of an enamel-coated metal face and attached to a metal post or other material of equal durability. Signs must be posted at an interval of 50 feet and must be maintained by the property owner in perpetuity. The sign shall follow the City’s adopted signage standard, be worded as follows or with alternative language as approved by the City:

Protected Critical Area

Do Not Disturb

Help protect and care for this area

Contact City of Woodinville 489-2754

(4) Fencing. Required fencing shall be constructed of permanent and durable materials. Fencing shall be designed so as to not interfere with species migration and shall be constructed in a manner that minimizes impacts to the critical areas and associated habitat. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.51.150 Native growth protection areas and designations on site plans.

(1) Tracts. A native growth protection area (NGPA) in the form of a tract shall be used to delineate and protect those critical areas and buffers listed below for development proposals including new construction, subdivisions, short subdivisions, and binding site plans. NGPA tracts shall be depicted or designated on all title documents and recorded for all affected lots.

(a) All geologically sensitive areas and buffers which are one acre or greater in size;

(b) All fish and wildlife conservation areas;

(c) All wetlands and buffers.

(2) Tract Interest. Any required NGPA tract shall be held in an undivided interest by each owner of a building lot within the development. This ownership interest shall pass with the ownership of the lot or shall be held by an incorporated homeowners’ association or other legal entity, which assures the ownership, maintenance, and protection of the tract.

(3) Site Plans. Site plans submitted as part of development proposals for construction permits shall include and delineate all critical areas, buffers, building setbacks, and native growth protection areas. If only a part of the development site has been mapped pursuant to WMC 21.51.030, the part of the site that has not been mapped shall be clearly identified and labeled on the site plans. The site plans shall be attached to the notice on title required by WMC 21.51.090.

(4) Easements. If a NGPA tract is not required in accordance with subsection (1) of this section, a NGPA in the form of an easement may be required over delineated critical areas to protect them in perpetuity.

(5) Recording. NGPAs shall be depicted or designated on the face of the plat or recorded drawing and on all title documents of record and shall be designated on the face of the plat or recorded drawing.

(6) Markers and Signage. Native growth protection areas shall be marked with critical area signage and/or fencing to protect wildlife corridors and to discourage human intrusion into the critical area pursuant to WMC 21.51.140.

(7) Mitigation and Restoration. Native growth protection areas may be enhanced as part of a mitigation or restoration project. The NGPA shall be designated as protected habitat for fish and wildlife and shall be left in its natural state (with the exception of mitigation to enhance habitat). Any downed trees shall remain in the NGPA to provide habitat for wildlife. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.51.200 Critical aquifer recharge areas – Designation.

(1) Definition. Critical aquifer recharge areas (CARAs) are those areas with a critical recharging effect on aquifers used for potable water as described in WAC 365-190-100. Due to soil infiltration conditions of these CARAs, they contribute significantly to the replenishment of ground water, and often have a high potential for contamination of ground water resources.

(2) Designation. Identification of CARAs shall be based on the City’s adopted critical aquifer recharge areas map pursuant to WMC 21.51.030. The critical aquifer recharge areas within the City limits have a medium to high susceptibility to ground water contamination and are not located in a sole source aquifer or wellhead protection area.

(3) Declassification. An applicant can request that the City declassify a specific area included in the map adopted under WMC 21.51.030. The request must be supported by a critical areas report that includes a hydrogeologic assessment. The request to declassify an area shall be reviewed by the Director following the procedure in WMC 21.51.100. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.51.210 Critical aquifer recharge areas – Development standards.

(1) Prohibited Activities. The following new uses and activities are not allowed in a critical aquifer recharge area:

(a) Mining of any type below the water table;

(b) Processing, storage, and disposal of radioactive substances;

(c) Hydrocarbon extraction;

(d) Commercial wood treatment facilities on permeable surfaces;

(e) Wrecking yards;

(f) Landfills for hazardous waste, municipal solid waste, or special waste; and

(g) On-site septic systems on lots smaller than one acre without a treatment system that results in effluent nitrate-nitrogen concentrations below 10 milligrams per liter. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.51.220 Critical aquifer recharge areas – Permitted activities.

(1) Regulated Activities. The following standards apply to any development proposal in a critical aquifer recharge area:

(a) All storage tanks proposed to be located in a critical aquifer recharge area must comply with the International Building Code and the International Fire Code requirements for secondary containment.

(b) Commercial vehicle repair and servicing must be conducted over impermeable pads and within a covered structure capable of withstanding normally expected weather conditions. Chemicals used in the process of vehicle repair and servicing must be stored in a manner that protects them from weather and provides containment should leaks occur.

(c) No dry wells shall be allowed in critical aquifer recharge areas on sites used for vehicle repair and servicing. Dry wells existing on the site prior to facility development must be abandoned using techniques approved by the Washington Department of Ecology prior to commencement of the proposed activity.

(d) The activities listed below shall be conditioned in accordance with the applicable State and Federal regulations as necessary to protect critical aquifer recharge areas:

Table 21.51.220(1)(d) – Regulated Activities  

	Activity	Applicable State and Federal Regulations

	Above ground storage tanks	WAC 173-303-640

	Animal feedlots	Chapters 173-216 and 173-220 WAC

	Automobile washers	Chapter 173-216 WAC, Vehicle and Equipment Washwater Discharges/Best Management Practices Manual (DOE 95-056)

	Chemical treatment storage and disposal facilities	WAC 173-303-282

	Hazardous waste generator (boat repair shops, biological research facility, dry cleaners, furniture stripping, motor vehicle service garages, photographic processing, printing and publishing shops, etc.)	Chapter 173-303 WAC

	Injection wells	Federal 40 CFR Parts 144 and 146, Chapter 173-218 WAC

	Junk yards and salvage yards	Chapter 173-304 WAC, Vehicle Recyclers: A Guide for Implementing the Industrial Stormwater General National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit Requirements (DOE 94-146)

	Oil and gas drilling	WAC 332-12-450, Chapter 173-218 WAC

	On-site sewage systems (large scale)	Chapter 173-240 WAC

	On-site sewage systems (< 14,500 gallons/day)	Chapter 246-272 WAC, local health ordinances

	Pesticide storage and use	Chapters 15.54 and 17.21 RCW

	Sawmills	Chapters 173-303 and 173-304 WAC, Industrial Stormwater General Permit Implementation Manual for Log Yards (DOE 04-10-031)

	Solid waste handling and recycling facilities	Chapter 173-304 WAC

	Surface mining	WAC 332-18-015

	Underground storage tanks	Chapter 173-360 WAC

	Wastewater application to land surface	Chapters 173-200 and 173-216 WAC

(Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.51.230 Critical aquifer recharge areas – Critical areas report additional requirements.

(1) In addition to the general critical areas report requirements in WMC 21.51.110, critical areas reports for CARAs shall include the following:

(a) Prepared by a Qualified Professional. A critical areas report for CARAs shall be prepared by a qualified professional who is a hydrogeologist, geologist, or engineer licensed in the State of Washington. The qualified professional shall have a minimum of five years of experience in the field and experience in preparing hydrogeologic assessments.

(b) Hydrogeologic Assessment. For all proposed activities to be located in a critical aquifer recharge area, a critical areas report shall contain a Level 1 hydrogeologic assessment. A Level 2 hydrogeologic assessment shall be required for any of the following proposed activities:

(i) Activities that result in five percent or more impervious site area;

(ii) Activities that divert, alter, or reduce the flow of surface or ground water, or reduce the recharging of the aquifer;

(iii) The use of hazardous substances, other than household chemicals used according to the directions specified on the packaging for domestic applications;

(iv) The use of injection wells, including on-site septic systems, except those domestic septic systems releasing less than 14,500 gallons of effluent per day and that are limited to a maximum density of one system per one acre; or

(v) Any other activity determined by the City that is likely to have an adverse impact on ground water quality or quantity, or on the recharge of the aquifer.

(c) Level 1 Hydrogeologic Assessment. A Level 1 hydrogeologic assessment shall include the following information on the site and development proposal:

(i) Available information regarding geologic and hydrogeologic characteristics of the site including the surface location of all critical aquifer recharge areas located on site or immediately adjacent to the site, and permeability of the unsaturated zone;

(ii) Ground water depth, flow direction, and gradient based on available information;

(iii) Currently available data on wells and springs within 1,300 feet of the project area;

(iv) Location of other critical areas, including surface waters, within 1,300 feet of the project area;

(v) Available historic water quality data for the area to be affected by the proposed activity; and

(vi) Best management practices proposed to be utilized.

(d) Level 2 Hydrogeologic Assessment. A Level 2 hydrogeologic assessment shall include the information required for a Level 1 hydrogeologic assessment and the following information:

(i) Historic water quality data for the area to be affected by the proposed activity compiled for at least the previous five-year period;

(ii) Ground water monitoring plan provisions;

(iii) Discussion of the effects of the proposed project on the ground water quality and quantity, including:

(A) Predictive evaluation of ground water withdrawal effects on nearby wells and surface water features; and

(B) Predictive evaluation of contaminant transport based on potential releases to ground water; and

(iv) A spill plan that identifies equipment and/or structures that could fail, resulting in an impact to the CARA. Spill plans shall include provisions for regular inspection, repair, and replacement of structures and equipment that could fail. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.51.250 Geologically sensitive areas – Designation.

(1) Definition. Geologically sensitive areas are those areas susceptible to erosion, sliding, earthquake, or other geological events. Geologically sensitive areas pose a risk to health and safety of citizens when incompatible development is located in areas of significant hazard.

(2) Designation. Areas susceptible to one or more of the following types of hazards shall be designated as a geologically sensitive area and subject to the provisions of this chapter.

(a) Erosion Hazard. Those areas identified by the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Natural Resources Conservation Service or identified by a critical areas report as having a severe to very severe erosion potential.

(b) Landslide Hazard. Those areas susceptible to landslides based on a combination of geologic, topographic, and hydrologic factors. They include areas susceptible because of any combination of bedrock, soil, slope (gradient), slope aspect, structure, hydrology, or other factors. Examples of these may include, but are not limited to, the following:

(i) Areas of historic failures, such as areas designated as quaternary slumps, earthflows, mudflows, lahars, or landslides on maps published by the U.S. Geological Survey, Washington Department of Natural Resources, and/or other research meeting the best available science criteria in WAC 365-195-915;

(ii) Areas with all three of the following characteristics:

(A) Slopes steeper than 15 percent;

(B) Hillsides intersecting geologic contacts with a relatively permeable sediment overlying a relatively impermeable sediment or bedrock; and

(C) Springs or ground water seepage;

(iii) Areas that have shown movement during the Holocene epoch (from 11,700 years ago to the present) or that are underlain or covered by mass wastage debris of that epoch;

(iv) Areas potentially unstable due to rapid stream incision, stream bank erosion, or undercutting by wave action;

(v) Areas located in a ravine, canyon or on an active alluvial fan, presently or potentially subject to inundation by debris flows or catastrophic flooding; and

(vi) Any area with a slope of 40 percent or steeper and with a vertical relief of 10 or more feet except areas composed of consolidated rock. A slope is delineated by establishing its toe and top and measured by averaging the inclination over at least 10 feet of vertical relief.

(c) Seismic Hazard. Those areas subject to severe risk of damage as a result of earthquake-induced ground shaking, slope failure, settlement, surface rupture, or soil liquefaction.

(i) Ground shaking is the primary cause of earthquake damage in Washington. The strength of ground shaking is primarily affected by the magnitude of an earthquake, the distance from the source of an earthquake, the type and thickness of geologic materials at the surface, and the subsurface geologic structure;

(ii) Settlement and soil liquefaction conditions occur in areas underlain by cohesionless, loose, or soft-saturated soils of low density, typically in association with a shallow ground water table; and

(iii) Surface ruptures due to faults.

(d) Other Geologic Hazard. Other geological events including mass wasting debris flows, rock falls, and differential settlement. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.51.260 Geologically sensitive areas – Erosion and landslide hazards.

(1) General Development Standards. Alterations of erosion and landslide hazard areas and their buffers may only occur for activities that:

(a) Will not increase the threat of the geological hazard, soil movement, or slope instability to adjacent properties beyond predevelopment conditions;

(b) Will not adversely impact other critical areas or their buffers;

(c) Are designed so that the hazard and risk of damage to the project is eliminated or mitigated to a level where there is no increased adverse impact relative to natural conditions prior to development, its associated land use, or adjacent properties; and

(d) Are designed and constructed in conformance with the recommendations of the critical areas report.

(2) Buffer and Setback Required. Based upon review of and City concurrence with a critical areas report prepared by a qualified professional, a buffer shall be established from all edges of erosion or landslide hazard areas. The size of the buffer eliminates or minimizes the risk of property damage, death, or injury resulting from erosion and landslides caused in whole or part by the development.

(a) Standard Buffer. The standard buffer shall be 50 feet.

(b) Buffer Reduction. The buffer may be reduced to a minimum of 15 feet when a qualified professional demonstrates that the reduction will provide adequate protection to the proposed development, adjacent developments and uses, and the subject critical area.

(c) Increased Buffer. The buffer may be increased when a qualified professional determines a larger buffer is necessary to prevent risk of damage to proposed and existing development.

(d) Building Setback. A minimum 10-foot building setback shall be required from the edge of the buffer for any building or structure to ensure adequate distance for maintenance and repair without encroaching into the buffers. Trails, sidewalks, or stormwater facilities may be located in the building setback as long as access for maintenance will not result in adverse impacts to the buffer.

(3) Design Standards. Development within an erosion or landslide hazard area and its buffer shall be designed to meet the following requirements, unless it can be demonstrated that an alternative design provides greater long-term slope stability while meeting all other provisions of this title:

(a) The proposed development shall not decrease the factor of safety for landslide occurrences below the limits of 1.5 for static conditions and 1.2 for dynamic conditions;

(b) Structures and improvements shall be clustered to avoid geologically sensitive areas and other critical areas to the greatest extent possible;

(c) Structures and improvements shall minimize alterations to the natural contour of the slope, and foundations shall be tiered where possible to conform to existing topography;

(d) Structures and improvements shall be located to preserve the most critical portion of the site and its natural landforms and vegetation;

(e) The proposed development shall not result in greater risk or a need for increased buffers on neighboring properties;

(f) The use of retaining walls that allow the maintenance of existing natural slope area is preferred over graded artificial slopes; and

(g) Development shall be designed to minimize impervious lot coverage.

(4) Alteration Criteria. Alterations shall be subject to the following requirements:

(a) Alterations of an erosion or landslide hazard area and its buffer may only occur for activities for which a geotechnical analysis demonstrates that:

(i) The development will not increase surface water discharge or sedimentation to adjacent properties beyond predevelopment conditions;

(ii) The development will not decrease slope stability on the subject property and adjacent properties;

(iii) Such alterations will not adversely impact other critical areas; and

(iv) Steep slopes that are determined to be artificially created or man-made slopes through past grading or development activities may be modified under the recommendation of an approved geotechnical report that demonstrates that alteration will stabilize the slope and minimize erosion and landslide risk beyond predevelopment conditions.

(b) Vegetation Preservation. Unless otherwise provided or as part of an approved alteration, removal of vegetation from an erosion or landslide hazard area or related buffer shall be prohibited.

(c) Seasonal Restriction. Clearing shall be allowed only from May 1st to October 1st of each year; provided, that the City may extend or shorten the dry season on a case-by-case basis depending on actual weather conditions. Timber harvest, not including brush clearing or stump removal, may be allowed outside of seasonal restrictions pursuant to an approved forest practice permit issued by the Washington Department of Natural Resources.

(d) Utility Lines and Pipes. Utility lines and pipes shall be permitted in erosion and landslide hazard areas only when the applicant demonstrates that no other practical alternative is available. The line or pipe shall be located above ground and properly anchored, and designed so that it will continue to function in the event of an underlying slide. Stormwater conveyance shall be allowed only through a high-density polyethylene pipe with fuse-welded joints, or similar product approved by the City that is technically equal or superior.

(e) Point Discharges. Point discharges from surface water facilities and roof drains onto or upstream from an erosion or landslide hazard area shall be prohibited except as follows:

(i) Conveyed via continuous storm pipe downslope to a point where there are no erosion hazard areas downstream from the discharge;

(ii) Discharged at flow durations matching predeveloped conditions, with adequate energy dissipation, into existing channels that previously conveyed stormwater runoff in the predeveloped state; or

(iii) Dispersed discharge upslope of the steep slope onto a low-gradient undisturbed buffer demonstrated to be adequate to infiltrate all surface and stormwater runoff, and where it can be demonstrated that such discharge will not increase the saturation of the slope.

(f) Subdivisions. The division of land in erosion and landslide hazard areas and associated buffers shall be subject to WMC 21.51.080.

(g) Septic Systems. On-site sewage disposal systems, including drain fields, shall be prohibited within erosion and landslide hazard areas and their buffers.

(5) Additional Report Requirements. In addition to the general critical areas report requirements of WMC 21.51.110, critical areas reports for erosion and landslide hazard areas shall include the following information:

(a) Prepared by a Qualified Professional. The critical areas report shall be prepared by a qualified professional who is a civil engineer, engineering geologist, and/or geologist licensed in the State of Washington. The qualified professional shall have a minimum of five years of experience in the field and experience in preparing reports for geologic, hydrologic, and ground water flow systems.

(b) Analysis of Proposal. The report shall contain a hazards analysis including a detailed description of the project, its relationship to the geologic hazard(s), and its potential impact upon the hazard area, the subject property, and affected adjacent properties.

(c) Hazards Analysis. The hazards analysis shall include the following information on the site and development proposal:

(i) A description of the extent and type of vegetative cover;

(ii) A description of subsurface conditions based on data from site-specific explorations;

(iii) Descriptions of surface and ground water conditions, public and private sewage disposal systems, fills and excavations, and all structural improvements;

(iv) An analysis or estimate of slope stability and the effect construction and placement of structures will have on the slope over the estimated life of the structure;

(v) Consideration of the run-out hazard of landslide debris and/or the impacts of landslide run-out on downslope properties;

(vi) A study of slope stability including an analysis of proposed cuts, fills, and other site grading;

(vii) Recommendations for building siting limitations;

(viii) An analysis of proposed surface and subsurface drainage, and the vulnerability of the site to erosion;

(ix) A detailed overview of the field investigations, published data, and references; data and conclusions from past assessments of the site; and site specific measurements, tests, investigations, or studies that support the identification of geologically sensitive areas;

(x) A review of the site history regarding landslides, erosion, and prior grading. A description of the vulnerability of the site to seismic and other geologic events; and

(xi) Documentation of data resulting from tests or analysis.

(d) Geotechnical Engineering Report. The technical information for a project within a landslide hazard area shall include a geotechnical engineering report prepared by a licensed engineer that presents engineering recommendations for the following:

(i) Parameters for design of site improvements including appropriate foundations and retaining structures. These should include allowable load and resistance capacities for bearing and lateral loads, installation considerations, and estimates of settlement performance;

(ii) Recommendations for drainage and subdrainage improvements;

(iii) Earthwork recommendations including clearing and site preparation standards, fill placement and compaction standards, temporary and permanent slope inclinations and protection, and temporary excavation support, if necessary; and

(iv) Mitigation of adverse site conditions including slope stabilization measures and seismically unstable soils, if necessary.

(e) Erosion and Sediment Control Plan. For any development proposal on a site containing an erosion hazard area, an erosion and sediment control plan shall be required. The erosion and sediment control plan shall be prepared in compliance with requirements set forth in the adopted King County Surface Water Design Manual.

(f) Drainage Plan. The technical information shall include a drainage plan for the collection, transport, treatment, discharge, and/or recycle of water prepared in accordance with the adopted King County Surface Water Design Manual. The drainage plan should consider on-site septic system disposal volumes where the additional volume will affect the erosion or landslide hazard area.

(g) Monitoring Surface Waters. If the City determines based on the recommendation of a qualified professional that there is a significant risk of damage to downstream receiving waters due to potential erosion from the site, based on the size of the project, the proximity to the receiving waters, or the sensitivity of the receiving waters, the technical information shall include a plan to monitor the surface water discharge from the site. The monitoring plan shall include a recommended schedule for submitting monitoring reports to the City.

(h) Minimum Buffer and Building Setback. The report shall make a recommendation for the minimum no-disturbance buffer and minimum building setback from any geologically sensitive area based upon the geotechnical analysis.

(i) Mitigation Assessment. When hazard mitigation is required, the mitigation plan shall specifically address how the activity maintains or reduces the predevelopment level of risk to the site and adjacent properties on a long-term basis (equal to or exceeding the projected lifespan of the activity or occupation). Mitigation may be required to avoid any increase in risk above the preexisting conditions following abandonment of the activity. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.51.270 Geologically sensitive areas – Seismic hazard areas and other hazard areas.

(1) Development Standards. Alterations of seismic hazard areas or other hazard areas and their buffers may only occur for activities that:

(a) Will not increase the threat of the geological hazard, soil movement, or slope instability to adjacent properties beyond predevelopment conditions;

(b) Will not adversely impact other critical areas or their buffers;

(c) Are designed so that the hazard and risk of damage to the project is eliminated or mitigated to a level where there is no increased adverse impact relative to natural conditions prior to development, its associated land use, or adjacent properties; and

(d) Are designed and constructed in conformance with the recommendations of the critical areas report.

(2) Additional Report Requirements. In addition to the general critical areas report requirements of WMC 21.51.110, critical areas reports for seismic and other hazard areas shall include the following information:

(a) Prepared by a Qualified Professional. The critical areas report shall be prepared by a qualified professional who is a civil engineer, engineering geologist, and/or geologist licensed in the State of Washington. The qualified professional shall have a minimum of five years of experience in the field and experience in preparing reports for geologic, hydrologic, and ground water flow systems.

(b) Analysis of Proposal. The report shall contain a hazards analysis including a detailed description of the project, its relationship to the geologic hazard(s), and its potential impact upon the hazard area, the subject property, and affected adjacent properties.

(c) Hazards Analysis. The hazards analysis shall include a complete discussion of the potential impacts of seismic activity on the site (for example, forces generated and fault displacement).

(d) Geological Assessment. The report shall include an assessment of the geologic characteristics of the soils, sediments, and/or rock of the project area and potentially affected adjacent properties. Soils analysis shall be accomplished in accordance with accepted classification systems in use in the region. The assessment shall include:

(i) A description of the surface and subsurface geology, hydrology, soils, and vegetation found in the project area and in all hazard areas addressed in the report;

(ii) A detailed overview of the field investigations, published data, and references; data and conclusions from past assessments of the site; and site specific measurements, tests, investigations, or studies that support the identification of geologically sensitive areas; and

(iii) A review of the site history regarding landslides, erosion, and prior grading, including a description of the vulnerability of the site to seismic and other geologic events.

(e) Geotechnical Engineering Report. A geotechnical engineering report shall evaluate the physical properties of the subsurface soils, particularly the thickness of unconsolidated deposits and their liquefaction potential. If it is determined that the site is subject to liquefaction, mitigation measures shall be recommended and implemented.

(f) Minimum Buffer and Building Setback. The report shall make a recommendation for the minimum no-disturbance buffer and minimum building setback from any geologically sensitive area based upon the geotechnical analysis.

(g) Mitigation Assessment. When hazard mitigation is required, the mitigation plan shall specifically address how the activity maintains or reduces the predevelopment level of risk to the site and adjacent properties on a long-term basis (equal to or exceeding the projected lifespan of the activity or occupation). Mitigation may be required to avoid any increase in risk above the preexisting conditions following abandonment of the activity. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.51.300 Wetlands – Designation and rating.

(1) Definition. Wetlands are those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. Wetlands do not include those artificial wetlands intentionally created from nonwetland sites, including, but not limited to, irrigation and drainage ditches, grass-lined swales, canals, detention facilities, wastewater treatment facilities, farm ponds, and landscape amenities, or those wetlands created after July 1, 1990, that were unintentionally created as a result of the construction of a road, street, or highway. Wetlands may include those artificial wetlands intentionally created from nonwetland areas created to mitigate conversion of wetlands.

(2) Designation. Identification of wetlands and delineation of their boundaries shall be in accordance with the current approved Federal wetland delineation manual and applicable regional supplements as set forth in WAC 173-22-035. Areas meeting the wetland designation criteria are critical areas and subject to the provisions of this chapter.

(3) Wetland Rating and Categories. Wetlands shall be rated according to the current approved version of the Department of Ecology Washington State Wetland Rating System for Western Washington. Definitions and the methodology for determining criteria as provided in this document are hereby adopted by reference.

(a) Categories. Wetlands shall be designated based on the table below. Special characteristic wetlands shall be designated through the current Ecology wetland rating system. If the wetland qualifies under more than one category, the greater wetland rating shall apply.

 

Table 21.51.300(3)(a) – Wetland Categories  

	Category	Designation Descriptions

	Category I	Wetlands that meet one of the following criteria:

	 	– High level of functions (score of 23 or more);

	 	– Represent unique or rare high-functioning wetland types;

	 	– More sensitive to disturbance than most wetlands; or

	 	– Relatively undisturbed and contain ecological attributes that are impossible to replace in a human lifetime.

	Category II	– High level of some functions (score of 20 – 22).

	 	– Difficult, though not impossible, to replace.

	Category III	– Moderate level of functions (score of 16 – 19).

	 	– Can often be adequately replaced with a well-planned mitigation project.

	 	– Experienced some disturbance.

	 	– Often less diverse and more isolated from other natural resources than Category II wetlands.

	Category IV	– Lowest level of functions (score of 15 or less).

	 	– Can often be adequately replaced with a well-planned mitigation project.

	 	– Often characterized by a high level of disturbance.

(b) Date of Wetland Rating. Wetland rating categories shall be applied as the wetland exists on the date of adoption of the rating system, as the wetland naturally changes thereafter, or as the wetland changes in accordance with permitted activities. Wetland rating categories shall not change due to illegal modification.

(c) Delineation. The wetland’s boundaries shall be delineated through a survey and field investigation by a qualified professional applying the most current Federal wetland delineation manual and applicable regional supplement. Wetland delineations are valid for five years; after such date, the City shall determine whether a revision or additional assessment is necessary. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.51.310 Wetlands – Development standards.

(1) Standard Wetland Buffers. Activities and uses shall be prohibited within wetlands and their buffers except as provided for in this chapter. For activities and uses meeting the minimized impact standards in subsection (2) of this section, the width of the wetland buffers shall be determined according to the wetland category and habitat point scoring shown in Table 21.51.310(1). The outer edge of the wetland buffer shall be delineated through a survey and field investigation by a qualified professional.

 

Table 21.51.310(1) – Wetland Buffer Widths  

	Wetland Category	Buffer Width Based on Habitat Points

	3 – 4 habitat points	5 habitat points	6 – 7 habitat points	8 – 9 habitat points

	Category I	75 feet	105 feet	165 feet	225 feet

	Category II	75 feet	105 feet	165 feet	225 feet

	Category III	60 feet	105 feet	165 feet	225 feet

	Category IV	40 feet

(2) Minimized Impact Standards. The following minimized impact standards must be adhered to in the table below. If an applicant chooses not to apply mitigation standards, the wetland buffer widths in Table 21.51.310(1) shall be increased by 33 percent.

 

Table 21.51.310(2) – Minimized Impact Standards  

	Disturbance	Required Measures to Minimize Impacts

	Lights	– Direct lights away from wetland.

	Noise	– Locate activity that generates noise away from wetland.

	 	– If warranted, enhance existing buffer with native vegetation plantings adjacent to noise source.

	 	– For activities that generate relatively continuous, potentially disruptive noise, such as certain heavy industry or mining, establish an additional 10-foot heavily vegetated buffer strip immediately adjacent to the outer wetland buffer.

	Toxic runoff	– Route all new, untreated runoff away from wetland while ensuring wetland is not dewatered.

	 	– Limit use of pesticides within 150 feet of wetland meeting surface water discharge requirements of Chapter 13.04 WMC.

	 	– Apply integrated pest management.

	Stormwater runoff	– Retrofit stormwater detention and treatment for roads and existing adjacent development.

	 	– Prevent channelized flow from lawns that directly enters the buffer.

	 	– Use low intensity development techniques (per PSAT publication on LID techniques).

	 	– Design the on-site stormwater system to comply with the current approved version of the King County Surface Water Design Manual.

	Change in water regime	– Infiltrate or treat, detain, and disperse into buffer new runoff from impervious surfaces and new lawns.

	Pets and human disturbance	– Use privacy fencing OR plant dense vegetation to delineate buffer edge and to discourage disturbance using vegetation appropriate for the ecoregion.

	– Place wetland and its buffer in a separate tract or protect with a conservation easement.

	Dust	– Use best management practices to control dust.

	Disruption of corridors or connections	– Maintain connections to off-site areas that are undisturbed.

	– Restore corridors.

(3) Increased Buffers. An increased buffer width shall be required in accordance with the recommendations of a qualified professional and best available science when a larger buffer is necessary to protect wetland functions and values. This determination shall be based on one or more of the following critical areas:

(a) Geologically Sensitive Areas. If the buffer or abutting uplands include a geologically sensitive area, the buffer width shall be the greater of either the required wetland buffer or 25 feet beyond the top of the geologically sensitive area.

(b) Other Critical Areas. If the wetland and its buffer are located adjacent to other critical areas, a larger buffer may be required to protect other critical areas in accordance to the recommendations of a qualified professional and best available science.

(c) Species Habitat. The wetland contains documented habitat for endangered, threatened, priority species or species of local importance. The buffer shall be established based on a habitat assessment pursuant to WMC 21.51.400 through 21.51.440.

(4) Existing Roads or Structures in Buffers. Where a legally established roadway transects a wetland buffer, a modification to the minimum required buffer width may be granted to the edge of the roadway or structure; provided, that the proposed development does not increase the degree of nonconformity.

(5) Buffer Averaging. The minimum buffer width may be averaged in accordance with an approved critical areas report using the best available science. Averaging of buffer widths may only be allowed if all of the following criteria are met:

(a) It will provide additional protection to wetlands and result in a net improvement of wetland habitat, functions, and values;

(b) The buffer width is not reduced by more than 25 percent of the standard width in any one location;

(c) The wetland contains variations in sensitivity due to existing physical characteristics or the character of the buffer varies in slope, soils, or vegetation, and the wetland would benefit from a wider buffer in places and would not be adversely impacted by a narrower buffer in other places;

(d) The total area contained in the buffer area after averaging is no less than that which would be contained within the standard buffer; and

(e) When wetland standard buffers are reduced, wetland areas shall not be filled to create wetland buffers.

(6) Building Setback. A minimum 10-foot building setback shall be required from the edge of the buffer for any building or structure to ensure adequate distance for maintenance and repair without encroaching into the buffers. Trails, sidewalks, or stormwater facilities may be located in the building setback as long as access for maintenance will not result in adverse impacts to the buffer.

(7) Temporary and permanent signs and fencing shall be installed along the outer boundary of the wetland buffer in accordance with WMC 21.51.140.

(8) Livestock. Property owners shall implement a farm management plan or standards to protect and enhance wetland water quality pursuant to Chapter 21.31 WMC. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.51.320 Wetlands – Permitted activities.

(1) Alterations. Alterations to wetlands and their buffers may be allowed in addition to those established in WMC 21.51.040 and 21.51.050, if the City determines that there is no practical alternative location with less adverse impacts on the wetland or its buffer, subject to mitigation requirements set forth in this chapter, as follows:

(a) Conservation and Restoration Activities. Conservation and restoration activities include activities that are aimed at protecting soil, water, vegetation, or wildlife.

(b) Public and Private Utilities. Utilities may be allowed in wetland buffers if all of the following criteria are met:

(i) Placement of the utilities may be located in the outer 25 percent of the buffer area;

(ii) The utility corridor and construction area are the minimum size necessary;

(iii) The utility is not located in a wetland or buffer designated as a fish and wildlife habitat conservation area pursuant to WMC 21.51.400;

(iv) Mitigation is required that minimizes the impact of the proposal on the wetland buffer;

(v) The utility corridor meets the provisions of Policies U-1.5 and U-1.8 of the Comprehensive Plan;

(vi) Construction and maintenance protects the wetland and buffer and is aligned to avoid cutting trees greater than 12 inches in diameter at breast height; and

(vii) For public sewer and water distribution only, if the corridor cannot be located in the outer 25 percent of the buffer area due to gravity flow, it may be located in another part of the buffer with the least adverse impact to the wetland.

(c) Drilling for Utilities or Utility Corridors under a Wetland. Entrance/exit portals shall be located completely outside of the wetland buffer; provided, that drilling does not interrupt the ground water connection to the wetland or percolation of surface water down through the soil column. Specific studies by a hydrologist are necessary to determine whether the ground water connection to the wetland or percolation of surface water down through the soil column will be disturbed.

(d) Utility Joint Use. Joint use of an approved utility corridor by other utilities may be allowed.

(e) Stormwater Facilities. The following stormwater facilities are permitted only within the outer 25 percent of the buffer of a Category III or IV wetland:

(i) Surface water discharge of treated stormwater to a wetland from a detention facility, presettlement pond, or other surface water management activity or facility may be allowed only if the discharge does not increase the rate of flow, change the native plant composition in a wetland, or decrease the water quality of the wetland; and

(ii) Stormwater management facilities, limited to stormwater dispersion, outfalls, and bioswales, may be allowed only if no other location is feasible and the location will not degrade functions and values of the wetland.

(f) Dispersal Trenches. Grass-lined swales, dispersal trenches, and energy dissipaters may be located in the outer 25 percent of the buffer area of a Category III or Category IV wetland only. Other surface water management facilities are not allowed within the buffer area.

(g) Trails. Public and private trails, or visual access areas, may be located in the outer 25 percent of wetland buffers, provided:

(i) The trail surface shall not be made of impervious materials, except that public multipurpose trails may be made of impervious materials if they meet all other requirements, including water quality and quantity; and

(ii) Buffers shall be expanded, where possible, equal to the width of the trail corridor including disturbed areas.

(h) Existing Roads. Widening of existing roads may be allowed on the outer 25 percent of the buffer area if:

(i) There is no practical alternative access with less environmental adverse impact;

(ii) The proposal minimizes impact to the wetland and provides mitigation for unavoidable impacts through restoration, enhancement, or replacement of disturbed areas;

(iii) The proposal does not change the overall wetland hydrology;

(iv) The proposal does not diminish the flood storage capacity of the wetland;

(v) The proposal is constructed during summer low water periods; and

(vi) Crossings are the minimum size or length necessary to provide access.

(2) There shall be no introduction of any plant or wildlife that is not indigenous to the Puget Sound region into any wetland or buffer unless authorized by a State or Federal permit or approval.

(3) The use of hazardous substances, pesticides, and fertilizers in the wetland and its buffer is prohibited. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.51.330 Wetlands – Critical areas report additional requirements.

(1) Additional Report Requirements. In addition to the general critical areas report requirements of WMC 21.51.110, critical areas reports for wetlands shall include the following information:

(a) Prepared by a Qualified Professional. The critical areas report shall be prepared by a qualified professional who is a professional wetland scientist. The qualified professional shall have a minimum of five years of experience in the field of wetland science and experience in preparing wetland reports.

(b) Wetland Assessment. The wetland assessment shall include the following information on the site:

(i) Wetland delineation, rating, category, and required buffers;

(ii) Existing wetland acreage, which may be approximated if the wetland extends onto adjacent properties;

(iii) Vegetative, faunal, and hydrologic characteristics;

(iv) Soil and substrate conditions;

(v) A discussion of the water sources supplying the wetland and documentation of hydrologic regime (locations of inlet and outlet features, water depths throughout the wetland, evidence of recharge or discharge, evidence of water depths throughout the year – drift lines, algal layers, moss lines, and sediment deposits); and

(vi) Clearing limits.

(c) Habitat and Vegetation Conservation. A habitat and native vegetation conservation strategy that addresses methods to protect and enhance on-site habitat and wetland functions.

(d) Proposed Mitigation. If required, a mitigation plan consistent with WMC 21.51.120 and 21.51.340. The mitigation plan shall include a written assessment and accompanying maps of the mitigation area, including the following information at a minimum:

(i) Proposed wetland acreage;

(ii) Proposed vegetative, faunal, and hydrologic characteristics;

(iii) Surface and subsurface hydrologic conditions including an analysis of existing and future hydrologic regime and proposed hydrologic regime for enhanced, created, or restored mitigation areas;

(iv) Proposed soil and substrate conditions;

(v) Proposed adjacent site conditions;

(vi) Required wetland buffers (including any buffer reduction and mitigation proposed to increase the plant densities, remove weedy vegetation, and replant the buffers);

(vii) Information demonstrating how enhancement will increase functions of degraded wetlands and how the increase will mitigate for loss of wetland areas and functions at the impact site.

(e) Maintenance and Monitoring. A written plan outlining proposed maintenance, monitoring, and management practices that will provide long-term protection of the wetland consistent with WMC 21.51.130.

(f) Data Sheets. Copies of all wetland determination data sheets and supporting figures. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.51.340 Wetlands – Mitigation.

(1) General. Mitigation shall be consistent with the requirements in WMC 21.51.120. An evaluation of mitigation sequencing, including avoidance, minimization, and compensation, shall be provided pursuant to WMC 21.51.120. Selection of mitigation sites should be guided by watershed plans for basins and sub-basins where those plans are available.

(2) Mitigation for Lost Functions and Values. Mitigation actions shall address functions affected by the alteration to achieve functional equivalency or improvement, and shall provide similar wetland functions as those lost, except when:

(a) The lost wetland provides minimal functions as determined by a site-specific function assessment and the proposed mitigation action(s) will provide equal or greater functions or will provide functions shown to be limiting within a watershed through a formal watershed assessment plan or protocol; or

(b) Off-site replacement will best meet formally identified regional goals, such as replacement of historically diminished wetland types.

(3) Preference of Mitigation Actions. Mitigation actions that require compensation by replacing, enhancing, or substitution shall occur in the following order of preference:

(a) Restoring wetland acreage and functions to an area where those functions formerly occurred.

(b) Creating new wetland areas and functions in an area where they did not previously occur.

(c) Enhancing an existing wetland.

(d) Preserving existing high-quality wetlands from future loss or degradation.

(4) Type and Location of Mitigation. Mitigation actions shall be in kind and located on the same site as the alteration, except when:

(a) There is no opportunity for on-site mitigation or on-site opportunities do not have a high likelihood of success due to development pressures, adjacent land uses, wildlife impacts, or on-site buffers or connectivity are inadequate;

(b) Off-site mitigation has a greater likelihood of providing equal or improved wetland functions than the impacted wetland;

(c) Off-site locations shall be in Water Resource Inventory Area (WRIA) 8 and in the same sub-basin as the impacted wetland; and

(d) The off-site location wetland mitigation will best meet formally identified watershed goals, such as replacement of historically diminished wetland types.

(5) Mitigation Ratios.

(a) Acreage Replacement Ratios. The following ratios shall apply to creation or restoration that is in kind, on site, the same category, timed prior to or concurrent with alteration, and has a high probability of success. These ratios do not apply to remedial actions resulting from unauthorized alterations; greater ratios shall apply in those cases. These ratios do not apply to the use of credits from a State-certified wetland mitigation bank or approved in-lieu-fee program. The first number specifies the acreage of replacement wetlands and the second specifies the acreage of wetlands altered.

 

Table 21.51.340(5)(a) – Acreage Replacement Ratios  

	Category and Type of Wetland	Creation or Reestablishment	Rehabilitation	Enhancement

	Category I: Bog, Natural Heritage Site	Not considered possible	Case by case	Case by case

	Category I: Mature Forested	6:1	12:1	24:1

	Category I: Based on Functions	4:1	8:1	16:1

	Category II	3:1	6:1	12:1

	Category III	2:1	4:1	8:1

	Category IV	1.5:1	3:1	6:1

(b) Credit/Debit Method. To more fully protect functions and values, and as an alternative to the mitigation ratios found in the joint guidance “Wetland Mitigation in Washington State Parts I and II” (Ecology Publication No. 06-06-011a-b, Olympia, WA, March, 2006), the City may allow mitigation based on the “credit/debit” method developed by the Department of Ecology in “Calculating Credits and Debits for Compensatory Mitigation in Wetlands of Western Washington: Final Report” (Ecology Publication No. 10-06-011, Olympia, WA, March 2012, or as revised).

(c) Buffer Mitigation Ratios. Impacts to buffers shall be mitigated at a 1:1 ratio. Compensatory buffer mitigation shall replace those buffer functions lost from development.

(6) Mitigation Timing. Where feasible, mitigation projects shall be completed prior to activities that will disturb wetlands. In all other cases, mitigation shall be completed immediately following disturbance and prior to use or occupancy of the activity or development. Construction of mitigation projects shall be timed to reduce impacts to existing wildlife and flora.

(7) Monitoring and Maintenance. Mitigation projects shall be monitored and maintained consistent with WMC 21.51.130.

(8) Buffers for Mitigation Sites. Mitigation sites shall have buffers consistent with the requirements of this chapter. The buffer for a wetland that is created, restored, or enhanced as compensation for approved wetland alterations shall be subject to the buffer of the highest wetland category involved.

(9) Wetland Mitigation Banks. Credits from a wetland mitigation bank may be approved for use as compensation for unavoidable impacts to wetlands.

(a) The following criteria shall be met in order to apply credits from a wetland mitigation bank when:

(i) The bank is certified under Chapter 173-700 WAC;

(ii) The City determines that the wetland mitigation bank provides appropriate compensation for the authorized impacts; and

(iii) The proposed use of credits is consistent with the terms and conditions of the bank’s certification.

(b) Replacement ratios for projects using bank credits shall be consistent with replacement ratios specified in the bank’s certification.

(c) Credits from a certified wetland mitigation bank may be used to compensate for impacts located within the service area specified in the bank’s certification. In some cases, bank service areas may include portions of more than one adjacent drainage basin for specific wetland functions.

(10) In-Lieu Fee. To aid in the implementation of off-site mitigation, the City may develop an in-lieu-fee program. This program shall be developed and approved through a public process and be consistent with Federal rules, State policy on in-lieu-fee mitigation, and State water quality regulations. An approved in-lieu-fee program sells compensatory mitigation credits to permittees whose obligation to provide compensatory mitigation is then transferred to the in-lieu program sponsor, a governmental or nonprofit natural resource management entity. Credits from an approved in-lieu-fee program may be used if all of the following apply:

(a) The approval authority determines that it would provide environmentally appropriate compensation for the proposed impacts.

(b) The mitigation will occur on a site identified using the site selection and prioritization process in the approved in-lieu-fee program instrument.

(c) The proposed use of credits is consistent with the terms and conditions of the approved in-lieu-fee program instrument.

(d) Land acquisition and initial physical and biological improvements of the mitigation site must be completed within three years of the credit sale.

(e) Projects using in-lieu-fee credits shall have debits associated with the proposed impacts calculated by the applicant’s qualified wetland scientist using the method consistent with the credit assessment method specified in the approved instrument for the in-lieu-fee program.

(f) Credits from an approved in-lieu-fee program may be used to compensate for impacts located within the service area specified in the approved in-lieu-fee instrument.

(11) Alternative Mitigation Plans. The City may approve alternative critical areas mitigation plans that are based on best available science, such as priority restoration plans that achieve restoration goals identified in the Shoreline Master Program (SMP). Alternative mitigation proposals must provide an equivalent or better level of protection of critical area functions and values than would be provided by the strict application of this chapter. The following criteria shall be met for approval of an alternative mitigation proposal:

(a) The proposal uses a watershed approach consistent with Selecting Wetland Mitigation Sites Using a Watershed Approach (Western Washington) (Ecology Publication No. 09-06-32, Olympia, WA, December 2009).

(b) Creation or enhancement of a larger system of natural areas and open space is preferable to the preservation of many individual habitat areas.

(c) Mitigation according to subsection (4) of this section is not feasible due to site constraints such as parcel size, stream type, wetland category, or geologic hazards.

(d) There is clear potential for success of the proposed mitigation at the proposed mitigation site.

(e) The plan shall contain clear and measurable standards for achieving compliance with the specific provisions of the plan.

(f) The plan shall be reviewed and approved as part of overall approval of the proposed use. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.51.350 Frequently flooded areas – Designation.

(1) Definition. Frequently flooded areas are those areas meeting one or more of the following components. These areas shall be designated as frequently flooded areas and shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter:

(a) Floodplain;

(b) Flood fringe; and

(c) Floodway.

(2) Designation. Frequently flooded areas shall include the following areas:

(a) Areas Identified on Flood Insurance Map(s). Those areas identified as special flood hazard areas by the Federal Insurance Administrator pursuant to Chapter 21.53 WMC. 

(b) Areas Identified by the City. Those areas of special flood hazard identified by the City pursuant to Chapter 21.53 WMC based on a review of base flood elevation and floodway data available from Federal, State, County or other agency sources when base flood elevation data has not been provided from FEMA. (Ord. 699 § 1, 2020; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.51.360 Development requirements within frequently flooded areas.

All development within a frequently flooded area shall comply with the requirements set forth in Chapter 21.53 WMC, Flood Damage Prevention. (Ord. 699 § 3, 2020)


21.51.370 Frequently flooded areas – Permitted activities.

Repealed by Ord. 699. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.51.380 Frequently flooded areas – Critical areas report additional requirements.

(1) A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in Chapter 21.53 WMC. The permit shall be for all structures including manufactured homes and for all development including fill and other activities as defined in Chapter 21.53 WMC. In addition to the general critical areas report requirements of WMC 21.51.110, critical area reports for frequently flooded areas shall include a flood hazard assessment and the following information:

(a) Prepared by a Qualified Professional. The critical areas report shall be prepared by a qualified professional who is a hydrologist or engineer licensed in the State of Washington. The qualified professional shall have a minimum of five years of experience in the field and experience in preparing flood hazard assessments.

(b) Site Areas. The following areas shall be addressed:

(i) The site area of the proposed activity;

(ii) All areas of a special flood hazard, or other flood area as indicated in the flood insurance maps within 200 feet of the project area; and

(iii) All other flood areas indicated on the flood insurance maps within 200 feet of the project area.

(c) Watercourse Alteration. Alteration of natural watercourses shall be avoided, if feasible. If unavoidable, a critical areas report shall include:

(i) A description of and plan showing the extent to which a watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposal;

(ii) A maintenance program that provides maintenance practices for the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse to ensure that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished; and

(iii) Information describing and documenting how the proposed watercourse alteration complies with the requirements of Chapter 21.53 WMC and other applicable State or Federal permit requirements.

(d) Habitat Impact Assessment. A permit application to develop in a frequently flooded area shall include an assessment of the impact of the project on Federal, State, or locally protected species and habitat, water quality, and aquatic and riparian habitat. A habitat assessment shall be one of the following:

(i) A biological evaluation or biological assessment developed in accordance with 50 CFR 402.12;

(ii) Documentation that the activity fits within Section 4(d) of the Endangered Species Act;

(iii) Documentation that the activity fits within a habitat conservation plan approved pursuant to Section 10 of the Endangered Species Act, where such assessment has been prepared and made available; or

(iv) A habitat impact assessment prepared in accordance with the current adopted FEMA Regional Guidance for Floodplain Habitat Assessment and Mitigation, FEMA Region X. The assessment shall determine if the project would adversely affect:

(A) Species that are Federal, State, or locally listed as threatened or endangered;

(B) The primary constituent elements for critical habitat, when designated, including but not limited to water quality, water quantity, flood volumes, flood velocities, spawning substrate, and/or floodplain refuge for listed salmonids;

(C) Essential fish habitat designated by the National Marine Fisheries Service;

(D) Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas; and

(E) Other protected areas and elements necessary for species conservation. (Ord. 699 § 4, 2020; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.51.400 Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas – Designation.

(1) Definition. Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas are those habitat areas that meet any of the criteria listed below. Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas do not include irrigation ditches, canals, stormwater runoff devices, or other entirely artificial watercourses, except where they exist in a natural watercourse that has been altered by humans.

(a) Areas with Which State or Federally Designated Endangered, Threatened, and Sensitive Species Have a Primary Association.

(i) Federally designated endangered and threatened species are those fish and wildlife species identified by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and the National Marine Fisheries Service that are in danger of extinction or threatened to become endangered. The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and the National Marine Fisheries Service should be consulted for current listing status.

(ii) State designated endangered, threatened, and sensitive species are those fish and wildlife species native to the State of Washington, identified by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife (WDFW), that are in danger of extinction, threatened to become endangered, vulnerable, or declining and are likely to become endangered or threatened in a significant portion of their range within the State without cooperative management or removal of threats. The Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife should be consulted for current listing status.

(b) State Priority Habitat and Species. Habitats associated with State priority species or designated as State priority habitats are considered priorities for conservation and management. Priority species require protective habitat measures for their perpetuation due to their population status, sensitivity to habitat alteration, and/or recreational, commercial, or tribal importance. Priority habitats are those habitat types or elements with unique or significant value to a diverse assemblage of species. A priority habitat may consist of a unique vegetation type or dominant plant species, a described successional stage, or a specific structural element. Priority habitats and species are identified by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife.

(c) Habitat and Species of Local Importance. Habitats and species of local importance are those identified by the City of Woodinville that due to their population status, or sensitivity to habitat manipulation, warrant protection.

(i) The following species are designated as species of local importance:

Table 21.51.400(c)(i) – Species of Local Importance  

	Common Name	Scientific Name

	Bald eagle	Haliaeetus leucocephalus

	Peregrine falcon	Falco peregrines

	Common loon	Gavia immer

	Pileated woodpecker	Dryocopus pileatus

	Vaux’s swift	Chaetura vauxi

	Purple martin	Progne subis

	Western grebe	Aechmophorus occidentalis

	Great blue heron	Ardea herodias

	Green heron	Butorides virescens

	Osprey	Pandion haliaetus

	Western big-eared bat	Plecotus townsendii

	Keen’s myotis	Myotis keenii

	Long-eared myotis	Myotis evotis

	Oregon spotted frog	Rana pretiosa

	Western pond turtle	Clemmys marmorata

	Bull trout	Salvelinus confluentus

	Chinook salmon	Oncorhynchus tshawyscha

	Coho salmon	Oncorhynchus kisutch

	Sockeye/kokanee salmon	Oncorhynchus nerka

	River lamprey	Lampetra ayresi

(ii) Nominations for habitats or species of local importance shall be processed as a Type V permit pursuant to Chapter 21.83 WMC. Nominations for habitats or species of local importance shall demonstrate the following:

(A) Habitat or species rarity or vulnerability to rarity, as evidenced by restricted, small, or declining species population and habitats or community loss or degradation;

(B) The need for protection, maintenance, and/or restoration of the nominated habitat to ensure the long-term survival of a species;

(C) If applicable, the ability of the site to maintain connectivity between habitat areas or to contribute significantly to regional biodiversity as evidenced by species use, richness, abundance, and/or rarity;

(D) Why special protection is needed and how existing County, State and Federal programs and regulations do not provide adequate protection; and

(E) Any proposed management strategies for the affected species or habitat supported by best available science.

(d) Streams and Watercourses. Streams shall be classified using the current approved version of the State Water Typing System pursuant to WAC 222-16-030 and 222-16-031. Streams meeting the designation criteria below and all associated riparian habitat areas, identified as stream buffers in this chapter, are subject to the provisions of this chapter.

Table 21.51.400(1)(d) – Stream Classifications  

	Classification	Brief Description	Full Description

	Type S	Shoreline of the State	All waters, within their bankfull width, as inventoried as “shorelines of the State” under Chapter 90.58 RCW and the rules promulgated pursuant to Chapter 90.58 RCW including periodically inundated areas of their associated wetlands. Within the City of Woodinville, the Sammamish River and Little Bear Creek are designated as Type S streams.

	Type F	Fish-bearing stream (perennial or seasonal)	Segments of natural waters other than Type S waters, which are within the bankfull widths of defined channels and periodically inundated areas of their associated wetlands, or within lakes, ponds, or impoundments having a surface area of 0.5 acre or greater at seasonal low water and which in any case contain fish habitat or are described by one of the following four categories:

	 	 	(a) Waters which are diverted for domestic use by more than 10 residential or camping units or by a public accommodation facility licensed to serve more than 10 persons, where such diversion is determined by the Department to be a valid appropriation of water and the only practical water source for such users. Such waters shall be considered to be Type F water upstream from the point of such diversion for 1,500 feet or until the drainage area is reduced by 50 percent, whichever is less;

	 	 	(b) Waters which are diverted for use by Federal, State, tribal or private fish hatcheries. Such waters shall be considered Type F water upstream from the point of diversion for 1,500 feet, including tributaries, if highly significant for protection of downstream water quality. The Department may allow additional harvest beyond the requirements of Type F water designation provided the Department determines after a landowner-requested on-site assessment by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, Washington Department of Ecology, the affected tribes and interested parties that:

	 	 	(i) The management practices proposed by the landowner will adequately protect water quality for the fish hatchery; and

	 	 	(ii) Such additional harvest meets the requirements of the water type designation that would apply in the absence of the hatchery;

	 	 	(c) Waters which are within a Federal, State, local, or private campground having more than 10 camping units; provided, that the water shall not be considered to enter a campground until it reaches the boundary of the park lands available for public use and comes within 100 feet of a camping unit, trail or other park improvement;

	 	 	(d) Riverine ponds, wall-based channels, and other channel features that are used by fish for off-channel habitat. These areas are critical to the maintenance of optimum survival of fish. This habitat shall be identified based on the following criteria:

	 	 	(i) The site must be connected to a fish habitat stream and accessible during some period of the year; and

	 	 	(ii) The off-channel water must be accessible to fish.

	Type Np	Non-fish-bearing perennial stream	All segments of natural waters within the bankfull width of defined channels that are perennial non-fish-habitat streams. Perennial streams are flowing waters that do not go dry any time of a year of normal rainfall and include the intermittent dry portions of the perennial channel below the uppermost point of perennial flow.

	Type Ns	Non-fish-bearing seasonal stream	All segments of natural waters within the bankfull width of the defined channels that are not Type S, F, or Np waters. These are seasonal, non-fish-habitat streams in which surface flow is not present for at least some portion of a year of normal rainfall and are not located downstream from any stream reach that is a Type Np water. Ns waters must be physically connected by an above ground channel system to Type S, F, or Np waters.

(e) Naturally Occurring Ponds Under 20 Acres. Naturally occurring ponds are those ponds under 20 acres and their submerged aquatic beds that provide fish or wildlife habitat, including those artificial ponds intentionally created from dry areas in order to mitigate impacts to ponds. Naturally occurring ponds do not include ponds deliberately designed and created from dry sites, such as canals, detention facilities, wastewater treatment facilities, farm ponds, temporary construction ponds, and landscape amenities, unless such artificial ponds were intentionally created for mitigation.

(f) Waters of the State. Waters of the State include lakes, ponds, streams, inland waters, underground waters, and all other surface waters and watercourses within the jurisdiction of the State of Washington, as classified in WAC 222-16-031.

(g) Areas of Rare Plant Species and High Quality Ecosystems. Areas of rare plant species and high quality ecosystems are identified by the Washington State Department of Natural Resources through the Natural Heritage Program.

(h) Native growth protection areas (NGPA) and other areas designated by the City.

(2) Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas are usually found in conjunction with another critical area listed in this chapter. The critical areas report shall address all criteria for each critical area specifically. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.51.410 Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas – Development standards.

(1) Standard Buffers. Activities and uses shall be prohibited within fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas and their buffers, except as provided for in this chapter.

(a) Habitat Conservation Area Buffers. The City shall require the establishment of buffer areas for activities adjacent to habitat conservation areas, when needed to protect habitat conservation areas. Buffers shall consist of an undisturbed area of native vegetation or areas identified for restoration established to protect the integrity, functions, and values of the affected habitat. Required buffer widths shall reflect the sensitivity of the habitat and the type and intensity of human activity proposed to be conducted nearby, and shall be consistent with the management recommendations issued by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife.

(b) Stream Buffers. Stream buffers shall be established for habitats that include aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems that mutually benefit each other and that are buffers located adjacent to rivers, perennial or intermittent streams, seeps, and springs.

(i) Stream Buffer Widths. The stream buffers shall be determined according to the stream type shown in Table 21.51.410(1)(b)(i). Widths shall be measured outward in each direction on the horizontal plane from the ordinary high water mark or from the top of the bank if the ordinary high water mark cannot be identified.

 

Table 21.51.410(1)(b)(i) – Stream  Buffer Widths  

	Stream Type	Standard Area Width

	S	Buffers established per Woodinville Shoreline Master Program (SMP)

	F	140 feet

	Np	70 feet

	Ns	50 feet

(ii) Measurement. The outer edge of the stream buffer shall be delineated through a survey and field investigation by a qualified professional.

(iii) Increased Widths. An increased buffer shall be required in accordance with the recommendations of a qualified professional and the best available science in the following circumstances:

(A) Where the standard width is insufficient to prevent habitat degradation and to protect the structure and functions of the habitat area;

(B) Where the frequently flooded area exceeds the standard stream buffer, the width shall extend to the outer edge of the frequently flooded area;

(C) Where the channel migration zone exceeds the standard stream buffer, the width shall extend to the outer edge of the channel migration zone; or

(D) The habitat area is in an area of high blow-down potential, the stream buffer shall be expanded an additional 50 feet on the windward side.

(iv) Urban Stream Designation. The City may approve further decreases to buffer widths on streams designated as “urban” in accordance with the recommendations of a qualified professional biologist and the best available science on a case-by-case basis. No buffer shall be reduced on a stream designated as “urban” to less than 50 feet wide unless the stream is not used by fish whereas the minimum buffer will be 35 feet. Stream enhancement measures shall be required to improve overall stream function. The City may designate a stream as “urban” if all of the following criteria are met:

(A) The stream is not a Type S stream;

(B) The stream has degraded channel conditions (e.g., presence of piping, sedimentation, channelization, etc.);

(C) The stream has buffers that are currently degraded or developed;

(D) The portion of the buffer affecting the subject property or development is located within the CBD, GB, or I zones;

(E) Stream enhancement shall be sufficient to protect stream buffer functions and values based on site-specific characteristics and must include enhancement measures implemented to provide a net improvement in overall stream and buffer function and value.

(2) Buffer Averaging. The minimum buffer width may be averaged in accordance with an approved critical areas report using the best available science and any management recommendations issued by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife. Averaging of buffer widths may only be allowed if all of the following criteria are met:

(a) It will provide additional protection to the fish and wildlife habitat conservation area and result in a net improvement of the habitat functions and values;

(b) It will not adversely affect salmonid habitat;

(c) The buffer width is not reduced by more than 25 percent of the standard width in any one location;

(d) It will provide additional natural resource protection, such as buffer enhancement;

(e) The total area contained in the buffer area after averaging is no less than that which would be contained within the standard buffer;

(f) The proposal includes revegetation and restoration of the averaged buffer using native plants; and

(g) Buffer averaging is not used in conjunction with a stream buffer reduction or urban stream designation.

(3) Building Setback. A minimum 10-foot building setback shall be required from the edge of the buffer for any building or structure to ensure adequate distance for maintenance and repair without encroaching into the buffers. Trails, sidewalks, or stormwater facilities may be located in the building setback as long as access for maintenance will not result in adverse impacts to the buffer.

(4) Protection. Whenever activities are proposed in or adjacent to a habitat conservation area with which State or Federally endangered or threatened species have a primary association, such area shall be protected through the application of measures in accordance with a critical areas report and approved by the City and guidance provided by the appropriate State and Federal agencies.

(5) Special Conditions. Buffers shall also be subject to modifications under the following site conditions:

(a) Geologically Sensitive Areas. The buffer or abutting uplands include a geologically sensitive area. The buffer width shall be the greater of either the required buffer or 25 feet beyond the top of the hazard area;

(b) Wetlands. Any fish and wildlife habitat conservation area adjoined by a riparian wetland shall have the buffer required for the habitat conservation area involved or the buffer which applies to the wetland, whichever is greater; or

(c) Other Critical Areas. If the habitat conservation area buffer is located adjacent to other critical areas, a larger buffer shall be required to protect other critical areas in accordance to the recommendations of a qualified professional and best available science.

(6) Signage and Fencing. Temporary and permanent signs and fencing shall be installed along the outer boundary of the fish and wildlife habitat conservation area buffer in accordance with WMC 21.51.140.

(7) Livestock. Property owners shall implement a farm management plan or standards to protect and enhance water quality pursuant to Chapter 21.31 WMC.

(8) Seasonal Restrictions. When a species is more susceptible to adverse impacts during specific periods of the year, as determined by the Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife, seasonal restrictions may apply. Larger buffers may be required and activities may be further restricted during the specified season. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.51.420 Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas – Permitted activities.

(1) Approval of Activities. The City shall condition approvals of activities allowed within or adjacent to a habitat conservation area or its buffers as necessary to minimize or mitigate any potential adverse impacts. Conditions shall be based on the best available science and may include, but are not limited to, the following:

(a) Establishment of buffer zones;

(b) Preservation of critically important vegetation and/or habitat features such as snags and downed wood;

(c) Limitation of access to the habitat area, including fencing to deter unauthorized access;

(d) Seasonal restriction of construction activities;

(e) Establishment of a duration and timetable for periodic review of mitigation activities; and

(f) Requirement of a performance bond, when necessary, to ensure completion and success of proposed mitigation.

(2) Hazardous Substances. The use of hazardous substances, pesticides, and fertilizers in the stream and its buffer is prohibited.

(3) Nonnative Species. The introduction of any plant, wildlife, or fish species not indigenous to the region shall be prohibited from fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas unless authorized by a State or Federal permit or approval.

(4) Alterations. Alterations to fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas and their buffers, except for in-stream environments, may be allowed in addition to those established in WMC 21.51.040 and 21.51.050. Where applicable, activities and uses shall also be subject to the Woodinville Shoreline Master Program (SMP).

(a) Utilities. Utilities may be allowed within fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas if:

(i) No practical alternative location is available;

(ii) The requirements for sewer utility corridors in WMC 21.51.320 are met;

(iii) Joint use of an approved utility corridor by more than one utility may be allowed; and

(iv) The utility corridor meets the provisions of Policies U-1.5 and U-1.8 of the City of Woodinville Comprehensive Plan.

(b) Surface Water Management Activities and Facilities. The following may be allowed within fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas as follows:

(i) Surface water discharge to a stream from a detention facility, presettlement pond or other surface water management activity or facility may be allowed if the discharge is in compliance with the City’s adopted surface water design manual;

(ii) Stormwater Management Facilities. Grass-lined swales and dispersal trenches may be located in the outer 25 percent of the buffer area. All other surface water management facilities are not allowed within the buffer area.

(c) Trails. Public and private trails, and/or visual access to the habitat conservation area, may be allowed if:

(i) Trail surface shall not be made of impervious materials, except that public multipurpose trails may be made of impervious materials if they meet all other requirements including water quality and quantity; and

(ii) Buffers shall be expanded, where possible, equal to the width of the trail corridor including disturbed areas.

(5) The following shall apply for areas with endangered or threatened species:

(a) No development shall be allowed within a habitat conservation area or its buffer with which State or Federally endangered, threatened, or sensitive species have a primary association, except that which is provided for by a management plan established by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife or applicable State or Federal agency.

(i) Areas shall be protected through the application of protection measures in accordance with a critical areas report prepared by a qualified professional and approved by the City.

(ii) Approval for alteration of land adjacent to the habitat conservation area or its buffer shall not occur prior to consultation with the Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife for animal species and the Washington Department of Natural Resources for plant species and other appropriate Federal or State agency.

(b) Bald Eagle Habitat.

(i) Bald eagle habitat shall be protected pursuant to the Washington State Bald Eagle Protection Rules (WAC 232-12-292) and the Federal Bald Eagle Protection Act.

(ii) Whenever activities are proposed within 800 feet of a verified nest territory or communal roost or within a quarter-mile of a shoreline foraging area, a critical areas report shall be developed by a qualified professional.

(iii) The applicant shall consult with U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service to determine if a permit is required.

(iv) The City shall verify the location of eagle management areas for each proposed activity.

(c) Great Blue Heron Rookeries.

(i) A buffer equal to the distance of 820 feet radius measured from the outermost nest tree in the rookery will be established around an active rookery. This area will be maintained in native vegetation.

(ii) Between January 1st and July 31st, no clearing, grading or land disturbing activity shall be allowed within 900 feet of the rookery, unless approved by the City and Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife.

(iii) Approval of all activities requiring permits shall not occur within 900 feet of a heron rookery prior to the approval of a critical areas report by the City and Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife.

(d) Anadromous Fish.

(i) All activities, uses, and alterations proposed to be located in water bodies used by anadromous fish or in areas that affect such water bodies shall give special consideration to the preservation and enhancement of anadromous fish habitat, including, but not limited to, the following standards:

(A) Activities shall be timed to occur only during the allowable work window as designated by the Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife for the applicable species;

(B) An alternative alignment or location for the activity is not feasible;

(C) The activity is designed so that it will not degrade the functions or values of the fish habitat or other critical areas;

(D) Shoreline erosion control measures shall be designed to use bioengineering methods or soft armoring techniques, according to an approved critical areas report; and

(E) Any impacts to the functions or values of the habitat conservation area are mitigated in accordance with an approved critical areas report.

(ii) Structures that prevent the migration of salmonids shall not be allowed in the portion of water bodies currently or historically used by anadromous fish. Fish bypass facilities shall be provided that allow the upstream migration of adult fish and shall prevent fry and juveniles migrating downstream from being trapped or harmed.

(iii) Fills, when authorized pursuant to the City of Woodinville’s Shoreline Management Master Program, shall not adversely impact anadromous fish or their habitat or shall mitigate any unavoidable impacts, and shall only be allowed for a water-dependent use.

(6) Alterations to streams and their buffers may be allowed in addition to those established in WMC 21.51.040 and the Woodinville Shoreline Master Program for Type S streams, as follows:

(a) Existing Roads. Widening of existing roads may be allowed on the outer 25 percent of the buffer area if:

(i) There is no practical alternative access with less adverse environmental impact;

(ii) The proposal minimizes impact to the stream and provides mitigation for unavoidable impacts through restoration, enhancement, or replacement of disturbed areas;

(iii) The proposal does not change the overall stream hydrology;

(iv) The proposal does not diminish the flood storage capacity of the stream;

(v) The proposal is constructed during summer low water periods; and

(vi) The proposal is the minimum size or length necessary to provide access.

(b) Stream Crossings. The use of existing crossings, including but not limited to utility corridors, road and railroad rights-of-way, across streams or buffers for public or private trails is preferred to new crossings. Stream crossings may be allowed if:

(i) All crossings use bridges or other construction techniques in accordance with best management practices which do not disturb the stream bed or bank, except that bottomless culverts or other appropriate methods demonstrated to provide fisheries protection may be used for Type F or Np streams if the applicant demonstrates that such methods and their implementation will pose no harm to the stream or inhibit migration of fish;

(ii) All crossings are constructed during the summer low flow and are timed to avoid stream disturbance during periods when use is critical to resident or anadromous fish including salmonids;

(iii) Crossings do not occur over resident or anadromous fish spawning areas unless the City determines that no other possible crossing site exists;

(iv) Bridge piers or abutments are not placed within the FEMA floodway or the ordinary high water mark;

(v) Crossings do not diminish the flood-carrying capacity of the stream;

(vi) Underground utility crossings are laterally drilled and located at a depth of four feet below the maximum depth of scour for the base flood predicted by a civil engineer licensed by the State of Washington; and

(vii) The number of crossings is minimized and consolidated to serve multiple purposes and properties whenever possible.

(c) Stream Relocations. Relocations may be allowed subject to the following limitations:

(i) Type F, Np, and Ns streams as part of a public road project for which a public agency and utility exception is granted pursuant to WMC 21.51.060;

(ii) Type F, Np, and Ns streams for the purpose of enhancing or restoring resources in the stream if:

(A) Appropriate floodplain protection measures are used;

(B) The relocation occurs on the site, except that relocation off the site may be allowed if the applicant demonstrates that any on-site relocation is impracticable, the applicant provides all necessary easements and waivers from affected property owners and the off-site location is in the same drainage sub-basin as the original stream; and

(C) A critical areas report shows that the relocation is beneficial to fish and wildlife habitat;

(iii) Relocations are constructed during the summer low flow and are timed to avoid stream disturbance during periods when use is critical to resident or anadromous fish including salmonids;

(iv) Streams shall not be relocated solely for development purposes;

(v) The applicant shall demonstrate, based on information provided by a civil engineer and a qualified biologist, that:

(A) Equivalent base flood storage volume and function will be maintained;

(B) No adverse impact to local ground water will occur;

(C) No increase in velocity will occur upstream or downstream;

(D) No increase in the sediment load will occur upstream or downstream;

(E) Requirements set out in the mitigation plan are met;

(F) Relocation conforms to other applicable laws; and

(G) All work will be carried out under the direct supervision of a qualified biologist; and

(vi) The applicant shall obtain all required State and Federal permits and authorization prior to conducting site work.

(d) Stream Channel Stabilization. A stream channel may be stabilized if:

(i) Movement of the stream channel threatens existing residential or commercial structures, public facilities or improvements, unique natural resources or the only existing access to property;

(ii) Stabilization is done in compliance with the requirements of WMC 21.51.350 through 21.51.380; and

(iii) Soft-bank stabilization techniques are utilized unless the applicant demonstrates that soft-bank techniques are not a reasonable alternative due to site-specific soil, geologic and/or hydrologic conditions.

(e) Enhancements. Stream enhancement not associated with any other development proposal may be allowed if accomplished according to a plan for its design, implementation, maintenance, and monitoring prepared by a civil engineer and a qualified biologist and carried out under the direct supervision of a qualified biologist pursuant to provisions of this chapter.

(f) Stream Restoration. A minor stream restoration project for fish habitat enhancement may be allowed if the restoration is:

(i) Sponsored or approved by a public agency with a mandate to do such work;

(ii) Not associated with mitigation of a specific development proposal;

(iii) Limited to placement of rock weirs, log controls, spawning gravel, culvert replacement and other specific habitat improvements for resident and anadromous fish including salmonid;

(iv) Involves the use of hand labor and light equipment; and/or the use of helicopters and cranes that deliver supplies to the project site; provided, that they have no contact with critical areas or their buffers; and

(v) Performed under the direct supervision of a qualified biologist. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.51.430 Fish and wildlife habitat conservation area – Critical areas report additional requirements.

(1) In addition to the general critical areas report requirements of WMC 21.51.110, critical areas reports for fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas shall include the following information:

(a) Prepared by a Qualified Professional. The critical areas report shall be prepared by a wildlife, stream or wetland biologist or scientist. The qualified professional shall have a minimum of five years of experience in the field and experience in preparing reports for fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas.

(b) Areas Addressed in Critical Areas Report. The following areas shall be addressed in a critical areas report for habitat conservation areas:

(i) The project area of the proposed activity;

(ii) All habitat conservation areas and recommended buffers within 200 feet of the project area; and

(iii) All shoreline areas, floodplains, other critical areas, and related buffers within 200 feet of the project area.

(c) Habitat Assessment. The report shall include an assessment of the presence or absence of potential critical fish or wildlife habitat. A habitat assessment shall include the following information:

(i) Extent of fish and wildlife habitat areas and required buffers;

(ii) Existing habitat area acreage;

(iii) Vegetative, faunal, and hydrologic characteristics;

(iv) Identification of species of local importance, priority species, or endangered, threatened, sensitive, or candidate species that have a primary association with habitat on or adjacent to the project area;

(v) Assessment of potential project impacts to the use of the site by the species;

(vi) A discussion of any Federal, State, or local special management recommendations, including Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife habitat management recommendations, that have been developed for species or habitats located on or adjacent to the project area; and

(vii) A detailed discussion of the direct and indirect potential impacts on habitat by the project, including potential impacts to water quality.

(d) Proposed Mitigation. If required, a mitigation plan consistent with WMC 21.51.120 and 21.51.440. The mitigation plan shall include a written assessment and accompanying maps of the mitigation area, including the following information at a minimum:

(i) Prohibition or limitation of development activities within the fish and wildlife habitat conservation area;

(ii) Establishment of a buffer around the fish and wildlife habitat conservation area;

(iii) Retention of certain vegetation or areas of vegetation critically important to the listed species;

(iv) Limitation of access to the fish and wildlife habitat conservation area and buffer;

(v) Seasonal restrictions on construction activities on the subject property;

(vi) Clustering of development on the subject property as appropriate; and

(vii) Preservation or creation of a habitat area for the listed species.

(e) Habitat Management. When appropriate due to the type of habitat or species present or the project area conditions, the City may also require a habitat management plan to include:

(i) A discussion of ongoing management practices that will protect habitat after the project site has been developed, including proposed monitoring and maintenance programs;

(ii) An evaluation by the Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife, affected tribes, or other qualified expert regarding the applicant’s analysis and the effectiveness of any proposed mitigating measures or programs, to include any recommendations as appropriate; and

(iii) A request for consultation with the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, affected tribes or other appropriate agency; and

(iv) Detailed surface and subsurface hydrologic features both on and adjacent to the site. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.51.440 Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas – Mitigation.

(1) General. Mitigation of alterations to habitat conservation areas shall achieve equivalent or greater biologic functions and shall include mitigation for adverse impacts upstream or downstream of the development proposal site as appropriate. Mitigation shall be supported by best available science and address each function affected by the alteration to achieve functional equivalency or improvement on a per function basis. Mitigation should occur in the same sub-drainage basin as the habitat.

(2) Sites. Mitigation sites shall be located to achieve contiguous wildlife habitat corridors in accordance with a mitigation plan and habitat management plan to minimize the isolating effects of development on habitat areas. Mitigation of aquatic habitat shall be located within the same aquatic ecosystem as the area disturbed.

(3) Restoration. Restoration or mitigation shall be required as part of a development proposal whereby impacts, either direct or indirect, to the habitat conservation area occur. Restoration shall also be required when a habitat conservation area or its buffer is altered in violation of law or without any specific permission or approval by the City. A mitigation plan for the restoration or mitigation, included as part of the critical areas report, shall demonstrate that:

(a) Habitat conservation area has been degraded and will not be further degraded by the restoration or mitigation activity;

(b) Restoration or mitigation will reliably and demonstrably improve the water quality and fish and wildlife habitat;

(c) Restoration or mitigation will result in no net loss and no significant adverse impact will occur to habitat functions; and

(d) On sites where nonnative vegetation was cleared, restoration shall include installation of native vegetation with a density equal to or greater than the predevelopment site conditions; and

(e) Restoration or mitigation will assist in stabilizing the stream channel.

(4) Stream Restoration and Mitigation. All restoration and/or mitigation projects for streams shall meet the following:

(a) All work shall be carried out under the direct supervision of a qualified biologist;

(b) Basin analysis shall be performed to determine hydrologic conditions;

(c) Natural channel dimensions shall be replicated including its depth, width, length, and gradient at the original location, and the original horizontal alignment (meander lengths) shall be replaced;

(d) Identical or similar materials shall be used to restore the stream bottom;

(e) Bank and buffer configuration shall be restored to its original condition;

(f) Channel, bank and buffer areas shall be replanted with native vegetation which replicates the original vegetation in species, sizes and densities; and

(g) Preexisting biologic functions of the stream shall be recreated.

(5) Stream Replacement or Enhancement. Replacement or enhancement for approved stream or buffer alterations shall be accomplished in streams and on the site unless the applicant demonstrates that:

(a) Enhancement or replacement on the site is not possible or on-site opportunities do not have a high likelihood of success due to development pressures, adjacent land uses, or on-site buffers or connectivity are inadequate;

(b) Off-site location is in the same drainage sub-basin as the original stream; and

(c) Greater biologic and hydrologic functions will be achieved.

(6) Surface Water Management. Surface water management or flood control alterations shall not be considered enhancement unless other functions are simultaneously improved.

(7) Daylighting. Daylighting a stream is encouraged when redeveloping. The Director may modify the requirements pertaining to aquatic areas and their buffers when locating or daylighting a stream.

(8) Monitoring and Maintenance. Mitigation sites shall be monitored and maintained consistent with WMC 21.51.130. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.51.450 City Development Services Director to administer.

Repealed by Ord. 699. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.51.460 Development permit required.

Repealed by Ord. 699. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.51.470 Duties of the City Development Services Director.

Repealed by Ord. 699. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.51.480 Flood variance procedure.

Repealed by Ord. 699. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.51.490 Conditions for flood variances.

Repealed by Ord. 699. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


Chapter 21.52 ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION

Sections: 

21.52.010    Authority.

21.52.020    General requirements – Adoption by reference.

21.52.030    Additional definitions.

21.52.040    Designation of responsible official.

21.52.050    Lead agency determination and responsibilities.

21.52.060    Transfer of lead agency status to a State agency.

21.52.070    Integration with permit and land use decisions.

21.52.080    Additional timing considerations.

21.52.090    Categorical exemptions and threshold determinations – Adoption by reference.

21.52.100    Thresholds for categorical exemptions.

21.52.110    Use of exemptions.

21.52.120    Environmental checklist.

21.52.130    Mitigated DNS (MDNS).

21.52.140    Optional DNS and MDNS process.

21.52.150    Environmental impact statement (EIS) – Adoption by reference.

21.52.160    Preparation of EIS – Additional considerations.

21.52.170    EIS – Commenting – Adoption by reference.

21.52.180    Reserved.

21.52.190    Public notice.

21.52.200    Designation of official to perform consulted agency responsibilities for the City.

21.52.210    Using existing environmental documents – Adoption by reference.

21.52.220    SEPA and agency decisions – Adoption by reference.

21.52.230    Substantive authority.

21.52.240    Appeals.

21.52.250    Notice/statute of limitations.

21.52.260    Definitions – Adoption by reference.

21.52.270    Agency compliance – Adoption by reference.

21.52.280    Critical areas.

21.52.290    Fees.

21.52.300    Forms – Adoption by reference.

21.52.310    WACs on file.

21.52.320    Initial SEPA analysis.

21.52.330    Categorically exempt and planned actions.


21.52.010 Authority.

The City adopts the ordinance codified in this chapter under the State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA) (RCW 43.21C.120) and the SEPA rules (WAC 197-11-904). This chapter contains the City’s SEPA procedures and policies. The SEPA rules contained in Chapter 197-11 WAC must be used in conjunction with this chapter. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.52.020 General requirements – Adoption by reference.

The City adopts the following sections of Chapter 197-11 WAC, as now existing or hereinafter amended, by reference:

WAC 

197-11-040    Definitions.

197-11-050    Lead agency.

197-11-055    Timing of the SEPA process.

197-11-060    Content of environmental review.

197-11-070    Limitations on actions during SEPA process.

197-11-080    Incomplete or unavailable information.

197-11-090    Supporting documents.

197-11-100    Information required of applicants.

197-11-158    GMA project review – Reliance on existing plans and relations.

197-11-164    Planned actions – Definition and criteria.

197-11-168    Ordinances or resolutions designating planned actions – Procedures for adoption.

197-11-172    Planned actions – Project review.

197-11-210    SEPA/GMA integration.

197-11-220    SEPA/GMA definitions.

197-11-228    Overall SEPA/GMA integration procedures.

197-11-230    Timing of an integrated GMA/SEPA process.

197-11-232    SEPA/GMA integration procedures for preliminary planning, environmental analysis, and expanded scoping.

197-11-235    Documents.

197-11-238    Monitoring.

197-11-250    SEPA/Model Toxics Control Act (MTCA) integration.

197-11-253    SEPA lead agency for MTCA actions.

197-11-256    Preliminary evaluation.

197-11-259    Determination of nonsignificance for MTCA remedial actions.

197-11-262    Determination of significance and environmental impact statement (EIS) for MTCA remedial actions.

197-11-265    Early scoping for MTCA remedial actions.

197-11-268    MTCA interim actions.

(Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.52.030 Additional definitions.

In addition to those definitions contained within WAC 197-11-700 through 197-11-799, when used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context indicates otherwise:

(1) “Department” means any division, subdivision, or organizational unit of the City established by ordinance, rule, or order. 

(2) “SEPA rules” means Chapter 197-11 WAC adopted by the Department of Ecology. 

(3) “Ordinance” means the ordinance, resolution, or other procedure used by the City to adopt regulatory requirements.

(4) “Early notice” means the City’s response to an applicant stating whether it considers issuance of a determination of significance likely for the applicant’s proposal (mitigated determination of nonsignificance (DNS) procedures). (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.52.040 Designation of responsible official.

(1) For those proposals for which the City is the lead agency, the responsible official shall be the Planning Director, or such other person as the City Manager may designate in writing. 

(2) For all proposals for which the City is the lead agency, the responsible official shall make the threshold determination, supervise scoping and preparation of any required environmental impact statement (EIS), and perform any other functions assigned to the lead agency or responsible official by those sections of the SEPA rules that were adopted by reference in WMC 21.52.020.

(3) The City shall retain all documents required by the SEPA rules (Chapter 197-11 WAC) and make them available in accordance with Chapter 42.56 RCW. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.52.050 Lead agency determination and responsibilities.

(1) When the City receives an application for or initiating a proposal that involves a nonexempt action, the responsible official shall determine the lead agency for that proposal under WAC 197-11-050 and 197-11-922 through 197-11-940, unless the lead agency has been previously determined or the department is aware that another department or agency is in the process of determining the lead agency. 

(2) When the City is not the lead agency for a proposal, all departments of the City shall use and consider, as appropriate, either the DNS or the final EIS of the lead agency in making decisions on the proposal. No City department shall prepare or require preparation of a DNS or EIS in addition to that prepared by the lead agency, unless the City determines a supplemental environmental review is necessary under WAC 197-11-600. 

(3) If the City or any of its departments receives a lead agency determination made by another agency that appears inconsistent with the criteria of WAC 197-11-922 through 197-11-940, it may object to the determination. Any objection must be made to the agency originally making the determination and resolved within 14 days of receipt of the determination, or the City must petition the Department of Ecology for a lead agency determination under WAC 197-11-946 within the 14-day time period. Any such petition on behalf of the City may be initiated by the responsible official.

(4) The responsible official is authorized to make agreements as to lead agency status or shared lead agency duties for a proposal under WAC 197-11-942 and 197-11-944; provided, that the responsible official and any department that will incur responsibilities as the result of such agreement approve the agreement.

(5) The responsible official, when making a lead agency determination for a private project, shall require sufficient information from the applicant to identify which other agencies have jurisdiction over the proposal. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.52.060 Transfer of lead agency status to a State agency.

For any proposal for a private project where the City would be the lead agency and for which one or more State agencies have jurisdiction, the City’s responsible official may elect to transfer the lead agency duties to a State agency. The State agency with jurisdiction appearing first on the priority listing in WAC 197-11-936 shall be the lead agency and the City shall be agency with jurisdiction. To transfer lead agency duties, the City’s responsible official must transmit a notice of the transfer together with any relevant information available on the proposal to the appropriate State agency with jurisdiction. The responsible official of the City shall also give notice of the transfer to the private applicant and any other agencies with jurisdiction over the proposal. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.52.070 Integration with permit and land use decisions.

Under State law, the procedure for review of project permits shall be combined with the environmental review process, both procedural and substantive. The process under SEPA and this chapter shall integrate the following procedures, insofar as possible, with any applicable process for decisionmaking on permit and land use applications:

(1) Staff review of the application under City codes and regulations and the environmental review and determination thereon;

(2) The staff report on the application and the report or documentation concerning environmental review;

(3) Hearings and other public processes, including required public notices, required by City code or regulation, and hearings and other public processes, including public notices, required or conducted under SEPA. This section shall include all appeals, except as otherwise expressly provided by this code;

(4) Such other review processes as the Planning Director shall determine. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.52.080 Additional timing considerations.

(1) For nonexempt proposals, the DNS or draft EIS for the proposal shall accompany the City’s staff recommendation to any appropriate advisory body, such as the Planning Commission.

(2) If the City’s only action on a proposal is a decision on a building permit or other permit that requires detailed project plans and specifications, the applicant may request in writing that the City conduct environmental review prior to submission of the detailed plans and specifications. In addition to the environmental documents, the applicant shall submit such additional information as required by the responsible official. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.52.090 Categorical exemptions and threshold determinations – Adoption by reference.

The City adopts the following sections of Chapter 197-11 WAC, as now existing or hereinafter amended, by reference: 

WAC

197-11-300    Purpose of this part.

197-11-305    Categorical exemptions.

197-11-310    Threshold determination required.

197-11-315    Environmental checklist.

197-11-330    Threshold determination process.

197-11-335    Additional information.

197-11-340    Determination of nonsignificance (DNS).

197-11-350    Mitigated DNS.

197-11-355    Optional DNS process.

197-11-360    Determination of significance (DS)/Initiation of scoping.

197-11-390    Effect of threshold determination.

197-11-800    Categorical exemptions.

197-11-880    Emergencies.

197-11-890    Petitioning DOE to change exemptions.

(Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.52.100 Thresholds for categorical exemptions.

The City hereby adopts the following thresholds for minor new construction under WAC 197-11-800(1)(b) and RCW 43.21C.410 based on local conditions:

(1) For residential dwelling units in WAC 197-11-800(1)(b)(i): up to four dwelling units;

(2) For agricultural structures in WAC 197-11-800(1)(b)(ii): up to 10,000 square feet;

(3) For office, school, commercial, recreational services, or storage building in WAC 197-11-800(1)(b)(iii): up to 4,000 square feet and 20 parking spaces;

(4) For parking lots in WAC 197-11-800(1)(b)(iv): up to 20 parking spaces;

(5) For landfills and excavations in WAC 197-11-800(1)(b)(v): up to 100 cubic yards; and

(6) The construction of an individual battery charging station or an individual battery exchange station, as defined in Chapter 21.11 WMC.

(7) Whenever the City establishes new exempt levels under this section, it shall send them to the Department of Ecology, Headquarters Office, Olympia, Washington, under WAC 197-11-800(1)(c). (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.52.110 Use of exemptions.

(1) When the City receives an application for a license or, in the case of governmental proposals, a department initiates a proposal, the responsible official shall determine whether the license and/or the proposal is exempt. The responsible official’s determination that a proposal is exempt shall be final and not subject to administrative review. If a proposal is exempt, none of the procedural requirements of this chapter apply to the proposal. The City shall not require completion of an environmental checklist for an exempt proposal.

(2) In determining whether or not a proposal is exempt, the responsible official shall make certain the proposal is properly defined and shall identify the governmental licenses required (WAC 197-11-060). If a proposal includes exempt and nonexempt actions, the responsible official shall determine the lead agency, even if the license application that triggers the responsible official’s consideration is exempt.

(3) Planned Actions. 

(a) A planned action does not require a threshold determination or the preparation of an environmental impact statement under SEPA, but is subject to environmental review and mitigation under SEPA.

(b) A “planned action” means one or more types of project action that:

(i) Are designated planned actions by an ordinance or resolution adopted by the City;

(ii) Have had the significant impacts adequately addressed in an environmental impact statement prepared in conjunction with:

(A) A comprehensive plan or subarea plan adopted under Chapter 36.70A RCW; or

(B) A fully contained community, a master planned resort, a master planned development or a phased project;

(iii) Are subsequent or implementing projects for the proposals listed in subsection (3)(b)(ii) of this section;

(iv) Are located within an urban growth area, as defined in RCW 36.70A.030;

(v) Are not essential public facilities, as defined in RCW 36.70A.200; and 

(vi) Are consistent with the City’s Comprehensive Plan adopted under Chapter 36.70A RCW.

(c) Limitations on Planned Actions. The City shall limit planned actions to certain types of development or to specific geographical areas that are less extensive than the jurisdictional boundaries of the City, and may limit a planned action to a time period identified in the environmental impact statement or the adoption of this code.

(4) If a proposal includes both exempt and nonexempt actions, the responsible official may authorize exempt actions prior to compliance with the procedural requirements of this chapter, except that:

(a) The City shall not give authorization for:

(i) Any nonexempt action,

(ii) Any action that would have an adverse environmental impact, or

(iii) Any action that would limit the choice of alternatives;

(b) A department may withhold approval of an exempt action that would lead to modification of the physical environment, when such modification would serve no purpose if nonexempt action(s) were not approved; and 

(c) A department may withhold approval of exempt actions that would lead to substantial financial expenditures by a private applicant when the expenditures would serve no purpose if nonexempt action(s) were not approved. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.52.120 Environmental checklist.

(1) A completed environmental checklist shall be filed at the same time as an application for a permit, license, certificate, or other approval not specifically exempted in this chapter; except, a checklist is not needed if the City and applicant agree that an EIS is required, SEPA compliance has been completed, or SEPA compliance has been initiated by another agency. The City shall use the environmental checklist to determine the lead agency and, if the City is the lead agency, for making the threshold determination. The checklist shall be in the form of WAC 197-11-960 with the following addition(s): The signature line shall state:

I certify (or declare) under penalty of perjury under the laws of the state of Washington that the above answers are true and complete to the best of my knowledge. I understand the lead agency is relying on them to make its decision.

(2) For private proposals, the City will require the applicant to complete the environmental checklist, providing assistance as necessary. For City proposals, the department initiating the proposal shall complete the environmental checklist for that proposal. 

(3) The City may require that it, and not the private applicant, will complete all or part of the environmental checklist for a private proposal, if either of the following occurs: 

(a) The City has technical information on a question or questions that is unavailable to the private applicant; or

(b) The applicant has provided inaccurate information on previous proposals or on proposals currently under consideration. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.52.130 Mitigated DNS (MDNS).

(1) As provided in this section and in WAC 197-11-350, the responsible official may issue a DNS based on conditions attached to the proposal by the responsible official, or on changes to, or clarifications of, the proposal made by the applicant.

(2) An applicant may request in writing early notice of whether a DS is likely under WAC 197-11-350. The request must: 

(a) Follow submission of a permit application and environmental checklist for a nonexempt proposal for which the department is lead agency; and 

(b) Precede the City’s actual threshold determination for the proposal. 

(3) The responsible official should respond to the request for early notice within 14 working days. The response shall:

(a) Be written;

(b) State whether the City currently considers issuance of a DS likely and, if so, indicate the general or specific area(s) of concern that is/are leading the City to consider a DS; and

(c) State that the applicant may change or clarify the proposal to mitigate the indicated impacts, revising the environmental checklist and/or permit application as necessary to reflect the changes or clarifications. 

(4) As much as possible, the City should assist the applicant with identification of impacts to the extent necessary to formulate mitigation measures.

(5) When an applicant submits a changed or clarified proposal, along with a revised environmental checklist, the City shall base its threshold determination on the changed or clarified proposal and should make the determination within 15 days of receiving the changed or clarified proposal.

(a) If the City indicated specific mitigation measures in its response to the request for early notice, and the applicant changed or clarified the proposal to include those specific mitigation measures, the City shall issue and circulate a DNS if the City determines that no additional information or mitigation measures are required.

(b) If the City indicated areas of concern, but did not indicate specific mitigation measures that would allow it to issue a DNS, the City shall make the threshold determination, issuing a DNS or DS as appropriate. 

(c) The applicant’s proposed mitigation measures (clarifications, changes, or conditions) must be in writing and must be specific. For example, proposals to “control noise” or “prevent stormwater runoff” are inadequate, whereas proposals to “muffle machinery to X decibel” or “construct 200-foot stormwater retention pond at Y location” are adequate.

(d) Mitigation measures that justify issuance of a mitigated DNS (MDNS) may be incorporated in the DNS by reference to agency staff reports, studies, or other documents.

(6) The City shall not act upon a proposal for which a mitigated DNS has been issued for 14 days after the date of issuance. 

(7) A MDNS is issued under either WAC 197-11-340(2), requiring a 14-day comment period and public notice, or WAC 197-11-355(5), which may require no additional comment period beyond the comment period on the notice of application.

(8) Mitigation measures incorporated in the MDNS shall be deemed conditions of approval of the permit decision and may be enforced in the same manner as any terms or conditions of the permit, or enforced in any manner specifically prescribed by the City. Failure to comply with the designated mitigation measures shall be grounds for suspension and/or revocation of any permit issued. 

(9) If the City’s tentative decision on a permit or approval does not include mitigation measures that were incorporated in a mitigated DNS for the proposal, the City should evaluate the threshold determination to assure consistency with WAC 197-11-340(3)(a) (withdrawal of DNS).

(10) The City’s written response under subsection (3) of this section shall not be construed as a determination of significance. In addition, preliminary discussion of clarification or changes to a proposal, as opposed to a written request for early notice, shall not bind the City to consider the clarifications or changes in its threshold determination. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.52.140 Optional DNS and MDNS process.

(1) If the responsible official has a reasonable basis for determining that significant adverse environmental impacts are unlikely, the responsible official may elect to use the single integrated comment period set forth in this section. If this process is used, a second comment period is not required when the DNS is issued.

(2) If the optional process set forth in this section is used, the responsible official shall:

(a) State on the first page of the notice of application that it expects to issue a DNS (MDNS) for the proposal, and that:

(i) The optional DNS process is being used;

(ii) This may be the only opportunity to comment on the environmental impacts of the proposal;

(iii) The proposal may include mitigation measures under applicable codes, and the project review process may incorporate or require mitigation measures regardless of whether an EIS is prepared; and 

(iv) A copy of the subsequent threshold determination for the specific proposal may be obtained upon request (in addition, the City may choose to maintain a general mailing list for threshold determination distribution);

(b) List in the notice of application the conditions being considered to mitigate environmental impacts, if a MDNS is expected;

(c) Comply with the requirements for a notice of application and public notice in RCW 36.70B.110; and

(d) Send the notice of application and environmental checklist to:

(i) Agencies with jurisdiction, the Department of Ecology, affected tribes, and each local agency or political subdivision whose public services would be changed as a result of implementation of the proposal; and

(ii) Anyone requesting a copy of the environmental checklist for the specific proposal (in addition, the City may choose to maintain a general mailing list for checklist distribution).

(3) If the responsible official indicates on the notice of application that a DNS is likely, an agency with jurisdiction may assume lead agency status during the comment period on the notice of application in accordance with WMC 21.52.040 and WAC 197-11-948.

(4) The responsible official shall consider timely comments on the notice of application and either:

(a) Issue a DNS or MDNS with no comment period using the procedures in subsection (5) of this section;

(b) Issue a DNS or MDNS with a comment period using the procedures in subsection (5) of this section;

(c) Issue a DS; or

(d) Require additional information or studies prior to making a threshold determination.

(5) If a DNS or MDNS is issued under subsection (4)(a) or (4)(b) of this section, the responsible official shall send a copy of the DNS or MDNS to the Department of Ecology, agencies with jurisdiction, those who commented, and anyone requesting a copy. A copy of the environmental checklist need not be circulated. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.52.150 Environmental impact statement (EIS) – Adoption by reference.

The City adopts the following sections of Chapter 197-11 WAC, as now existing or hereinafter amended, by reference:

WAC

197-11-400    Purpose of EIS.

197-11-402    General requirements.

197-11-405    EIS types.

197-11-406    EIS timing.

197-11-408    Scoping.

197-11-410    Expanded scoping.

197-11-420    EIS preparation.

197-11-425    Style and size.

197-11-430    Format.

197-11-435    Cover letter or memo.

197-11-440    EIS contents.

197-11-442    Contents of EIS on nonproject proposals.

197-11-443    EIS contents when prior nonproject EIS.

197-11-444    Elements of the environment.

197-11-448    Relationship of EIS to other considerations. 

197-11-450    Cost-benefit analysis.

197-11-455    Issuance of draft environmental impact statement (DEIS).

197-11-460    Issuance of final environmental impact statement (FEIS).

(Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.52.160 Preparation of EIS – Additional considerations.

(1) Preparation of draft and final EISs (DEIS and FEIS) and draft and final supplemental EISs (SEIS) is the responsibility of the Planning Department under the direction of the responsible official. Before the City issues an EIS, the responsible official shall be satisfied that it complies with this chapter and Chapter 197-11 WAC. 

(2) The draft and final EIS or SEIS shall be prepared, at the City’s option, by the City staff, the applicant, or a consultant approved by the City. If the responsible official requires an EIS for a proposal and determines that someone other than the City will prepare the EIS, the responsible official shall notify the applicant immediately after completion of the threshold determination. The responsible official shall also notify the applicant of the City’s procedure for EIS preparation, including approval of the DEIS and FEIS prior to distribution. 

(3) The City may require an applicant to provide information the City does not possess, including specific investigations. However, the applicant is not required to supply information that is not required under this chapter or that is being requested from another agency. (This does not apply to information the City may request under another ordinance or statute.) (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.52.170 EIS – Commenting – Adoption by reference.

The City adopts the following sections of Chapter 197-11 WAC, as now existing or hereinafter amended, by reference: 

WAC

197-11-500    Purpose of this part.

197-11-502    Inviting comment.

197-11-504    Availability and cost of environmental documents.

197-11-508    SEPA register.

197-11-535    Public hearings and meetings.

197-11-545    Effect of no comment.

197-11-550    Specificity of comments.

197-11-560    FEIS response to comments.

197-11-570    Consulted agency costs to assist lead agency.

(Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.52.180 Reserved.

(Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.52.190 Public notice.

(1) Whenever possible, the City shall integrate the public notice required under this section with existing notice procedures for the City’s nonexempt permit(s) or approval(s) required for the proposal. 

(2) Whenever the City issues a DNS under WAC 197-11-340(2) or a DS under WAC 197-11-360(3), the City shall give public notice as follows:

(a) If no public notice is otherwise required for the permit or approval, the City shall give notice of the DNS or DS by at least one of the following:

(i) Publishing notice in the City’s official newspaper;

(ii) Mailing notice to property owners per WMC 21.84.040; or

(iii) Noticing as otherwise required or allowed by Chapter 21.84 WMC.

(b) Whenever the City issues a DS under WAC 197-11-360(3), the City shall state the scoping procedure for the proposal in the DS as required in WAC 197-11-408 and in the public notice.

(c) If the DS is made concurrent with the notice of application, the DS and scoping notice shall be combined with the notice of application issued under RCW 36.70B.110. Nothing in this subsection prevents the DS/scoping notice from being issued before the notice of application. If sufficient information is not available to make a threshold determination when the notice of application is issued, the DS may be issued later in the review process.

(d) If an open record predecision hearing is required, the threshold determination shall be issued at least 15 days before the open record predecision hearing.

(3) Whenever the City issues a DEIS under WAC 197-11-455(5) or a SEIS under WAC 197-11-620, notice of the availability of those documents shall be given by:

(a) Indicating the availability of the DEIS in any public notice required for a nonexempt permit; and

(b) One or more of the following:

(i) Posting the property for site-specific proposal;

(ii) Publishing notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the County, City, or general area where the proposal is located;

(iii) Notifying public or private groups which have expressed interest in a certain proposal or in the type of proposal being considered;

(iv) Notifying the news media;

(v) Placing notices in appropriate regional, neighborhood, ethnic, or trade journals; and/or

(vi) Publishing notice in agency newsletters and/or sending notice to agency mailing lists (general lists or specific lists for proposals or subject areas).

(4) The City may require an applicant to complete the public notice requirements for the applicant’s proposal at his or her expense. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.52.200 Designation of official to perform consulted agency responsibilities for the City.

(1) The responsible official shall be responsible for preparation of written comments for the City in response to a consultation request prior to a threshold determination, participation in scoping, and reviewing a DEIS.

(2) This responsible official shall be responsible for the City’s compliance with WAC 197-11-550 whenever the City is a consulted agency and is authorized to develop operating procedures that will ensure that responses to consultation requests are prepared in a timely fashion and include data from all appropriate departments of the City. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.52.210 Using existing environmental documents – Adoption by reference.

The City adopts the following sections of Chapter 197-11 WAC as now existing or hereinafter amended, by reference: 

WAC

197-11-600    When to use existing environmental documents.

197-11-610    Use of NEPA documents.

197-11-620    Supplemental environmental impact statement – Procedures.

197-11-625    Addenda – Procedures.

197-11-630    Adoption – Procedures.

197-11-635    Incorporation by reference – Procedures.

197-11-640    Combining documents.

(Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.52.220 SEPA and agency decisions – Adoption by reference.

The City adopts the following sections of Chapter 197-11 WAC, as now existing or hereinafter amended, by reference:

WAC

197-11-650    Purpose of this part.

197-11-655    Implementation.

197-11-660    Substantive authority and mitigation.

197-11-680    Appeals.

197-11-700    Definitions.

(Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.52.230 Substantive authority.

(1) The policies and goals set forth in this chapter are supplementary to those in the existing authorization of the City of Woodinville.

(2) The City may attach conditions to a permit or approval for a proposal so long as: 

(a) Such conditions are necessary to mitigate specific probable adverse environmental impacts clearly identified in an environmental document prepared pursuant to this chapter;

(b) Such conditions are in writing;

(c) The mitigation measures included in such conditions are reasonable and capable of being accomplished;

(d) The City has considered whether other local, State, or Federal mitigation measures applied to the proposal are sufficient to mitigate the identified impacts; and

(e) Such conditions are based on one or more policies in subsection (4) of this section and cited in the license or other decision document. 

(3) The City may deny a permit or approval for a proposal on the basis of SEPA so long as: 

(a) A finding is made that approving the proposal would result in probable significant adverse environmental impacts that are identified in an FEIS or final SEIS prepared pursuant to this chapter;

(b) A finding is made that there are no reasonable mitigation measures capable of being accomplished that are sufficient to mitigate the identified impact; and 

(c) The denial is based on one or more policies identified in subsection (4) of this section and identified in writing in the decision document.

(4) The City designates and adopts by reference the following policies as the basis for the City’s exercise of authority pursuant to this section:

(a) The City shall use all practicable means, consistent with other essential considerations of State policy, to improve and coordinate plans, functions, programs, and resources to the end that the State and its citizens may:

(i) Fulfill the responsibilities of each generation as trustee of the environment for succeeding generations;

(ii) Assure for all people of Washington safe, healthful, productive and aesthetically and culturally pleasing surroundings;

(iii) Attain the widest range of beneficial uses of the environment without degradation, risk to health or safety, or other undesirable and unintended consequences;

(iv) Preserve important historic, cultural, and natural aspects of our national heritage;

(v) Maintain, wherever possible, an environment which supports diversity and variety of individual choice;

(vi) Achieve a balance between population and resource use that will permit high standards of living and a wide sharing of life’s amenities; and

(vii) Enhance the quality of renewable resources and approach the maximum attainable recycling of depletable resources.

(b) The City adopts by reference the policies in the following City codes, ordinances, resolutions, and plans as adopted by the City:

(i) Chapter 43.21C RCW – State Environmental Policy Act;

(ii) Woodinville Municipal Code;

(iii) Woodinville Comprehensive Plan;

(iv) Woodinville Transportation Plan;

(v) Woodinville Storm Drainage Plan;

(vi) Woodinville Shoreline Master Plan;

(vii) Woodinville Emergency Management Plan;

(viii) Woodinville Capital Improvement Plan;

(ix) Woodinville Water District Water Plan;

(x) Woodinville Water District Sewer Plan. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.52.240 Appeals.

(1) Unless otherwise provided by this section:

(a) Appeals under this chapter shall be of the governmental action together with its accompanying environmental determinations and shall be heard pursuant to Chapter 21.85 WMC, Appeals, and Chapter 2.30 WMC, Appeal Procedures.

(b) Appeals of environmental determinations made (or lacking) under this chapter shall be commenced within the time required to appeal the governmental action which is subject to the environmental review.

(2) The City shall not allow more than one City appeal proceeding on a procedural determination (the adequacy of a determination of significance/nonsignificance or of a final EIS).

(3) The City shall consolidate an appeal of procedural issues and of substantive determinations made under this chapter (such as a decision to require particular mitigation measures or to deny a proposal) with a hearing or appeal on the underlying governmental action by providing for a single simultaneous hearing before the Hearing Examiner to consider the City’s decision on a proposal and any environmental determinations made under this chapter.

(4) The City establishes the following administrative appeal procedures: Appeals to SEPA decisions are heard by the Hearing Examiner. For SEPA decision appeals made prior to project decision, only one open record public hearing before the Hearing Examiner will be held for both the SEPA appeal and the project permit. The Hearing Examiner shall be the responsible authority for both the SEPA appeal decision and the project permit decision. This includes project permits that would otherwise be heard by another decisionmaker, such as the Planning Director or City Council. Any agency or person may appeal the City’s procedural compliance with Chapter 197-11 WAC for issuance of the following determinations:

(a) A Final DNS or Mitigated DNS (MDNS) Made Prior to Project Permit Decision. An appeal of the DNS or MDNS made prior to the final permit decision must be made to the Hearing Examiner within 14 days of the date the DNS or MDNS becomes final. The appeal period shall be extended an additional seven days if State or local rules adopted pursuant to Chapter 43.21C RCW (SEPA) allow public comment on a DNS issued as part of the appealable decision.

(b) A Final DNS or Mitigated DNS (MDNS) Made with Project Permit Decision. An appeal of the DNS or MDNS must be made to the Hearing Examiner within 14 days of the date the DNS or MDNS becomes final. The appeal period shall be extended an additional seven days if State or local rules adopted pursuant to Chapter 43.21C RCW (SEPA) allow public comment on a DNS issued as part of the appealable decision. The appeal is heard as an open record hearing by the Hearing Examiner, together with an appeal on the underlying governmental action; provided, that if an open record predecision hearing has already been held, the Hearing Examiner shall hear the appeal as a closed record appeal.

(c) A Final Determination of Significance (DS). An appeal of the DS must be made to the Hearing Examiner within 14 days of the date the DS becomes final. The appeal is heard as an open record hearing by the Hearing Examiner. A subsequent open record hearing may be held on the underlying action and accompanying SEPA documents (including an EIS, if one is prepared), and SEPA substantive determinations.

(5) For any appeal under this section, the City shall provide for a record that shall consist of the following: 

(a) Finding and conclusions; 

(b) Testimony under oath; and 

(c) A taped or written transcript. 

(6) The City may require the applicant to provide an electronic transcript. 

(7) The procedural determination by the City’s responsible official shall carry substantial weight in any appeal proceeding. 

(8) No permit shall be issued which would allow construction, demolition, grading, or other direct modification of the physical environment until expiration of the period for filing a notice of appeal, and until any appeal shall have been finalized at the Hearing Examiner level. 

(9) The City shall give official notice whenever it issues a permit or approval for which a statute or ordinance establishes a time limit for commencing judicial appeal. The following permits or approvals require official notice: all actions of the City Council, a City official, the Hearing Examiner, or any board or commission for which no further administrative appeal is provided.

(10) Except for permits and variances issued pursuant to Chapter 21.70 WMC, Shoreline Management, when any proposal or action not requiring a decision of the City’s Hearing Examiner is conditioned or denied on the basis of SEPA by a nonelected official, the decision shall be appealable to the City’s Hearing Examiner. Such appeal may be perfected by the proponent or any aggrieved party by giving notice to the responsible official within 14 days of the decision being appealed. Review by the Hearing Examiner shall be on a de novo basis. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.52.250 Notice/statute of limitations.

(1) The City, applicant, or proponent of an action may publish a notice of action pursuant to RCW 43.21C.080 for any action. 

(2) The form of the notice shall be substantially in the form provided in WAC 197-11-990. The notice shall be published by the City Clerk, applicant or proponent pursuant to RCW 43.21C.080. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.52.260 Definitions – Adoption by reference.

The City adopts the following sections of Chapter 197-11 WAC, as now existing or hereinafter amended, by reference:

WAC 

197-11-700    Definitions.

197-11-702    Act.

197-11-704    Action.

197-11-706    Addendum.

197-11-708    Adoption.

197-11-710    Affected tribe.

197-11-712    Affecting.

197-11-714    Agency.

197-11-716    Applicant.

197-11-718    Built environment.

197-11-720    Categorical exemption.

197-11-721    Closed record appeal.

197-11-722    Consolidated appeal.

197-11-724    Consulted agency.

197-11-726    Cost-benefit analysis.

197-11-728    County/city.

197-11-730    Decisionmaker.

197-11-732    Department.

197-11-734    Determination of nonsignificance (DNS).

197-11-736    Determination of significance (DS).

197-11-738    EIS.

197-11-740    Environment.

197-11-742    Environmental checklist.

197-11-744    Environmental document.

197-11-746    Environmental review.

197-11-750    Expanded scoping.

197-11-752    Impacts.

197-11-754    Incorporation by reference.

197-11-756    Lands covered by water.

197-11-758    Lead agency.

197-11-760    License.

197-11-762    Local agency.

197-11-764    Major action.

197-11-766    Mitigated DNS.

197-11-768    Mitigation.

197-11-770    Natural environment.

197-11-772    NEPA.

197-11-774    Nonproject.

197-11-775    Open record hearing.

197-11-776    Phased review.

197-11-778    Preparation.

197-11-780    Private project.

197-11-782    Probable.

197-11-784    Proposal.

197-11-786    Reasonable alternative.

197-11-788    Responsible official.

197-11-790    SEPA.

197-11-792    Scope.

197-11-793    Scoping.

197-11-794    Significant.

197-11-796    State agency.

197-11-797    Threshold determination.

197-11-799    Underlying governmental action.

(Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.52.270 Agency compliance – Adoption by reference.

The City adopts the following sections of Chapter 197-11 WAC, as now existing or hereinafter amended, by reference:

WAC 

197-11-900    Purpose of this part.

197-11-902    Agency SEPA policies.

197-11-916    Application to ongoing actions.

197-11-920    Agencies with environmental expertise.

197-11-922    Lead agency rules.

197-11-924    Determining the lead agency.

197-11-926    Lead agency for governmental proposals.

197-11-928    Lead agency for public and private proposals.

197-11-930    Lead agency for private projects with one agency with jurisdiction.

197-11-932    Lead agency for private projects requiring licenses from more than one agency, when one of the agencies is a county/city.

197-11-934    Lead agency for private projects requiring licenses from a local agency, not a county/city, and one or more state agencies.

197-11-936    Lead agency for private projects requiring licenses from more than one state agency.

197-11-938    Lead agencies for specific proposals.

197-11-940    Transfer of lead agency status to a state agency.

197-11-942    Agreements on lead agency status.

197-11-944    Agreements on division of lead agency duties.

197-11-946    DOE resolution of lead agency disputes.

197-11-948    Assumption of lead agency status.

(Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.52.280 Critical areas.

(1) The City has selected certain categorical exemptions that will not apply in critical areas identified in the critical areas development regulations required under RCW 36.70A.060 (see Chapter 21.51 WMC for critical areas regulations). For any critical area, the exemptions within WAC 197-11-800 that are inapplicable for that area are WAC 197-11-800(1), (2)(a) through (h), (24)(c), (e), (g), (h) and (25).

(2) The scope of environmental review of actions with these areas shall be limited to:

(a) Documenting whether the proposal is consistent with the requirements of the critical areas ordinance; and

(b) Evaluating potentially significant impacts on the critical area resources not adequately addressed by GMA planning documents and development regulations, if any, including any additional mitigation measures needed to protect the critical areas in order to achieve consistency with SEPA and with other applicable environmental review laws. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.52.290 Fees.

The City shall require fees in such amounts as are established by the City Council pursuant to such periodic resolution as the Council, from time to time, updates and approves for its activities in accordance with the provisions of this chapter:

(1) Threshold Determination. For every environmental checklist the City will review when it is the lead agency, the City/County shall collect an established fee from the proponent of the proposal prior to undertaking a basic threshold determination. The time periods provided by this chapter for making a threshold determination shall not begin to run until payment of the fee.

(2) Environmental Impact Statement. 

(a) When the City is the lead agency for a proposal requiring an EIS and the responsible official determines that the EIS shall be prepared by employees of the City, the City may charge and collect a reasonable fee from any applicant to cover costs incurred by the City in preparing the EIS. The responsible official shall advise the applicant(s) of the projected costs for the EIS prior to actual preparation; the applicant shall post bond or otherwise ensure payment of such costs.

(b) The responsible official may determine that the City will contract directly with a consultant for preparation of an EIS, or a portion of the EIS, for activities initiated by some persons or entity other than the City and may bill such costs and expenses directly to the applicant. Such consultant shall be selected by the City. 

(c) The applicant shall pay the projected amount to the City prior to commencing work. The City will refund the excess, if any, at the completion of the EIS. If the City’s costs exceed the projected costs, the applicant shall immediately pay the excess. If a proposal is modified so that an EIS is no longer required, the responsible official shall refund any fees collected under subsection (2)(a) or (b) of this section which remain after incurred costs, including overhead, are paid. 

(d) For all proposals in which the City is the lead agency and the responsible official determines that an EIS is required, the applicant shall be charged $500.00 or a fee equal to five percent of the costs of the draft and final EISs, whichever is greater, to cover the City’s administrative costs of supervision and preparation. For the purpose of this section, cost of an EIS shall include the cost of preparation and publication, including printing, collating, binding, and circulation of the draft and final EIS. Applicants may be required to post bond or otherwise insure payment of such costs. In the event the actual cost of the draft and final EIS exceeds the estimated cost of the EIS agreed upon by the City and the applicant, such excess shall be paid to the City by the applicant prior to final action by the City. 

(3) The City may collect a reasonable fee from an applicant to cover the cost of meeting the public notice requirements of this chapter relating to the applicant’s proposal. 

(4) The City shall not collect a fee for performing its duties as a consulted agency.

(5) The City may charge any person for copies of any document prepared under this chapter and for mailing the document in a manner provided by Chapter 42.17 RCW. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.52.300 Forms – Adoption by reference.

The City adopts the following sections of Chapter 197-11 WAC, as now existing or hereinafter amended, by reference: 

WAC

197-11-960    Environmental checklist.

197-11-965    Adoption notice.

197-11-970    Determination of nonsignificance (DNS).

197-11-980    Determination of significance (DS) and scoping notice.

197-11-985    Notice of assumption of lead agency status.

197-11-990    Notice of action.

(Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.52.310 WACs on file.

The City Clerk shall maintain on file for public use and examination one copy of the WAC sections referred to in this chapter. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.52.320 Initial SEPA analysis.

(1) The City shall also review the project permit application under the requirements of the State Environmental Policy Act (“SEPA”), Chapter 43.21C RCW, the SEPA Rules, Chapter 197-11 WAC, and this chapter, and shall:

(a) Determine whether the applicable regulations require studies that adequately analyze all of the project permit application’s specific probable adverse environmental impacts;

(b) Determine if the applicable regulations require measures that adequately address such environmental impacts;

(c) Determine whether additional studies are required and/or whether the project permit application should be conditioned with additional mitigation measures;

(d) Provide prompt and coordinated review by government agencies and the public on compliance with applicable environmental laws and plans, including mitigation for specific project impacts that have not been considered and addressed at the plan or development regulation level.

(2) In its review of a project permit application, the City may determine that the requirements for environmental analysis, protection and mitigation measures in the applicable development regulations, Comprehensive Plan and/or in other applicable local, State or Federal laws provide adequate analysis of and mitigation for the specific adverse environmental impacts of the application.

(3) If the City bases or conditions its approval of the project permit application on compliance with the requirements or mitigation measures described in subsection (1) of this section, the City shall not impose additional mitigation under SEPA during project review.

(4) A Comprehensive Plan, development regulation or other applicable local, State or Federal law provides adequate analysis of and mitigation for the specific adverse environmental impacts of an application when:

(a) The impacts have been avoided or otherwise mitigated; or 

(b) The City has designated as acceptable certain levels of service, land use designations, development standards or other land use planning required or allowed by Chapter 36.70A RCW.

(5) In its decision whether a specific adverse environmental impact has been addressed by an existing rule or law of another agency with jurisdiction with environmental expertise with regard to a specific environmental impact, the City shall consult orally or in writing with that agency and may expressly defer to that agency. In making this deferral, the City shall base or condition its project approval on compliance with these other existing rules or laws.

(6) Nothing in this section limits the authority of the City in its review or mitigation of a project to adopt or otherwise rely on environmental analyses and requirements under other laws, as provided by Chapter 43.21C RCW.

(7) The City shall also review the application under this chapter. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.52.330 Categorically exempt and planned actions.

(1) Categorically Exempt. Actions categorically exempt under RCW 43.21C.110(1)(a) do not require environmental review or the preparation of an environmental impact statement. An action that is categorically exempt under the rules adopted by the Department of Ecology (Chapter 197-11 WAC) may not be conditioned or denied under SEPA.

(2) Planned Actions.

(a) A planned action does not require a threshold determination or the preparation of an environmental impact statement under SEPA, but is subject to environmental review and mitigation under SEPA.

(b) A “planned action” means one or more types of project action that:

(i) Are designated planned actions by an ordinance or resolution adopted by the City;

(ii) Have had the significant impacts adequately addressed in an environmental impact statement prepared in conjunction with:

(A) The Comprehensive Plan or subarea plan adopted under Chapter 36.70A RCW; or

(B) A fully contained community, a master planned resort, a master planned development or a phased project;

(iii) Are subsequent or implementing projects for the proposals listed in subsection (2)(b)(ii) of this section;

(iv) Are located within an urban growth area, as defined in RCW 36.70A.030;

(v) Are not essential public facilities, as defined in RCW 36.70A.200;

(vi) Are consistent with the City’s Comprehensive Plan adopted under Chapter 36.70A RCW.

(3) Limitations on Planned Actions. The City shall limit planned actions to certain types of development or to specific geographical areas that are less extensive than the jurisdictional boundaries of the City and may limit a planned action to a time period identified in the environmental impact statement or in the ordinance or resolution designating the planned action under RCW 36.70A.040. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


Chapter 21.53 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION

Sections:

21.53.010    Authority.

21.53.020    Purpose.

21.53.030    Methods of reducing flood losses.

21.53.040    Flood warning.

21.53.050    Definitions.

21.53.060    Lands to which this chapter applies.

21.53.070    Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.

21.53.080    Compliance.

21.53.090    Enforcement and penalties.

21.53.100    Abrogation and greater restrictions.

21.53.110    Administration of this chapter.

21.53.120    Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator.

21.53.130    General standards for flood hazard reduction.

21.53.140    Specific standards for flood hazard reduction.

21.53.150    AE and A1-30 zones with base flood elevations but no floodways.

21.53.160    Floodways.

21.53.170    Standards for shallow flooding areas (AO zones).

21.53.180    General requirements for other development.

21.53.190    Critical facilities.

21.53.200    Livestock sanctuaries.

21.53.210    Variances.


21.53.010 Authority.

This chapter is adopted pursuant to Chapter 86.16 RCW and Chapter 173-158 WAC. (Ord. 699 § 6 (Att. A), 2020)


21.53.020 Purpose.

It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare; reduce the annual cost of flood insurance; and minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:

(1) Protect human life and health;

(2) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;

(3) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

(4) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;

(5) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone, and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in flood hazard areas;

(6) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood hazard areas so as to minimize blight areas caused by flooding;

(7) Notify potential buyers that the property is in a special flood hazard area;

(8) Notify those who occupy flood hazard areas that they assume responsibility for their actions; and

(9) Participate in and maintain eligibility for flood insurance and disaster relief. (Ord. 699 § 6 (Att. A), 2020)


21.53.030 Methods of reducing flood losses.

In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions for:

(1) Restricting or prohibiting development that is dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;

(2) Requiring that development vulnerable to floods be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;

(3) Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters;

(4) Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development, which may increase flood damage; and

(5) Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers that unnaturally divert flood waters or may increase flood hazards in other areas. (Ord. 699 § 6 (Att. A), 2020)


21.53.040 Flood warning.

The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. (Ord. 699 § 6 (Att. A), 2020)


21.53.050 Definitions.

The following words and phrases shall be defined and given the meaning set forth below for the purpose of this chapter. Other words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and all interpretations shall be made as to give this chapter its most reasonable application.

(1) “Alteration of watercourse” means any action that will change the location of the channel occupied by water within the banks of any portion of a riverine waterbody.

(2) “Area of shallow flooding” means a designated zone AO, AH, AR/AO or AR/AH (or VO) on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. Also referred to as the “sheet flow area.”

(3) “Area of special flood hazard” means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) as zone A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR (V, VO, V1-30, VE). “Special flood hazard area” is synonymous in meaning with the phrase “area of special flood hazard.”

(4) “ASCE 24” means the most recently published version of ASCE 24, Flood Resistant Design and Construction, published by the American Society of Civil Engineers.

(5) “Base flood” means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also referred to as the “100-year flood”).

(6) “Base flood elevation (BFE)” means the elevation to which flood water is anticipated to rise during the base flood.

(7) “Basement” means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.

(8) “Critical facility” means a facility for which even a slight chance of flooding might be too great. “Critical facilities” include, but are not limited to, schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire and emergency response installations, and installations which produce, use, or store hazardous materials or hazardous waste.

(9) “Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood hazard.

(10) “Elevation certificate” means an administrative tool of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) that can be used to provide elevation information, to determine the proper insurance premium rate, and to support a request for a letter of map amendment (LOMA) or letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F).

(11) “Elevated building” means, for insurance purposes, a nonbasement building that has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.

(12) “Essential facility” has the same meaning as “essential facility” defined in ASCE 24. Table 1-1 in ASCE 24-14 further identifies building occupancies that are essential facilities.

(13) “Farmhouse” means a single-family dwelling located on a farm site where resulting agricultural products are not produced for the primary consumption or use by the occupants and the farm owner.

(14) “Flood or flooding” means:

(a) A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:

(i) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.

(ii) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.

(iii) Mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused by flooding as defined in subsection (14)(a)(ii) of this section and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current.

(b) The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in subsection (14)(a)(i) of this section.

(15) “Flood elevation study” means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards. Also known as a flood insurance study (FIS).

(16) “Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)” means the official map of a community, on which the Federal Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. A FIRM that has been made available digitally is called a Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM).

(17) “Floodplain or flood prone area” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. See “flood or flooding.”

(18) “Floodplain administrator” means the community official designated by title to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations.

(19) “Floodplain management regulations” means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as floodplain ordinances, grading ordinances and erosion control ordinances) and other applications of police power. The term describes such State or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.

(20) “Flood proofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate risk of flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents. Flood-proofed structures are those that have the structural integrity and design to be impervious to flood water below the base flood elevation.

(21) “Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. Also referred to as “regulatory floodway.”

(22) “Functionally dependent use” means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, and does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.

(23) “Highest adjacent grade” means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.

(24) “Historic structure” means any structure that is:

(a) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;

(b) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;

(c) Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or

(d) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:

(i) By an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or

(ii) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.

(25) “Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter (i.e. provided there are adequate flood ventilation openings).

(26) “Mean sea level” means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the vertical datum to which base flood elevations shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.

(27) “New construction” means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of an initial Flood Insurance Rate Map or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, “new construction” means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.

(28) One Hundred Year Flood or 100-Year Flood. See “base flood.”

(29) “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle:

(a)     Built on a single chassis;

(b) Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;

(c) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and

(d) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

(30) “Start of construction” includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days from the date of the permit. The “actual start” means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

(31) “Structure” means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.

(32) “Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

(33) “Substantial improvement” means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage” regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:

(a) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct previously identified existing violations of State or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications that have been identified by the local code enforcement official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

(b) Any alteration of a “historic structure”; provided, that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a “historic structure.”

(34) “Variance” means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation.

(35) “Water surface elevation” means the height, in relation to the vertical datum utilized in the applicable flood insurance study of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.

(36) “Water dependent” means a structure for commerce or industry that cannot exist in any other location and is dependent on the water by reason of the intrinsic nature of its operations. (Ord. 699 § 6 (Att. A), 2020)


21.53.060 Lands to which this chapter applies.

This chapter applies to all special flood hazard areas within the boundaries of the City of Woodinville. (Ord. 699 § 6 (Att. A), 2020)


21.53.070 Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.

The special flood hazard areas identified by the Federal Insurance Administrator in a scientific and engineering report entitled “The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for King County, Washington and Incorporated Areas” dated August 19, 2020, and any revisions thereto, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated August 19, 2020, and any revisions thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The FIS and the FIRM are on file at 17301 133rd Avenue NE, Woodinville, Washington.

The best available information for flood hazard area identification as outlined in WMC 21.53.120(2) shall be the basis for regulation until a new FIRM is issued that incorporates data utilized under WMC 21.53.120(2). (Ord. 699 § 6 (Att. A), 2020)


21.53.080 Compliance.

All development within special flood hazard areas is subject to the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. (Ord. 699 § 6 (Att. A), 2020)


21.53.090 Enforcement and penalties.

(1) No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violations of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions), shall constitute a misdemeanor.

(2) Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than $5,000 or imprisoned for not more than one year, or both, for each violation pursuant to Chapter 1.03 WMC, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. As an alternative, the City may render civil penalties pursuant to the notice of violation provisions set forth in Chapter 1.06 WMC.

(3) Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. 699 § 6 (Att. A), 2020)


21.53.100 Abrogation and greater restrictions.

This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 699 § 6 (Att. A), 2020)


21.53.110 Administration of this chapter.

(1) The development services director or designee is designated as the floodplain administrator and shall administer, implement, and enforce this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accordance with this chapter.

(2) A development improvement permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in WMC 21.53.070. The permit shall be for all structures including manufactured homes and for all development including fill and other activities as defined in WMC 21.53.050. Application submittal requirements for a flood improvement permit are set forth in WMC 21.80.100. (Ord. 699 § 6 (Att. A), 2020)


21.53.120 Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator.

Duties of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to:

(1) Review all development permits to determine if:

(a) The permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;

(b) All other required State and Federal permits have been obtained;

(c) The site is reasonably safe from flooding;

(d) The proposed development is not located in the floodway or if located in the floodway, assure the encroachment provisions in WMC 21.53.160(1) are satisfied.

(e) Notify FEMA when annexations occur in the special flood hazard area.

(2) When base flood elevation data has not been provided (in A or V zones) in accordance with WMC 21.53.070 (Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard), the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, State, or other source, in order to administer WMC 21.53.140 (Specific standards for flood hazard reduction), and WMC 21.53.160 (Floodways).

(3) Obtain and maintain the following:

(a) Where base flood elevation data is provided through the FIS, FIRM, or required as in WMC 21.53.120(2), obtain and maintain a record of the actual (as-built) elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure contains a basement;

(b) Obtain and maintain documentation of the elevation of the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member in V or VE zones;

(c) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed nonresidential structures where base flood elevation data is provided through the FIS, FIRM, or as required in WMC 21.53.120(2):

(i) Obtain and maintain a record of the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure was floodproofed;

(ii) Maintain the floodproofing certifications for flood improvement permits required under WMC 21.53.140(2);

(d) Certification required by WMC 21.53.160(1), which the Building Official shall maintain for public inspection;

(e) Records of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance;

(f) Improvement and damage calculations; and

(g) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter.

(4) Whenever a watercourse is to be altered or relocated:

(a) Notify adjacent communities and the Department of Ecology prior to such alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administrator through appropriate notification means; and

(b) Assure that the flood carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained.

(5) Review building permits where elevation data is not available either through the FIS, FIRM, or from another authoritative source (WMC 21.53.120(2)). Applications for floodplain development shall be reviewed to assure that proposed construction will be reasonably safe from flooding. The test of reasonableness includes use of historical data, high water marks, photographs of past flooding, etc., where available. (Failure to elevate habitable buildings at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade in these zones may result in higher insurance rates.)

(6) If a project will alter the base flood elevation or boundaries of the special flood hazard area, then the project proponent shall provide the community with engineering documentation and analysis regarding the proposed change. If the change to the base flood elevation or boundaries of the special flood hazard area would normally require a letter of map change, then the project proponent shall initiate, and receive approval of, a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) prior to approval of the development permit. The project shall be constructed in a manner consistent with the approved CLOMR. If a CLOMR application is made, then the project proponent shall also supply the full CLOMR documentation package to the Floodplain Administrator to be attached to the floodplain development permit, including all required property owner notifications. (Ord. 699 § 6 (Att. A), 2020)


21.53.130 General standards for flood hazard reduction.

In all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards are required:

(1) Anchoring.

(a) All new construction and substantial improvements, including those related to manufactured homes, shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads including the effects of buoyancy.

(b) All manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement, and shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. Anchoring methods may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. For more detailed information, refer to guidebook, FEMA-85, “Manufactured Home Installation in Flood Hazard Areas.”

(2) Construction Materials and Methods.

(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.

(b) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.

(c) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or otherwise elevated or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.

(3) Storage of Materials and Equipment.

(a) The storage or processing of materials that could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life if released due to damage from flooding is prohibited in special flood hazard areas.

(b) Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not subject to damage by floods and if firmly anchored to prevent flotation, or if readily removable from the area within the time available after flood warning.

(4) Utilities.

(a) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems;

(b) Water wells shall be located on high ground that is not in the floodway (WAC 173-160-171);

(c) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters;

(d) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.

(5) Subdivision Proposals and Development.

(a) All subdivisions, as well as new development, shall:

(i) Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;

(ii) Have public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and

(iii) Have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage.

(b) Where subdivision proposals and other proposed developments contain greater than 50 lots or five acres (whichever is the lesser) base flood elevation data shall be included as part of the application. (Ord. 699 § 6 (Att. A), 2020)


21.53.140 Specific standards for flood hazard reduction.

In all areas of special flood hazards, the standards for specific uses as prescribed in this section are required:

(1) Residential Construction.

(a) In AE and A1-30 zones or other A-zoned areas where the BFE has been determined or can be reasonably obtained, new construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated one foot or more above the BFE. Mechanical equipment and utilities shall be waterproof or elevated least one foot above the BFE.

(b) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure in an AO zone shall meet the requirements in WMC 21.53.170.

(c) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure in an unnumbered A zone for which a BFE is not available and cannot be reasonably obtained shall be reasonably safe from flooding, but in all cases the lowest floor shall be at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade.

(d) Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding are prohibited or shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood waters. Designs must meet or exceed the following criteria:

(i) Have a minimum of two openings with a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding.

(ii) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.

(iii) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit of flood water.

(iv) A garage attached to a residential structure, constructed with the garage floor slab below the BFE, must be designed to allow for the automatic entry and exit of flood waters.

Alternatively, a registered engineer or architect may design and certify engineered openings.

(2) Nonresidential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall meet the requirements of subsection (2)(a) or (b) of this section.

(a) New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall meet all of the following requirements:

(i) In AE and A1-30 zones or other A-zoned areas where the BFE has been determined or can be reasonably obtained:

(A) New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated one foot or more above the BFE, or elevated as required by ASCE 24, whichever is greater.

(B) Mechanical equipment and utilities shall be waterproofed or elevated at least one foot above the BFE, or as required by ASCE 24, whichever is greater.

(ii) If located in an AO zone, the structure shall meet the requirements in WMC 21.53.170.

(iii) If located in an unnumbered A zone for which a BFE is not available and cannot be reasonably obtained, the structure shall be reasonably safe from flooding, but in all cases the lowest floor shall be at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade.

(iv) Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding are prohibited or shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood waters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:

(A) Have a minimum of two openings with a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding.

(B) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.

(C) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit of flood water.

(D) A garage attached to a residential structure, constructed with the garage floor slab below the BFE, must be designed to allow for the automatic entry and exit of flood waters.

Alternatively, a registered engineer or architect may design and certify engineered openings.

(b) If the requirements of subsection (2)(a) of this section are not met, then new construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall meet all of the following requirements:

(i) Be dry floodproofed so that below one foot or more above the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water or dry floodproofed to the elevation required by ASCE 24, whichever is greater;

(ii) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy;

(iii) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting provisions of this subsection based on their development and/or review of the structural design, specifications and plans. Such certifications shall be provided to the official as set forth in WMC 21.53.120(3)(b);

(iv) Nonresidential structures that are elevated, not floodproofed, must meet the same standards for space below the lowest floor as described in subsection (1)(d) of this section.

(3) Manufactured Homes. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated one foot or more above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.

(4) Recreational Vehicles.

(a) Recreational vehicles placed on sites are required to either:

(i) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or

(ii) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and have no permanently attached additions; or

(b) Meet the requirements of subsection (3) of this section.

(5) Enclosed Area Below the Lowest Floor. If buildings or manufactured homes are constructed or substantially improved with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor, the areas shall be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage.

(6) Appurtenant Structures (Detached Garages and Small Storage Structures). For A Zones (A, AE, A1-30, AH, AO):

(a) Appurtenant structures used solely for parking of vehicles or limited storage may be constructed such that the floor is below the BFE, provided the structure is designed and constructed in accordance with the following requirements:

(i) Use of the appurtenant structure must be limited to parking of vehicles or limited storage;

(ii) The portions of the appurtenant structure located below the BFE must be built using flood resistant materials;

(iii) The appurtenant structure must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement;

(iv) Any machinery or equipment servicing the appurtenant structure must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the BFE;

(v) The appurtenant structure must comply with floodway encroachment provisions in WMC 21.53.160(1);

(vi) The appurtenant structure must be designed to allow for the automatic entry and exit of flood waters in accordance with WMC 21.53.140(1)(d);

(vii) The structure shall have low damage potential;

(viii) If the structure is converted to another use, it must be brought into full compliance with the standards governing such use; and

(ix) The structure shall not be used for human habitation.

(b) Detached garages, storage structures, and other appurtenant structures not meeting the above standards must be constructed in accordance with all applicable standards in WMC 21.53.140(1).

(c) Upon completion of the structure, certification that the requirements of this section have been satisfied shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator for verification. (Ord. 699 § 6 (Att. A), 2020)


21.53.150 AE and A1-30 zones with base flood elevations but no floodways.

In areas with BFEs (but a regulatory floodway has not been designated), no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community’s FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. (Ord. 699 § 6 (Att. A), 2020)


21.53.160 Floodways.

Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters that can carry debris, and increase erosion potential, the following apply:

(1) No Rise Standard. Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development are prohibited unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.

(2) Residential Construction in Floodways.

(a) Construction or reconstruction of residential structures is prohibited within designated floodways, except for:

(i) Repairs, reconstruction, or improvements to a structure that do not increase the ground floor area; and the cost of which does not exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure either:

(A) Before the repair or reconstruction is started; or

(B) If the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before the damage occurred.

(ii) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of State or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications that have been identified by the local code enforcement official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or to structures identified as historic places, may be excluded in the 50 percent market value of the structure.

(b) Replacement of Farmhouses in Floodway. Repairs, reconstruction, replacement, or improvements to existing farmhouse structures located in designated floodways and that are located on lands designated as agricultural lands of long-term commercial significance under RCW 36.70A.170 may be permitted subject to the following:

(i) The new farmhouse is a replacement for an existing farmhouse on the same farm site;

(ii) There is no potential building site for a replacement farmhouse on the same farm outside the designated floodway;

(iii) Repairs, reconstruction, or improvements to a farmhouse shall not increase the total square footage of encroachment of the existing farmhouse;

(iv) A replacement farmhouse shall not exceed the total square footage of encroachment of the farmhouse it is replacing;

(v) A farmhouse being replaced shall be removed, in its entirety, including foundation, from the floodway within 90 days after occupancy of a new farmhouse;

(vi) For substantial improvements and replacement farmhouses, the elevation of the lowest floor of the improvement and farmhouse respectively, including basement, is a minimum of one foot higher than the BFE;

(vii) New and replacement water supply systems are designed to eliminate or minimize infiltration of flood waters into the system;

(viii) New and replacement sanitary sewerage systems are designed and located to eliminate or minimize infiltration of flood water into the system and discharge from the system into the flood waters; and

(ix) All other utilities and connections to public utilities are designed, constructed, and located to eliminate or minimize flood damage.

(c) Substantially Damaged Residences in Floodway. For all substantially damaged residential structures, other than farmhouses, located in a designated floodway:

(i) The Floodplain Administrator may make a written request that the Department of Ecology assess the risk of harm to life and property posed by the specific conditions of the floodway. Based on analysis of depth, velocity, flood-related erosion, channel migration, debris load potential, and flood warning capability, the Department of Ecology may exercise best professional judgment in recommending to the local permitting authority repair, replacement, or relocation of a substantially damaged structure consistent with WAC 173-158-076. The property owner shall be responsible for submitting to the local government and the Department of Ecology any information necessary to complete the assessment. Without a favorable recommendation from the department for the repair or replacement of a substantially damaged residential structure located in the regulatory floodway, no repair or replacement is allowed per WAC 173-158-070(1).

(ii) A replacement residential structure is a residential structure built as a substitute for a legally existing residential structure of equivalent use and size. Before the repair, replacement, or reconstruction is started, all requirements of the NFIP, the State requirements adopted pursuant to Chapter 86.16 RCW, and all applicable local regulations must be satisfied. In addition, the following conditions must be met:

(A) There is no potential safe building location for the replacement residential structure on the same property outside the regulatory floodway;

(B) Repairs, reconstruction, or replacement of a residential structure shall not increase the total square footage of floodway encroachment;

(C) The elevation of the lowest floor of the substantially damaged or replacement residential structure is a minimum of one foot higher than the BFE;

(D) New and replacement water supply systems are designed to eliminate or minimize infiltration of flood water into the system;

(E) New and replacement sanitary sewerage systems are designed and located to eliminate or minimize infiltration of flood water into the system and discharge from the system into the flood waters; and

(F) All other utilities and connections to public utilities are designed, constructed, and located to eliminate or minimize flood damage.

(3) All Other Building Standards Apply in the Floodway. If subsection (1) of this section is satisfied or construction is allowed pursuant to subsection (2) of this section, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of WMC 21.53.130 through WMC 21.53.200 (provisions for flood hazard reduction). (Ord. 699 § 6 (Att. A), 2020)


21.53.170 Standards for shallow flooding areas (AO zones).

Shallow flooding areas appear on FIRMs as AO zones with depth designations. The base flood depths in these zones range from one to three feet above ground where a clearly defined channel does not exist, or where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is usually characterized as sheet flow. In addition to other provisions in this chapter, the following shall apply in AO zones:

(1) New construction and substantial improvements of residential structures and manufactured homes within AO zones shall have the lowest floor (including basement and mechanical equipment) elevated above the highest adjacent grade to the structure, one foot or more above the depth number specified in feet on the community’s FIRM (at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade to the structure if no depth number is specified).

(2) New construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures within AO zones shall either:

(a) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade of the building site, one foot or more above the depth number specified on the FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified); or

(b) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be completely flood proofed to or above that level so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. If this method is used, compliance shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect as in WMC 21.53.140(1)(d).

(3) Require adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures.

(4) Recreational vehicles placed on sites within AO zones on the community’s FIRM shall either:

(a) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or

(b) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and have no permanently attached additions; or

(c) Meet the requirements of subsections (1) and (3) of this section and the anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in WMC 21.53.130(1). (Ord. 699 § 6 (Att. A), 2020)


21.53.180 General requirements for other development.

All development, including manmade changes to improved or unimproved real estate for which specific provisions are not specified in this chapter or the State building codes with adopted amendments shall:

(1) Be located and constructed to minimize flood damage;

(2) Meet the encroachment limitations of this chapter if located in a regulatory floodway;

(3) Be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement resulting from hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood;

(4) Be constructed of flood damage-resistant materials;

(5) Meet the flood opening requirements of WMC 21.53.140(1)(d); and

(6) Have mechanical, plumbing, and electrical systems above the design flood elevation or meet the requirements of ASCE 24, except that minimum electric service required to address life safety and electric code requirements is permitted below the design flood elevation provided it conforms to the provisions of the electrical part of building code for wet locations. (Ord. 699 § 6 (Att. A), 2020)


21.53.190 Critical facilities.

Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent possible, located outside the limits of the SFHA (100-year floodplain). Construction of new critical facilities shall be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the lowest floor elevated three feet above BFE or to the height of the 500-year flood, whichever is higher. Access to and from the critical facility should also be protected to the height utilized above. Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into flood waters. Access routes elevated to or above the level of the BFE shall be provided to all critical facilities to the extent possible. (Ord. 699 § 6 (Att. A), 2020)


21.53.200 Livestock sanctuaries.

Elevated areas for the purpose of creating a flood sanctuary for livestock are allowed on farm units where livestock is allowed. Livestock flood sanctuaries shall be sized appropriately for the expected number of livestock and be elevated sufficiently to protect livestock. Proposals for livestock flood sanctuaries shall meet all procedural and substantive requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 699 § 6 (Att. A), 2020)


21.53.210 Variances.

It is the duty of the City to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below the base flood elevation are so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in this chapter should be rare. The long-term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if the granting of variances is strictly limited. The criteria are designed to exclude those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate. The provisions for a flood variance are set forth in WMC 21.80.110. (Ord. 699 § 6 (Att. A), 2020)


Chapter 21.60 SUBDIVISION DESIGN

Sections:

21.60.010    Title.

21.60.020    Authority.

21.60.030    Purpose.

21.60.040    General provisions.

21.60.050    Lot standards.

21.60.060    Exceptions to lot standards.

21.60.070    Easements.

21.60.080    Water supply.

21.60.090    Sewage disposal.

21.60.100    Storm drainage.

21.60.110    Watercourses.

21.60.120    Underground utilities.

21.60.130    Water and sewer standards.

21.60.140    Street standards.

21.60.150    Street right-of-way and pavement widths.

21.60.160    Street lights.

21.60.170    Monuments.

21.60.180    On-site recreation and trail corridors.

21.60.190    Tree preservation and protection.

21.60.200    Public accessways.

21.60.210    Clearing and grading.

21.60.220    Improvements – Completion or guarantee.

21.60.230    Improvements – Security for performance and warranty.

21.60.240    Improvements – Construction.

21.60.250    Survey required.

21.60.260    Repealed.

21.60.270    Repealed.

21.60.280    Repealed.

21.60.290    Repealed.

21.60.300    Repealed.


21.60.010 Title.

This chapter shall be known as the City of Woodinville subdivision code, hereafter referred to as “this chapter.” (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.60.020 Authority.

This chapter is adopted by City of Woodinville Ordinance No. 175, pursuant to Chapter 58.17 RCW. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.60.030 Purpose.

(1) The purpose of this chapter is to identify processes to accomplish the orderly development of land within the City, and to provide for the expeditious review and approval of proposed land divisions which comply with this section, other City land use regulations and standards, and Chapter 58.17 RCW, Plats – Subdivisions – Dedications.

(2) The purpose of this chapter is to set forth the criteria, standards and requirements for the review and approval of subdivision and short subdivision.

(3) The intent of this chapter is to provide criteria, regulations and standards to govern the subdividing of land within the City and to:

(a) Promote the public health, safety and general welfare in accordance with standards established by the State and the City;

(b) Promote effective use of land by preventing the overcrowding or scattered development which would injure health, safety or the general welfare due to the lack of water supplies, sanitary sewer, drainage, transportation or other public services, or excessive expenditure of public funds for such services;

(c) Avoid congestion and promote safe and convenient travel by the public on streets and highways through the coordination of streets within a subdivision with existing and planned streets;

(d) Provide for adequate light and air;

(e) Provide for water, sewage, drainage, parks, and recreational areas, sites for schools and schoolgrounds, and other public requirements;

(f) Provide for proper ingress and egress;

(g) Provide for the housing and commercial needs of the community;

(h) Require uniform monumenting of land divisions and conveyance of accurate legal descriptions;

(i) Protect environmentally sensitive areas; and

(j) Protect and preserve the community urban forest for its aesthetic, environmental and health benefits. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.60.040 General provisions.

(1) Applicability. All divisions or redivisions of land into lots, tracts, parcels, sites or divisions for the purpose of sale, lease or transfer of ownership shall comply with the provisions of State law and the Woodinville Municipal Code (WMC).

(2) Multiple Applications. All contiguous parcels of land, regardless of date of acquisition or location in different lots, tracts, parcels, tax lots or separate government lots, that are to be subdivided shall constitute a single subdivision or short subdivision action. Multiple applications or applications and/or exemptions shall not be utilized as a substitute for comprehensive subdividing in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.

(3) Exceptions. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:

(a) Cemeteries and burial plats;

(b) Divisions made by testamentary provisions, or the laws of descent;

(c) A division made under the provisions of the Horizontal Properties Regimes Act (Chapter 64.32 RCW); provided a binding site plan has been approved.

(4) Subdivisions Processed Simultaneously. Unless the applicant requests otherwise, a subdivision or short subdivision application shall be processed simultaneously with application for variances, conditional uses, street vacations, and similar quasi-judicial or administrative actions to the extent that procedural requirements applicable to these actions permit simultaneous processing, and subject to WMC 21.83.020.

(5) Deviation from Requirements. Subdivision and short subdivision development requirements may be modified by the Director only upon a showing by the applicant that the criteria of WMC 21.80.280, Variance, can be complied with. Deviations shall not be allowed on the basis of economic hardship. A request by the applicant must be attached to the application and shall be processed in conjunction with the application. Action taken by an approval authority on the request shall be entered into the record.

(6) Subdivision Names. No subdivision shall be approved which bears a name using a word which is the same as, similar to or pronounced the same as a word in the name of any other subdivision in the County, except for the words “town,” “city,” “place,” “court,” “addition,” “acres,” “heights,” “villa,” or similar words, unless the land so divided is contiguous to the subdivision bearing the same name. All subdivisions shall continue the block numbers of the subdivision of the same name last filed. (Ord. 643 § 2, 2017; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.60.050 Lot standards.

(1) Suitability for Intended Use. All lots shall be suitable for the general purpose for which they are intended to be used. No lot shall be of such size or design as to be detrimental to the health, safety or sanitary needs of the residents of the subdivision of such lot.

(2) Lots shall be created by following the procedures of this chapter and Chapters 21.80 through 21.89 WMC.

(3) No lot shall be established which is in violation of the Woodinville Municipal Code.

(4) Lot Shapes. Lot shapes shall be designed to avoid awkward configurations or appendages.

(5) Width – Area – Frontage. Each lot shall have sufficient width, area and frontage to comply with the minimum site requirements as set forth in Chapter 21.22 WMC, Density and Dimensions.

(6) Depth. Each lot should have an average depth between the front and rear lot lines of not less than one-foot depth for each one foot of width.

(7) Front Lot Line. For corner lots, double frontage lots, and single frontage lots, the front lot line shall be the property line(s) separating the lot from a street or vehicle access corridor.

(8) Side Lot Lines. As much as possible, where topography and natural features permit, side lot lines should run at right angles to the street upon which the lot faces, except that on curved streets they shall be radial to the curve.

(9) Building Setback Lines. Where watercourses, topography, geology and soils, vegetation, utilities, lot configuration, or other unique circumstances dictate a different building envelope than that set by Chapter 21.22 WMC, Density and Dimensions, building setback lines may be required to be shown on the final plat or short subdivision map and observed in the development of the lot.

(10) Future Subdivision of Lots. Where the subdivision or short subdivision will result in a lot one-half acre or larger in size which is likely to be further divided in the future, it may be required that the location of lot lines and other details of layout be such that future division may readily be made without violating the requirements of this section and without interfering with orderly extension and connection of adjacent streets. It is intended that the lot lines and other details of future subdivision be advisory only, and shall not be final or binding on the applicant unless he makes further application; however, any restriction of buildings within future street locations may be imposed and may require such restrictions to be set forth on the final plat or short subdivision. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.60.060 Exceptions to lot standards.

(1) Cluster – Zero Lot Line – Townhouse Development. The relaxation of building setbacks, lot size and lot frontage requirements as set forth in Chapter 21.22 WMC, Density and Dimensions, and WMC 21.60.050, Lot standards, may be authorized for a subdivision developed in compliance with Chapter 21.42 WMC. Such authorization shall only occur where the applicant presents a plan whereby the entire subdivision will be designed and developed with provision for proper maintenance of recreation facilities and open space which will be commonly available for use of the residents of the subdivision and which will be of such benefit to said residents as is equal to that which would be derived from observance of the size and frontage requirements otherwise specified. The relation of said requirements shall not violate the purpose and criteria set forth in WMC 21.60.030, Purpose, and 21.61.040, Preliminary subdivision and short subdivision approval criteria, respectively.

(2) Temporary Parcel. Parcels smaller than permitted by the Woodinville Municipal Code may be temporarily created if they are subsequently merged in title with an adjacent parcel to create a lot that complies with the Woodinville Municipal Code.

(3) Eminent Domain. Parcels smaller than otherwise permitted by the Woodinville Municipal Code may be created through the action of governmental agencies including the City of Woodinville by such actions as eminent domain and the splitting of a parcel by dedicated right-of-way. Wherever possible, such parcels shall be merged in title with adjacent lots to create lots in compliance with the Woodinville Municipal Code.

(4) Substandard Lots. A lot of record created prior to the effective date of the Woodinville Municipal Code that does not meet the minimum area or dimensional requirements of the land use district in which located shall be considered a conforming lot of record if the following requirements are met: there must be no adjoining lots of record of continuous boundary in the same ownership to which the substandard lot can be merged in title or with which the lot lines can be adjusted to create lots of record which would comply with the Woodinville Municipal Code.

(5) Lots for Building Pads. In industrial, business and multiple residential zones, lots with boundaries coterminous or nearly so with building walls may be created. The standards that normally would apply to such lots shall apply instead to the project tract of which such lots are a part. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.60.070 Easements.

(1) Public easements for the construction and maintenance of utilities and public facilities shall be granted to provide and maintain adequate utility service to each lot and adjacent lands. The widths of the public easements shall be the minimum necessary as determined by the utility, unless the Director determines a smaller or larger width is appropriate based on site conditions. Whenever possible, public easement shall be combined with driveways, pedestrian accessways and other utility easements.

(2) Private easements for the construction and maintenance of utilities within the subdivision or short subdivision shall be granted so that individual lots gain access to public facilities. The widths of the private easements shall be the minimum necessary as determined by the utility, unless the Director determines a larger width is appropriate based on the site conditions.

(3) When there is a need to use a stream for stormwater control purposes, public improvement and maintenance easements at least 20 feet wide shall be provided for storm drainage. When possible, said easements shall be located along the centerlines of such facilities. Public improvement and maintenance easements for creeks and other watercourses shall be provided and shall extend 25 feet in each direction from the waterway centerline or 10 feet from the top of a recognizable bank, whichever is greater. Such easements shall be of a width sufficient to allow both initial improvements and future maintenance operations. Larger widths may be required where necessary.

(4) Native growth and protection easements (NGPE) shall be granted as deemed appropriate by the Director where the preservation of native vegetation benefits the public health, safety and welfare, including control of surface water and erosion, maintenance or slope stability, visual and aural buffering, and protection of plant and animal habitat. The NGPE shall impose upon all present and future owners and occupiers of land subject to the easement the obligation, enforceable on behalf of the public by the City of Woodinville, to leave undisturbed all trees and other vegetation within the easement, except that are required for future construction of multi-purpose trails and Director-approved utilities. The vegetation within the easement may not be cut, pruned, covered by fill, removed, damaged or enhanced without express written permission from the City of Woodinville.

(5) Easements for utility mains or lines shall be held to prohibit the placement of any building on or over the easement, but shall not preclude landscaping of an appropriate variety as determined by the City. The City encourages the use of an easement for more than one utility or vehicle and pedestrian access, provided the Director finds the multi-use appropriate. Restoration shall be required of the site following any excavation or other disturbance permitted by the easement.

(6) Easements required by this section shall be granted by the terms and conditions of such easements being shown on the final plat or short subdivision or by separate instrument.

(7) Areas used as regional utility corridors shall be contained in tracts separate from the lots, but sharing of tracts among utilities encouraged. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.60.080 Water supply.

All lots shall be served by a water system approved by the City of Woodinville and the Woodinville Water District or local purveyor. Any common water system serving more than one lot shall be provided by the applicant and dedicated to the appropriate water purveyor. Water distribution systems shall be designed and constructed according to all applicable provisions of the Woodinville Municipal Code, the standards and specifications of the water purveyor and the applicable rules and regulations of the State. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.60.090 Sewage disposal.

All lots shall be served by the sanitary sewer system, or on-site sewage disposal system, as required by WMC 21.81.030. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.60.100 Storm drainage.

(1) All lots shall be provided with adequate storm drainage connected to the storm drainage system of the City or other system approved by the City.

(2) Where a public street is to be dedicated or improved by the applicant as a condition of preliminary approval, the applicant shall provide and dedicate any required storm drainage system in the street. 

(3) When required in accordance with Chapter 13.05 WMC, storm drainage facilities shall include suitable on-site detention and/or retention facilities.

(4) Storm drainage shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 13.05 WMC and standards and specifications approved by the City.

(5) Easements shall be dedicated as provided in WMC 21.60.070. 

(6) Maintenance of storm drainage facilities shall be assured through the creation of a homeowners association or the recording of a shared maintenance agreement, and covenants shall be provided for maintenance in accordance with Chapter 13.05 WMC. (Ord. 634 § 45, 2016; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.60.110 Watercourses.

When required by the City, the developer of a subdivision shall enhance any major or minor watercourse which traverses or abuts the subdivision in accordance with the specifications and standards approved by the City. Any required watercourse easements shall be dedicated as provided in WMC 21.60.070, Easements. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.60.120 Underground utilities.

All new and existing permanent utility service to lots shall be provided from underground facilities as set forth in the Woodinville Municipal Code regulating underground wiring, pursuant to WMC 12.30.310 and 15.39.010. The applicant shall be responsible for complying with the requirements of this section, and shall make all necessary arrangements with the utility companies and other persons or corporations affected by installation of such underground facilities in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Public Utility Commissioner of the State of Washington. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.60.130 Water and sewer standards.

(1) Design Standards. All City water and sewer facilities shall be designed in compliance with the “Design Requirements Water and Sewer System Extensions” document available from the Department of Planning and Community Development or appropriate water and sewer purveyor.

(2) Construction Standards. All City water and sewer facilities shall be constructed in compliance with the standards and specifications available from the Department of Planning and Community Development or appropriate water and sewer purveyor. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.60.140 Street standards.

(1) All street improvements, grades and design shall comply with standard regulations and specifications as set forth in Chapter 12.09 WMC.

(2) When required by the City to mitigate anticipated impacts of a new subdivision or short plat, the developer shall incorporate features into the layout of the street circulation system to minimize cut-through traffic of the proposed development and/or surrounding neighborhoods.

(3) This section does not apply to trails or pedestrian walkways not located in the public right-of-way.

(4) Proposed single-access subdivision streets ending in cul-de-sacs, hammerheads or loop roads shall not exceed 990 lineal feet in length from the access point of the new subdivision and serve more than 75 proposed dwelling units unless a connection can be established to a second access right-of-way. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.60.150 Street right-of-way and pavement widths.

(1) The street right-of-way in or along the boundary of a subdivision shall conform to the provisions set forth in Chapter 12.09 WMC.

(2) When subdivision or an area within a subdivision is set aside for commercial or industrial uses, or where probable future conditions warrant, greater widths than those provided in subsection (1) of this section may be required.

(3) Where topographical requirements necessitate either cuts or fills for the proper grading of the streets, additional right-of-way widths or slope easements may be required. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.60.160 Street lights.

All subdivisions shall include underground electric service, light standards, wiring and lamps for street lights according to City adopted standards for underground wiring and the specifications and standard set forth in Chapter 12.09 WMC. The subdivider shall install such facilities and make the necessary arrangements with the serving electric utility. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.60.170 Monuments.

(1) Permanent survey control monuments shall be provided for all final plats and short plats at:

(a) All controlling corners on the boundaries of the subdivision or short subdivision;

(b) The intersection of centerlines of roads within the subdivision or short subdivision; and

(c) The beginning and ends of curves on centerlines or points of intersections on tangents.

(i) Permanent survey control monuments shall be the standard concrete monuments as required by King County or City-approved equivalent. Permanent survey control monuments within a street shall be marked by a two-inch diameter by 24-inch-long galvanized iron pipe with a cap identifying the surveyor or survey company that placed the monument and shall be set after the street is paved. Every lot corner shall be marked by rebar at least one-half-inch diameter by 24 inches long with a cap identifying the surveyor or survey company that placed the monument. Said pipe or City-approved equivalent shall be driven into the ground. If any land in a subdivision or short subdivision is contiguous to a meandered body of water, the meander line shall be reestablished and shown on the final plat or short plat. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.60.180 On-site recreation and trail corridors.

All subdivisions shall provide on-site recreation and trail corridors in compliance with applicable provisions of Chapter 21.45 WMC, Recreation and Trail Corridors. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.60.190 Tree preservation and protection.

All subdivisions and short subdivisions shall provide tree preservation and protection in accordance with Chapter 21.50 WMC. A tree plan shall be part of the preliminary plat or short plat submittal requirements and approved prior to preliminary or short plat approval. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.60.200 Public accessways.

(1) When necessary for public convenience or safety, the developer shall improve and dedicate to the public accessways to connect to cul-de-sac streets, to pass through oddly shaped or unusually long blocks, to provide for networks of public paths creating access to schools, parks, shopping centers, transit stops, trails, or other community services.

(2) The accessway shall be of such design, width and location as reasonably may be required to facilitate public use and shall comply with WMC 21.44.100 regulating walkways, sidewalks, and trails as well as any other specifications and standards of the City. Where possible, said dedications may also accommodate utility easements and facilities. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.60.210 Clearing and grading.

All clearing and grading shall be conducted in compliance with the provisions set forth in the Woodinville Municipal Code applicable to clearing and grading. No clearing or grading shall occur prior to approval of tree preservation and protection measures. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.60.220 Improvements – Completion or guarantee.

Unless installation prior to plat approval is excused by the provisions of this chapter, the applicant shall complete the required improvements before final approval of the plat and shall financially guarantee installation thereof as set forth in WMC 21.60.230, Improvements – Security for performance and warranty, prior to construction. The applicant may be allowed to submit a surety bond, a cash deposit or assignment of funds for items not completed at the time of approval of the plat, only as set forth in WMC 21.61.050(6). The surety bond, cash deposit, or assignment of funds shall identify the improvements, name the date the improvements are to be completed, and be of a form and substance subject to the approval of the above Directors. All required improvements shall be installed and/or completed within one year for subdivisions (long plats). For short subdivisions (short plats), all required improvements shall be constructed within three years of the date of plat approval. If a building permit for any residential or commercial building constructed within the short plat boundaries is issued before three years after the date of plat approval, frontage improvements, other required improvements adjacent to the lot, and other required improvements necessary for the public health, safety, and welfare such as access to the lot that meets fire code requirements, are required to be constructed within six months of the date of issuance of the building permit, whichever is earliest to occur. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.60.230 Improvements – Security for performance and warranty.

(1) Prior to actual construction of required improvements, the subdivider shall provide a guarantee in a form approved by the City Attorney and in an amount to be determined by the Planning Director (landscape, critical areas, etc.) and Public Works Director (on- and off-site improvements, drainage, lighting, etc.) sufficient to guarantee actual construction and installation of such improvements prior to final plat or short plat approval and issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. The guarantee shall only be released to the applicant upon written approval by the Planning Director and Public Works Director. A schedule for the release of funds shall be approved by the City prior to authorization to proceed with construction. In such case where the applicant fails to complete the infrastructure work by the deadline provided herein, the City shall have the option of attaching the guarantee to ameliorate any outstanding environmental concerns at the project site and/or to complete the project. The amount of the guarantee for completion shall not be less than 150 percent of the estimate of the cost of such improvements, but the Director may set a higher percentage based upon the complexity of the project. In addition, before acceptance by the City of the improvements, the subdivider shall complete the project closeout requirements and file a maintenance and defect guarantee in a form approved by the City Attorney and in an amount to be determined by the Planning Director (landscape, critical areas, etc.) and Public Works Director guaranteeing the repair or replacement of any improvement or any landscaping which proves defective or fails to survive within a minimum two-year time period after final acceptance of the improvements or landscaping by the City. The City shall withhold acceptance of the improvements until any required security for completion and the required guarantee for maintenance are filed.

(2) The City Development Services Director may enforce the assignment of funds or other security required by this section according to their terms, pursuant to any and all legal and equitable remedies. In addition, any assignment of funds or other security filed pursuant to this section shall be subject to enforcement in the following manner:

(a) In the event the improvements are not completed as required, or warranty is not performed satisfactorily, the Development Services Director shall notify the property owner and the guarantor in writing which shall set forth the specific defects which must be remedied or repaired and shall state a specific time by which such shall be completed.

(b) In the event repairs or warranty are not completed as specified in the notice referred to in subsection (2)(a) of this section by the specified time, the City Development Services Director may proceed to repair the defect or perform the warranty by either force account, using City forces, or by private contractor. Upon completion of the repairs or maintenance, the cost thereof, plus interest at 12 percent per annum, shall be due and owing to the City from the owner and guarantor as a joint and several obligation. In the event the City is required to bring suit to enforce maintenance, the subdivider and guarantor shall be responsible for any costs and attorneys’ fees incurred by the City as a result of the action.

(c) In the event that the guarantee is in the form of an assignment of funds or cash deposit with the City, the City may deduct all costs set forth in this section from the assignment of funds or cash on deposit, and the subdivider shall be required to replenish the same for the duration of the guaranty period. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.60.240 Improvements – Construction.

Construction of subdivision improvements prior to final plat or short plat approval or subsequent to final plat approval is required subject to WMC 21.60.220 and shall proceed as follows:

(1) Complete construction drawings, specifications and related material shall be submitted to the City Development Services Director for approval prior to the commencement of construction. The submitted drawings and specifications shall be designed and certified by a registered civil engineer. Construction drawings shall be in conformance with the conditions, if any, of preliminary plat or short plat approval and applicable City standards.

(2) Construction of improvements shall not be initiated without authorization of the City Engineer. The City Engineer shall authorize the subdivider to proceed with construction after approval of the construction drawings and specifications by the appropriate City department. The City Engineer may grant approval on condition additions or changes are made in the drawings or specifications, or on the inclusion or implementation of mitigating measures necessary to minimize the impacts of the construction on the environment. Conditions required to minimize environmental impacts shall conform with the requirements of the WMC regarding environmental impact procedures.

(3) Any changes to the construction drawings or specifications involving design of the improvements shall first be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer and the appropriate City department.

(4) City Tree Official-approved tree protection measures shall be installed and inspected prior to beginning any construction activities. Damage to any preserved tree shall result in replacement pursuant to WMC 21.50.070 of the damaged tree to equal the number of tree credits lost as a result of the damage. After construction activities are completed, the applicant shall provide an inspection report prepared by a certified arborist of the condition of the preserved trees.

(5) Construction of the improvements shall proceed as shown in the construction drawings and specifications. Construction inspection shall proceed under the supervision of a registered civil engineer. The City Engineer or his designee shall inspect construction progress on a regular basis to review compliance with construction plans and required standards.

(6) After the completion of construction in accordance with the approved plans and specifications, as-built drawings showing the improvements as constructed shall be certified as true and complete by a registered civil engineer. The certified as-built drawings on reproducible Mylar shall be submitted to the City Development Services Director. When a final plat is involved, the certified as-built drawings are required to be submitted prior to the acceptance of the subdivision improvements and approval of the plat or proper administrative authority for short plats by the City Council. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.60.250 Survey required.

The survey of every proposed subdivision or short subdivision shall be made by or under the supervision of a registered land surveyor. All surveys shall conform to standard practices and principles for land surveying as set forth in the laws of the State of Washington and the submittal requirements checklist as developed by the Director. Subdivision control and staking traverses shall close within an error of one foot in 5,000 feet for residential and subdivision lots, and one foot in 10,000 feet for commercial and industrial development. Primary survey control points shall be referenced to section corners and monuments. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.60.260 General provisions.

Repealed by Ord. 643. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.60.270 Subdivision vacation.

Repealed by Ord. 643. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.60.280 Subdivision alteration.

Repealed by Ord. 643. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.60.290 Final plat and short plat corrections and boundary line adjustments.

Repealed by Ord. 643. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.60.300 Divisions requiring binding site plans.

Repealed by Ord. 643. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


Chapter 21.61 SUBDIVISION REVIEW PROCEDURES

Sections:

21.61.010    Purpose.

21.61.020    Preliminary subdivision review.

21.61.030    Short subdivision review.

21.61.040    Preliminary subdivision and short subdivision approval criteria.

21.61.050    Final plat.

21.61.060    Final plat approval criteria.

21.61.070    Binding site plan.

21.61.080    Boundary line adjustments.

21.61.090    Subdivision modifications and alterations.

21.61.100    Subdivision vacations.


21.61.010 Purpose.

The provisions of this chapter describe the procedure that the City will use to review and decide upon proposed subdivisions and short subdivisions. (Ord. 643 § 8, 2017)


21.61.020 Preliminary subdivision review.

(1) Applicability. The purpose of a preliminary subdivision is to divide land into five or more lots, tracts, parcels, sites, or divisions.

(2) Filing. Any person may file an application in compliance with the requirements as set forth in Chapters 21.60 and 21.83 WMC.

(3) Public Notice. Notices of application and public hearing shall be provided in compliance with Chapter 21.84 WMC.

(4) Public Hearing and Public Hearing Record. The hearing body shall hold a public hearing to receive all relevant evidence, including staff recommendations, testimony, and exhibits, in accordance with Chapter 21.84 WMC.

(5) Approval Criteria. As a basis for deciding the application, the hearing body shall determine if appropriate provisions have been made for, but not limited to, the standards set forth in Chapter 21.60 WMC and the criteria in WMC 21.61.040.

(6) Decisions. The final decision made by the hearing body shall be made pursuant to Chapters 21.83 and 21.84 WMC. The hearing body shall make written findings that appropriate provisions have been made for the public health, safety, and general welfare, including open space, site drainage, streets, transit, water and sanitary sewer services, parks and recreation, playgrounds, schools, and safe walk routes.

(7) Effect of Preliminary Subdivision Approval. Approval of the preliminary subdivision shall constitute authorization for the applicant to develop the subdivision facilities and improvements in strict accordance with the plans and specifications as approved by the City subject to any conditions imposed by the hearing body.

(8) Time Limitation. A preliminary subdivision shall be approved, approved with conditions, disapproved or returned to the applicant for modification or correction within 90 days from the date of filing of a complete application unless the applicant agrees to an extension of the time period in writing; provided, should an environmental impact statement (EIS) be required per RCW 43.21C.030, the 90-day period shall not include the time spent in preparing and circulating the EIS by the City.

(9) Expiration. Final plat approval must be acquired within five years of preliminary subdivision approval. A one-year extension may be granted by the Development Services Director if the applicant has attempted in good faith to complete the final plat within the five-year time period. The applicant shall file a written request with the City requesting the extension at least 30 days before expiration. (Ord. 643 § 8, 2017)


21.61.030 Short subdivision review.

(1) Applicability. The purpose of a short subdivision is to divide land into four or fewer lots, tracts, parcels, sites, or divisions.

(2) Filing. Any person may file an application in compliance with the requirements as set forth in Chapters 21.60 and 21.83 WMC.

(3) Public Notice. Notice of application shall be provided in compliance with Chapter 21.84 WMC and RCW 58.17.155.

(4) Approval Criteria. As a basis for deciding the application, the City shall determine if appropriate provisions have been made for, but not limited to, the standards set forth in Chapter 21.60 WMC and the criteria in WMC 21.61.040.

(5) Decision. Each final decision of the City shall be made pursuant to WMC 21.83.070. The City shall make written findings that appropriate provisions have been made for the public health, safety, and general welfare, including open space, site drainage, streets, transit, water and sanitary sewer services, parks and recreation, playgrounds, schools, and safe walk routes.

(6) Effect of Short Subdivision Approval. Approval of the short subdivision shall constitute authorization of the applicant to develop the short subdivision facilities and improvements in strict accordance with the plans and specifications as approved and conditioned by the City.

(7) Time Limitation. Within 30 days of the date of filing the application for a short subdivision, unless an extension is granted in writing by the applicant, the applicant shall be notified in writing of one of the following:

(a) That the final approval has been granted;

(b) That tentative approval has been granted, meaning that approval of a short subdivision application is subject to the satisfactory completion of improvements, conditions, and/or requirements specified by the City;

(c) That the application is returned due to certain omissions, problems, deficiencies, or noncompliance with short subdivision requirements; or

(d) That the application has been disapproved.

(8) Expiration. Final short subdivision approval must be acquired within five years of short subdivision approval. A one-year extension may be granted by the Development Services Director if the applicant has attempted in good faith to complete the final short subdivision within the five-year time period. The applicant shall file a written request with the City requesting the extension at least 30 days before expiration.

(9) Short Subdivisions – Restrictions. The area included in an approved and recorded short subdivision shall not be further divided within a period of five years from the date of final approval without meeting the requirements for a subdivision; except, that when the short subdivision contains fewer than four lots, tracts, parcels, sites, or divisions, nothing in this section shall prevent the owner who filed the short subdivision from filing an alteration within the five-year period to create up to a total of four lots, tracts, parcels, sites, or divisions within the original short subdivision boundaries. (Ord. 643 § 8, 2017)


21.61.040 Preliminary subdivision and short subdivision approval criteria.

(1) A preliminary subdivision or short subdivision shall be granted by the City if the applicant demonstrates all of the following criteria are met:

(a) The proposal is in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan, Shoreline Master Program, and other City-adopted plans;

(b) The proposal conforms to the development standards set forth in this title;

(c) The proposed street system conforms to the City of Woodinville public infrastructure standards and specifications and neighborhood street plans, and is laid out in such a manner as to provide for the safe, orderly and efficient circulation of traffic;

(d) The proposed subdivision or short subdivision will be adequately served with City-approved water and sewer, and other utilities appropriate to the nature of the subdivision or short subdivision;

(e) The layout of lots, and their size and dimensions, take into account topography and vegetation on the site in order that buildings may be reasonably sited, and that the least disruption of the site, topography, trees and vegetation will result from development of the lots;

(f) Identified hazards and limitations to development have been considered in the design of streets and lot layout to assure street and building sites are on geologically stable soil considering the stress and loads to which the soil may be subjected;

(g) Safe walk to school procedures, as established by the City, have been met;

(h) Tree preservation has been considered in accordance with the community urban forestry plan and tree preservation requirements have been adequately met. (Ord. 643 § 8, 2017)


21.61.050 Final plat.

(1) Applicability. A final plat is a final drawing of a preliminary subdivision or short subdivision prepared for filing for record with the King County Recorder’s Office.

(2) Filing. Any person may file an application in compliance with the requirements as set forth in Chapters 21.60 and 21.83 WMC.

(3) Public Notice. Notice of the filing of the application shall be mailed to parties of record of the short subdivision or preliminary subdivision.

(4) Department Review. The Development Services Department shall make written findings that appropriate provisions have been made for the public health, safety, and general welfare, including open space, site drainage, streets, transit, water and sanitary sewer services, parks and recreation, schools and playgrounds, and safe walk routes. The Development Services Department shall review the survey data, layout of lot lines, streets, alleys and other rights-of-way, and utility improvements to assure that:

(a) The proposed final plat conforms to all terms of preliminary approval, and whether the subdivision meets the requirements of Chapter 21.60 WMC, applicable State laws and all other local ordinances adopted by the City which were in effect at the time of preliminary approval;

(b) The proposed final plat contains a dedication to the public of all common improvements, including, but not limited to, streets, roads, water and sanitary sewer systems;

(c) City-approved utilities, systems, and features are available to each lot created by the division of land and referenced on the final plat;

(d) The proposed final plat bears the certificates and statements of approval;

(e) Current title insurance report furnished by the subdivider confirms the title of the land in the proposed subdivision is vested in the name of the owners whose signatures appear on the final plat;

(f) The legal description and all encumbrances within the subdivision boundary on the current title insurance report are consistent with the final plat;

(g) The facilities and improvements required to be provided by the subdivider, including as-built documents, have been completed subject to subsection (7) of this section;

(h) The surveyor has certified that all survey monument lot corners are in place and visible; and

(i) The plat is technically correct and accurate as certified by the surveyor responsible for the plat.

(5) Recording. No final plat shall be recorded unless approved by the City. The original of an approved final plat shall be filed for record with the King County Recorder’s Office. Prior to recording, the applicant shall submit the original final plat drawings to the Development Services Department together with the application fees and performance bond(s).

(6) Construction of Improvements. All required improvements, public or private, shall be constructed or installed prior to final plat approval in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the requirements of the approved subdivision, except as follows:

(a) For preliminary subdivisions, the City may accept a surety bond, a cash deposit or an assignment of funds in lieu of installing or constructing certain improvements, provided deferral of improvements shall not endanger the public health, safety, or welfare:

(i) Minor items of the required improvements such as the final lift of asphalt pavement and/or landscaping; or

(ii) Whether the City and/or other public agency’s capital project needs to be completed ahead of the required improvements to allow for logical sequence of construction to prevent damage or disruption to the improvements being made.

(b) For short subdivisions, the City may accept a surety bond, cash deposit, or assignment of funds in an amount determined by the City in lieu of constructing the required frontage improvements including, but not limited to, street frontage improvements, and storm drainage systems for any individual lot within the subdivision. In approving the plat and allowing the financial guarantee in lieu of actually constructing the required frontage improvements, the City shall determine that the public health, safety, and welfare are not endangered by allowing plat to be approved without the required improvements being completed within the time period set forth in WMC 21.60.220.

(7) Time Limits. Final plat shall be approved, disapproved or returned to the applicant for modification or correction within 30 days from the date of filing unless the applicant consents to an extension of such time period. (Ord. 643 § 8, 2017)


21.61.060 Final plat approval criteria.

(1) No final plat shall be approved unless the following criteria are met:

(a) The final plat is in substantial conformance with the provisions for the preliminary subdivision or short subdivision approval, including any conditions imposed as part of the approval.

(b) The final plat contains a dedication to the public of all common improvements, including but not limited to streets, roads, sewage disposal and water supply systems which were a condition of approval.

(c) All common improvements required as conditions of approval of the proposed preliminary subdivision or short subdivision have been referenced on the final plat.

(d) The final plat is in compliance with the provisions of Chapters 21.51 and 21.81 WMC. (Ord. 643 § 8, 2017)


21.61.070 Binding site plan.

(1) Applicability. The purpose of a binding site plan is to divide commercial or industrially zoned properties as authorized by RCW 58.17.035. Lots subject to a binding site plan continue to function as one site concerning, but not limited to, site access, interior circulation and parking areas, open space, drainage facilities, landscaping, or maintenance.

(2) Filing. Any person may file an application in compliance with the requirements as set forth in Chapters 21.60 and 21.83 WMC.

(3) Public Notice. Notice of the filing of the application shall be provided in compliance with Chapter 21.84 WMC.

(4) Decision Criteria. A binding site plan shall be granted by the City if the applicant demonstrates that all of the following criteria are met:

(a) The proposal conforms to the goals, policies, criteria and plans set forth in the City of Woodinville Comprehensive Plan;

(b) The proposal conforms to the development standards set forth in this title;

(c) The proposed street system conforms to the City of Woodinville public infrastructure standards and specifications and neighborhood street plans, and is laid out in such a manner as to provide for the safe, orderly and efficient circulation of traffic;

(d) The proposed binding site plan will be adequately served with City-approved water and sewer, and other utilities appropriate to the nature of the proposal;

(e) The layout of lots, and their size and dimensions, take into account topography and vegetation on the site in order that buildings may be reasonably sited, and that the least disruption of the site, topography, trees and vegetation will result from development of the lots;

(f) Identified hazards and limitations to development have been considered in the design of streets and lot layout to assure street and building sites are on geologically stable soil considering the stress and loads to which the soil may be subjected;

(g) Tree preservation has been considered in accordance with the community urban forestry plan and tree preservation requirements have been adequately met.

(5) Decisions. The City shall make written findings that appropriate provisions have been made for the public health, safety, and general welfare, including open spaces, drainage ways, streets and other public ways, transit stops, potable water supplies, and sanitary sewer.

(6) Effect of Binding Site Plan Approval. Approved binding site plans shall be binding and all provisions, conditions and requirements of the binding site plan shall be legally enforceable on the purchaser or any person acquiring a lease or other ownership interest of any lot, parcel or tract created pursuant to the binding site plan. A sale, transfer, or lease of any lot, tract or parcel created pursuant to the binding site plan that does not conform to the requirements of the binding site plan approval shall be considered a violation of this chapter, and shall be restrained by injunctive action and shall be illegal as provided in Chapter 58.17 RCW, Plats – Subdivisions – Dedications.

(7) Recording. No final plat shall be recorded unless approved by the City Council. The original of an approved final plat shall be filed for record with the King County Recorder’s Office. Prior to recording, the applicant shall submit the original final plat drawings to the Development Services Department together with the application fees and performance bond(s).

(8) Limitations. The following apply to binding site plan applications:

(a) Sites subject to binding site plans shall consist of one or more contiguous lots legally created.

(b) Sites subject to binding site plans may be reviewed independently, or concurrently with a commercial development permit application.

(c) The binding site plan process creates or alters lot lines, and does not authorize substantial improvements or changes to the property or the uses thereon. (Ord. 643 § 8, 2017)


21.61.080 Boundary line adjustments.

(1) Applicability. A boundary line adjustment may be used to correct or adjust final plats or boundary lines between two or more adjoining parcels; provided the proposed changes are minor and do not create new lots. This method may be used to consolidate two or more existing lots.

(2) Filing. Any person may file an application in compliance with the requirements as set forth in Chapters 21.60 and 21.83 WMC.

(3) Approval Criteria. A boundary line adjustment shall be granted by the City if the applicant demonstrates that all of the following criteria are met:

(a) The proposal does not create any additional tracts, lots, parcels, or divisions of land;

(b) The proposal does not cause a lot, tract, parcel, or division of land to contain insufficient area or dimensions to meet the minimum requirements for area and dimensions as set forth in the Woodinville Municipal Code;

(c) The proposal does not create or diminish any easement, or deprive a lot of access or utilities; and

(d) The proposal does not create or increase the nonconformity of structures.

(4) Decision. Each final decision of the City shall be made pursuant to WMC 21.83.070. The City shall make written findings that appropriate provisions have been made for the public health, safety, and general welfare, including open space, site drainage, streets, transit, water and sanitary sewer services, parks and recreation, schools and playgrounds, and safe walk routes. (Ord. 643 § 8, 2017)


21.61.090 Subdivision modifications and alterations.

(1) Modifications to Approved Subdivisions. Applications to modify an approved preliminary subdivision or short subdivision pursuant to WMC 21.61.020 and 21.61.030 shall be subject to the following:

(a) Minor modifications include, but are not limited to, changes in lot dimensions consistent with Chapter 21.60 WMC and engineering design that are minor and are not detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, do not result in relocation of access points, or decrease in the number of lots. Minor modifications shall be processed as a Type 2 decision pursuant to WMC 21.83.020(4).

(b) Major modifications include, but are not limited to, creating or increasing adverse impacts, creation of additional lots, reduction of open space area, or changes to the conditions of approval. Major modifications shall be processed as a new application as set forth in Chapters 21.60 and 21.83 WMC.

(2) Alterations to Recorded Subdivisions. Applications to alter a recorded subdivision shall comply with the following:

(a) The applicant shall file an application as set forth in Chapters 21.60 and 21.83 WMC.

(b) The application shall contain the signatures of the majority of those persons having an ownership interest of lots, tracts, parcels, sites, or divisions in the subject subdivision or portion to be altered and other application submittal materials as required.

(c) If the subdivision is subject to restrictive covenants which were filed at the time of the approval of the subdivision, and the alteration would result in the violation of a covenant, the application shall contain an agreement signed by all parties, subject to the covenants, providing that the parties agree to terminate or alter the relevant covenants to accomplish the purpose of the alteration.

(d) The hearing body shall conduct a public hearing on the application for alteration, subject to the provisions of Chapter 21.84 WMC, and may approve or deny the application for alteration of the subdivision after determining the public use and interest to be served.

(e) After approval of the alteration, the applicant shall submit to the City a revised drawing of the approved alteration of the subdivision, which after signature of the approving authority shall be filed with the King County Recorder’s Office to become the lawful subdivision of the property. The revised drawing shall be surveyed and prepared by a Washington State licensed land surveyor. (Ord. 643 § 8, 2017)


21.61.100 Subdivision vacations.

(1) Any person interested in the vacation of any subdivision or portion thereof or area dedicated for public use shall file an application pursuant to WMC 21.83.020.

(2) The application shall set forth the reasons for vacation and shall contain signatures of all parties having an ownership interest in that portion to be vacated.

(3) If the subdivision is subject to restrictive covenants which are filed at the time of approval of the subdivision, and the vacation would result in the violation of a covenant, the application shall contain an agreement signed by all parties subject to the covenants providing that the parties agree to terminate or alter the relevant covenants to accomplish the purpose of the vacation.

(4) The hearing body shall conduct a public hearing on the application for a vacation, and may approve or deny the application for vacation of the subdivision after determining the public use and interest to be served. If any portion of the land contained in the subdivision was dedicated to the public for public use or benefit, such land, if not deeded to the City, shall be deeded to the City unless the approval authority adopts written findings that the public use would not be served in retaining title to those lands. Title to vacated property shall be governed by Chapter 58.17 RCW, Plats – Subdivision Dedications. (Ord. 643 § 8, 2017)


Chapter 21.70 SHORELINE MANAGEMENT

Sections:

21.70.010    Adopted.


21.70.010  Adopted.

This chapter, Shoreline Management, is hereby amended to read as set forth in Attachment A which is attached to Ordinance 487 and incorporated herein by this reference as if set forth in full. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


Chapter 21.80 DECISION CRITERIA

Sections:

21.80.010    Purpose.

21.80.020    Determination of consistency.

21.80.030    Building permit.

21.80.040    Boundary line adjustment.

21.80.050    Binding site plan.

21.80.060    Conditional use permit.

21.80.070    Critical areas alteration/determination.

21.80.080    Critical areas exception.

21.80.090    Design review.

21.80.100    Flood improvement permit.

21.80.110    Flood variance.

21.80.120    Home industry permit.

21.80.130    Home occupation permit.

21.80.140    Land use project approval.

21.80.150    Master signage plan.

21.80.160    Reasonable use permit.

21.80.170    Right-of-way permit.

21.80.180    Shoreline conditional use permit.

21.80.190    Shoreline substantial development permit.

21.80.200    Shoreline variance.

21.80.210    Sign permit.

21.80.220    Site development permit.

21.80.230    Special use permit.

21.80.240    Subdivisions and short subdivisions, preliminary.

21.80.250    Subdivisions and short subdivisions, final.

21.80.260    Temporary use permit.

21.80.270    Tree removal permit.

21.80.280    Variance.

21.80.290    Wireless service facility.

21.80.300    Zone map amendments, site specific.


21.80.010 Purpose.

The purposes of this chapter are to allow for consistent evaluation of land use applications and to protect nearby properties from the possible effects of such requests by:

(1) Providing clear criteria on which to base a decision;

(2) Recognizing the effects of unique circumstances upon the development potential of a property;

(3) Avoiding the granting of special privileges;

(4) Avoiding development which may be unnecessarily detrimental to neighboring properties;

(5) Requiring that the design, scope and intensity of development are in keeping with the physical aspects of a site and adopted land use policies for the area; and

(6) Providing criteria which emphasize protection of the general character of neighborhoods. (Ord. 643 § 9, 2017; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.80.020 Determination of consistency.

(1) Purpose. When the City receives a project permit application, consistency between the proposed project and the applicable regulations and Comprehensive Plan shall be determined through the process in this title and the City’s adopted SEPA ordinance, Chapter 21.52 WMC.

(2) Consistency. The City shall determine whether the proposed project is consistent with the applicable development regulations or, in the absence of applicable development regulations, the appropriate elements of the Comprehensive Plan that address the unregulated impacts. This determination of consistency shall include the following:

(a) The type of land use permitted at the site, including uses that may be allowed under certain circumstances, if the criteria for their approval have been satisfied;

(b) The level of development, such as units per acre, or other measures of density;

(c) Availability and adequacy of infrastructure, public facilities and services identified in the Comprehensive Plan and needed to serve the development; and

(d) Character of the development, such as development standards. (Ord. 643 § 9, 2017; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.80.030 Building permit.

(1) Applicability. This section applies to all permits required under Chapter 15.04 WMC – Building Codes.

(2) Decision Criteria. The codes and standards referenced in Chapter 15.04 WMC and other applicable ordinances and regulations as they currently exist or are hereafter amended set forth the criteria for approving building permits. (Ord. 643 § 9, 2017; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.80.040 Boundary line adjustment.

(1) Applicability. A boundary line adjustment may be used to correct or adjust final plats or boundary lines between two or more adjoining parcels; provided the proposed changes are minor and do not create new lots. This method may be used to consolidate two or more existing lots.

(2) Decision Criteria. A boundary line adjustment shall be granted by the City if the applicant demonstrates that all of the criteria in WMC 21.61.080 are met. (Ord. 643 § 9, 2017; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.80.050 Binding site plan.

(1) Applicability. The purpose of a binding site plan is to divide commercial or industrially zoned properties as authorized by RCW 58.17.035. Lots subject to a binding site plan continue to function as one site concerning, but not limited to, site access, interior circulation and parking areas, open space, drainage facilities, landscaping, or maintenance.

(2) Decision Criteria. A binding site plan shall be granted by the City if the applicant demonstrates that all of the criteria in WMC 21.61.060 are met.

(3) Limitations. The following apply to binding site plan applications:

(a) Sites subject to binding site plans shall consist of one or more contiguous lots legally created.

(b) Sites subject to binding site plans may be reviewed independently, or concurrently with a commercial development permit application.

(c) The binding site plan process creates or alters lot lines, and does not authorize substantial improvements or changes to the property or the uses thereon. (Ord. 643 § 9, 2017; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.80.060 Conditional use permit. 

(1) Applicability. The purpose of a conditional use permit is to allow certain uses which, by their nature, may have undue impact on nearby land uses. This section shall apply to uses and activities listed or referenced as requiring a conditional use permit under Chapter 21.21 WMC.

(a) A conditional use permit for new construction, additions to existing buildings exceeding 20 percent of the existing gross floor area, or substantial improvements to an existing building shall be processed as a Type 3 decision pursuant to WMC 21.83.020(5).

(b) An administrative conditional use permit for additions to existing buildings 20 percent or less of the gross floor area or substantial improvements to an existing building shall be processed as a Type 2 decision pursuant to WMC 21.83.020(4).

(2) Decision Criteria. A conditional use permit shall be granted by the City only if the applicant demonstrates that:

(a) The conditional use is designed in a manner which is compatible with the character and appearance of the existing or proposed development in the vicinity of the subject property;

(b) The location, size and height of buildings, structures, walls and fences, and screening vegetation for the conditional use shall not hinder neighborhood circulation or discourage the permitted development or use of neighboring properties;

(c) Requested modifications to standards are limited to those which will mitigate impacts in a manner equal to or greater than the standards of this title;

(d) The conditional use is not in conflict with the health and safety of the community;

(e) The conditional use is such that pedestrian and vehicular traffic associated with the use will not be hazardous or conflict with existing and anticipated traffic in the neighborhood; and

(f) The conditional use will be supported by adequate public facilities or services and will not adversely affect public services to the surrounding area or conditions can be established to mitigate adverse impacts on such facilities. (Ord. 643 § 9, 2017; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.80.070 Critical areas alteration/determination.

(1) Applicability. The purpose of a critical area determination is to evaluate any development permit application or other request for permission to proceed with an alteration on a site that includes a critical area or is within an identified critical area buffer.

(2) Decision Criteria. As part of the critical area determination, the City shall:

(a) Determine whether any critical area exists on the property and confirm its nature and type;

(b) Determine whether a critical areas report is required;

(c) Evaluate the critical areas report;

(d) Determine whether the development proposal is consistent with Chapter 21.51 WMC;

(e) Determine whether any proposed alteration to the critical area is necessary; and

(f) Determine if the mitigation and monitoring plans and bonding measures proposed by the applicant are sufficient to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, consistent with the goals, purposes, objectives, and requirements of Chapter 21.51 WMC. (Ord. 643 § 9, 2017; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.80.080 Critical areas exception.

(1) Applicability. This section shall apply where application of Chapter 21.51 WMC would prohibit a development proposal by a public agency or public utility.

(2) Decision Criteria. A critical areas exception shall be granted if the applicant demonstrates the decision criteria in WMC 21.51.060 are met.

(3) Limitations. This exception shall not allow the use of the following critical areas for regional retention/detention facilities except where the applicant clearly demonstrates that the facility will protect public health and safety or repair damaged natural resources:

(a) Type S stream and its buffers;

(b) Category I or II wetland and its buffers with plant associations of infrequent occurrence; or

(c) Category I or II wetland and its buffers, which provide critical or outstanding habitat for herons, raptors, or State or Federal designated endangered or threatened species unless clearly demonstrated by the applicant that there will be no impact on such habitat. (Ord. 643 § 9, 2017; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.80.090 Design review.

(1) Applicability. All new construction within the CBD, O, TB, GB, and NB zones shall be subject to the design standards in Chapter 21.40 WMC. Alteration of any structure on commercially designated property within the City that affects the exterior appearance of a building shall be subject to review pursuant to WMC 21.40.030(3).

(2) Decision Criteria. A proposed design shall be approved by the City if the applicant demonstrates that the following criteria are met:

(a) The proposed design is consistent with the design standards found in Chapter 21.40 WMC; and

(b) Any design departures that deviate from design standards must be consistent with the stated design intent in Chapter 21.40 WMC. (Ord. 643 § 9, 2017; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.80.100 Flood improvement permit.

(1) Applicability. A flood improvement permit is required for improvements in floodplain management areas located within the city’s jurisdiction as prescribed in Chapter 21.53 WMC. A flood improvement permit may be applied in lieu of a critical area alteration as it specifically applies to flood hazards.

(2) Additional Submittal Requirements. In addition to the requirements set forth in WMC 21.83.060(8), an application for a flood improvement permit shall include the following: 

(a) The nature of the proposed action;

(b) A statement as to the proposed use of any structure;

(c) A statement as to whether the proposed action is temporary or permanent;

(d) Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures recorded on a current elevation certificate with Section B completed by the Floodplain Administrator;

(e) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been floodproofed; 

(f) Where a structure is to be floodproofed, certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet floodproofing criteria in WMC 21.53.140(2); 

(g) Description of the extent to which a watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development;

(h) Where a structure is proposed in a V, V1-30, or VE Zone, a V-Zone design certificate;

(i) Where development is proposed in a floodway, an engineering analysis indication of no rise of the base flood elevation; and

(j) Any other such information that may be reasonably required by the Floodplain Administrator in order to review the application.

(3) Decision Criteria. The decision authority may approve a flood improvement permit only if:

(a) All the necessary permits have been obtained from those Federal, State and/or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required; and

(b) The requirements applicable to special flood hazard areas in Chapter 21.53 WMC and applicable critical area regulations in Chapter 21.51 WMC are satisfied.

(4) Conditions of Approval. The decision authority may attach such conditions as reasonably necessary to safeguard the public health, general welfare, and safety including but not limited to the effects upon storage and conveyance of flood waters. (Ord. 699 § 7, 2020; Ord. 643 § 9, 2017; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.80.110 Flood variance.

(1) Applicability. A flood variance may be requested for relief from floodplain management regulation prescribed in Chapter 21.53 WMC.

(2) Limitations.

(a) A flood variance may be granted only where physical characteristics are so unusual that compliance with the floodplain management regulations would create an exceptional hardship to the property owner or the surrounding property owners.

(b) The characteristics must be unique to the property and not shared by adjacent parcels and must pertain to the land itself and not the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners.

(c) Evidence of other flood variances granted under similar circumstances shall not be considered in the granting of a flood variance.

(3) Requirements for a Flood Variance. A flood variance may only be issued if:

(a) Granting of the variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with other applicable laws and ordinances;

(b) For repair, rehabilitation, or restoration of historic structures, the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure;

(c) The variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief;

(d) The applicant demonstrates a good and sufficient cause for granting the variance;

(e) Failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the property owner;

(f) The applicant demonstrates that the use cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water and is a functionally dependent use;

(g) The variance is not issued within any floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result; and

(h) New construction and substantial improvements to be erected should be on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood elevation, except as the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.

(4) Criteria for Approval. The decision authority shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all applicable standards set forth in the floodplain management regulations and the following in deciding a flood variance application:

(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;

(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;

(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;

(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use, which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;

(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the City;

(i) The safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and

(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, water system, and streets and bridges.

(5) Conditions of Approval. The decision authority may attach such conditions as reasonably necessary to safeguard the public health, general welfare, and safety.

(6) Noticing. Any property owner to whom a flood variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of the Director that:

(a) The issuance of a flood variance to construct a structure below the base flood elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage; and

(b) Such construction below the base flood elevation increases risks to life and property. (Ord. 699 § 8, 2020; Ord. 643 § 9, 2017; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.80.120 Home industry permit.

(1) Applicability. This section shall apply to all limited-scale sales, service, or fabrication activities occurring on a single-family zoned lot and is subordinate to the primary use of the premises as a residence.

(2) Decision Criteria. A home industry permit shall be granted by the City if the applicant demonstrates that the development is consistent with the home industry requirements in WMC 21.31.090. (Ord. 643 § 9, 2017)


21.80.130 Home occupation permit.

(1) Applicability. This section shall apply to all limited-scale sales, service, or fabrication activities occurring on a single-family zoned lot and is subordinate to the primary use of the premises as a residence.

(2) Decision Criteria. A home occupation permit shall be granted by the City if the applicant demonstrates that the development is consistent with the home occupation requirements in WMC 21.31.080. (Ord. 643 § 9, 2017)


21.80.140 Land use project approval.

(1) Applicability. This section shall apply to the following commercial, mixed-use, industrial, public and/or multifamily residential projects:

(a) Establishing new development on a vacant site;

(b) Substantial improvement on an existing site pursuant to WMC 21.11.210; or

(c) Expanding of any development not categorically exempt under the State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA).

(2) Decision Criteria. A land use project approval permit shall be granted by the City if the applicant demonstrates that the development is consistent with all of the City’s development regulations, as adopted in the Woodinville Municipal Code. (Ord. 643 § 9, 2017)


21.80.150 Master signage plan.

(1) Applicability. This section shall apply to all new commercial or industrial projects or multi-tenant development having four or more tenant spaces. Existing development desiring to achieve conformance with this code shall be permitted to apply for a master sign plan.

(2) Decision Criteria. A master signage plan shall be granted by the City if the applicant demonstrates that all of the criteria set forth in WMC 21.35.120(2) are met. (Ord. 643 § 9, 2017)


21.80.160 Reasonable use permit.

(1) Applicability. This section shall apply where application of Chapter 21.51 WMC would deny all reasonable use of the subject property.

(2) Decision Criteria. A reasonable use permit shall be granted if the applicant demonstrates all of the criteria in WMC 21.51.070 are met. (Ord. 643 § 9, 2017)


21.80.170 Right-of-way permit.

(1) Applicability. This section shall apply to any construction, repair, or maintenance on, under, or over public right-of-way, any railroad tracks, utility facilities, telecommunications facilities or any other appurtenances necessary for the purpose of providing telecommunications service, conducting any public utility business, either public or private, or to go upon any such public right-of-way to perform any work therein which will obstruct the free flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or disturb the surface of public rights-of-way, alley, planting strip or sidewalk, or to occupy area upon the surface or beneath the surface of public rights-of-way, planting strips or sidewalks.

(2) Decision Criteria. A right-of-way permit shall be granted by the City if the applicant demonstrates the following criteria are met:

(a) All requisite licenses, certificates, and authorizations from applicable Federal, State, and local agencies have been obtained by the applicant;

(b) The capacity of the public right-of-way is acceptable to accommodate additional utility and telecommunications facilities if the right-of-way use authorization is granted;

(c) The proposal will not detrimentally affect the public health, safety and welfare if the right-of-way use authorization is granted;

(d) The proposal identifies the availability of reasonable alternate routes and/or locations in the right-of-way for the proposed facilities;

(e) Applicable Federal, State, and local statutes, regulations, ordinances, and policies related to utility, telecommunications, and other facilities, including City construction standards are met; and

(f) The proposal demonstrates that the grant to use the public right-of-way will serve the community interest. (Ord. 643 § 9, 2017)


21.80.180 Shoreline conditional use permit.

(1) Applicability. This section shall apply to development or substantial development classified as a conditional use according to the regulations in Chapter 6 of the Shoreline Master Program or to any uses not classified or set forth in the Shoreline Master Program.

(2) Decision Criteria. A shoreline conditional use permit shall be granted by the City only if the applicant demonstrates the criteria in the Woodinville Shoreline Master Program are met. (Ord. 643 § 9, 2017)


21.80.190 Shoreline substantial development permit.

(1) Applicability. This section shall apply to activities and uses defined as development pursuant to RCW 90.58.030(3)(a) and located within the shoreline jurisdiction as defined by the Shoreline Management Act, which are not exempt pursuant to WAC 173-27-040 and the Woodinville Shoreline Master Program.

(2) Decision Criteria. A shoreline substantial development permit shall be granted by the City only if the applicant demonstrates the criteria in SMP Section 7.5.2.2 are met. (Ord. 643 § 9, 2017)


21.80.200 Shoreline variance.

(1) Applicability. A shoreline variance permit is strictly limited to granting relief from specific bulk, dimensional, or performance standards set forth in the Shoreline Master Program where there are extraordinary or unique circumstances relating to the property such that the strict implementation of the Master Program will interfere with reasonable uses of the property or impose unnecessary hardships on the applicant or thwart the policies set forth in RCW 90.58.020.

(2) Decision Criteria. A shoreline variance shall be granted by the City only if the applicant demonstrates the criteria in SMP Section 7.5.4.3 are met. (Ord. 643 § 9, 2017)


21.80.210 Sign permit.

(1) Applicability. Except as otherwise permitted by Chapter 21.35 WMC, no sign shall be erected, altered or relocated without a sign permit issued by the City.

(2) Decision Criteria. A sign permit shall be granted by the City if the applicant demonstrates that the proposed development is consistent with the sign requirements in Chapter 21.35 WMC. (Ord. 643 § 9, 2017)


21.80.220 Site development permit.

(1) Applicability. A site development permit shall be required for projects meeting or exceeding the grading thresholds in WMC 15.05.060.

(2) Decision Criteria. A site development permit shall be granted by the City only if the applicant demonstrates that all of the criteria in WMC 15.05.040 are met. (Ord. 643 § 9, 2017)


21.80.230 Special use permit.

(1) Applicability. Uses and activities, including essential public facilities, listed or referenced as requiring a special use permit.

(2) Decision Criteria. A special use permit shall be granted by the City only if the applicant demonstrates that:

(a) The characteristics of the special use will not be unreasonably incompatible with the types of uses permitted in surrounding areas;

(b) The special use will not materially endanger the health, safety and welfare of the community;

(c) The special use is such that pedestrian and vehicular traffic associated with the use will not be hazardous or conflict with existing and anticipated traffic in the neighborhood;

(d) The special use will be supported by adequate public facilities or services and will not adversely affect public services to the surrounding area or conditions can be established to mitigate adverse impacts;

(e) The location, size and height of buildings, structures, walls and fences, and screening vegetation for the special use shall not hinder or discourage the appropriate development or use of neighboring properties;

(f) The special use is not in conflict with the policies of the Comprehensive Plan or the basic purposes of this title; and

(g) Where applicable, the special use meets the requirements of the Comprehensive Plan regarding the siting process for essential public facilities. (Ord. 643 § 9, 2017)


21.80.240 Subdivisions and short subdivisions, preliminary.

(1) Applicability. This section applies to preliminary approval of land divisions subject to Chapters 21.60 and 21.61 WMC.

(2) Decision Criteria. A preliminary subdivision or short subdivision shall be granted by the City if the applicant demonstrates all of the criteria in WMC 21.61.030 are met. (Ord. 643 § 9, 2017)


21.80.250 Subdivisions and short subdivisions, final.

(1) Applicability. This section applies to final approval of a short subdivision or subdivision.

(2) Decision Criteria. A final plat for a subdivision or short subdivision shall be approved by the City if the applicant demonstrates all of the criteria in WMC 21.61.050 are met. (Ord. 643 § 9, 2017)


21.80.260 Temporary use permit.

(1) Applicability. Temporary uses are those uses that are of a limited duration and/or frequency or comprise multiple related events over a specified period. Except as provided by WMC 21.36.020, a temporary use permit shall be required for the following activities:

(a) Uses not otherwise permitted in the zone that can be made compatible for periods of limited duration and/or frequency;

(b) Limited expansion of any use that is otherwise allowed in the zone but which exceeds the intended scope of permit approval;

(c) Temporary structures subject to WMC 21.36.050 through 21.36.110;

(d) Businesses operating as mobile vendors; or

(e) Temporary encampments.

(2) Decision Criteria. A temporary use permit shall be granted if the applicant demonstrates all of the following criteria are met:

(a) The proposed temporary use will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare;

(b) The proposed temporary use is compatible with existing land use in the immediate vicinity in terms of noise and hours of operation;

(c) Adequate public off-street parking and traffic control for the exclusive use of the proposed temporary use can be provided in a safe manner; and

(d) The proposed temporary use is not otherwise permitted in the zone in which it is proposed. (Ord. 644 § 2, 2018; Ord. 643 § 9, 2017)


21.80.270 Tree removal permit.

(1) Applicability. A tree removal permit shall be required when any person removes a tree not exempt under WMC 21.50.030.

(2) Decision Criteria. A tree removal permit shall be granted by the City if the applicant demonstrates that the proposal is consistent with the tree protection requirements in Chapter 21.50 WMC. (Ord. 643 § 9, 2017)


21.80.280 Variance.

(1) Applicability. A variance is intended to provide property owners relief from a dimensional standard that would result in an unusual or unreasonable hardship due to physical characteristics of the site. Variances may not alter a definition or a procedural provision of this title.

(2) Decision Criteria. A variance shall be granted by the City only if the applicant demonstrates all of the following:

(a) The strict enforcement of the provisions of this title creates an unnecessary hardship to the property owner;

(b) The variance is necessary because of special circumstances relating to the size, shape, topography, location, or surrounding of the subject property;

(c) The subject property is deprived, by provisions of this title, of rights and privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity and under an identical zone;

(d) The need for the variance is not the result of deliberate actions of the applicant or property owner;

(e) The variance does not create health and safety hazards;

(f) The variance does not allow establishment of a use that is not otherwise permitted in the zone in which the proposal is located; and

(g) The variance does not allow the creation of lots or densities that exceed the base residential density for the zone. (Ord. 643 § 9, 2017)


21.80.290 Wireless service facility.

(1) Applicability. Any placement or alteration of any wireless service facility at any location within Woodinville.

(2) Decision Criteria. A wireless service facility permit shall be granted by the City if the applicant demonstrates the criteria in WMC 21.37.030 are met. (Ord. 643 § 9, 2017)


21.80.300 Zone map amendments, site specific.

(1) Applicability. This section applies to site-specific amendments of the Woodinville zoning map.

(2) Decision Criteria. A zone reclassification shall be granted only if the applicant demonstrates that:

(a) The proposal is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan;

(b) There is a demonstrated need for additional zoning as the type proposed;

(c) The zone reclassification is consistent and compatible with uses and zoning of the surrounding properties; and

(d) The property is practically and physically suited for the uses allowed in the proposed zone reclassification. (Ord. 643 § 9, 2017)


Chapter 21.81 ADEQUACY OF PUBLIC FACILITIES

Sections:

21.81.010    Purpose.

21.81.020    General requirements.

21.81.030    Adequate sewage disposal.

21.81.040    Adequate water supply.

21.81.050    Surface water management.

21.81.060    Adequate roads.

21.81.070    Adequate roads – Road capacity level of service (LOS) standard.

21.81.080    Adequate roads – Applicability of capacity standard.

21.81.090    Adequate roads – General conditions.

21.81.100    Exceptions.

21.81.110    Adequate vehicular access.

21.81.120    Adequate fire protection.

21.81.130    School concurrency – Applicability and relationship with fees.

21.81.140    Findings, recommendations, and decisions regarding school capacities.

21.81.150    School concurrency standard.

21.81.160    Credit for improvements.


21.81.010 Purpose. 

The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that public facilities and services necessary to support development are adequate or will be provided in a timely manner consistent with the public facilities and services planning goal of the Washington State Growth Management Act of 1990 by: 

(1) Specifying the on-site and off-site facilities and services that must be in place or otherwise assured of timely provision prior to development; 

(2) Allocating the cost of those facilities and services fairly; and 

(3) Providing a general framework for relating development standards and other requirements of this code to: 

(a) Adopted service level standards for public facilities and services;

(b) Procedural requirements for phasing development projects to ensure that services are provided as development occurs; and

(c) The review of development permit applications. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.81.020 General requirements.

(1) All new development proposals including any use, activity, or structure allowed by Chapter 21.21 WMC that requires the City of Woodinville approval shall be adequately served by the following facilities and services prior to the time of occupancy, plat recording, or other land use approval, as further specified in this chapter:

(a) Sewage disposal;

(b) Water supply;

(c) Surface water management;

(d) Roads and access;

(e) Fire protection service; and 

(f) Schools. 

(2) Regardless of the number of sequential permits required, the provisions of this chapter shall be applied only once to any single development proposal. If changes and modifications result in impacts not considered when the proposal was first approved, the City shall consider the revised proposal as a new development proposal. 

(3) Utilities are encouraged to co-locate distribution lines when completing upgrades or when utility relocations are considered as a part of major street improvements.

(4) Any building constructed for the purposes of a utility and requiring a building permit shall meet the landscaping requirements for utilities and subregional utilities in Chapter 21.43 WMC and, if applicable, the City’s Design Guidelines and Standards.

(5) All utilities are subject to the sensitive areas regulations in Chapter 21.52 WMC. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.81.030 Adequate sewage disposal.

All new development shall be served by an adequate public or private sewage disposal system, including both collection and treatment facilities as follows: 

(1) New development is encouraged to connect to the public sewage system; provided, that:

(a) For the issuance of a building permit, preliminary plat approval or other land use approval the site of the proposed development is served by an existing disposal system consistent with the City-approved comprehensive sewer plan, and the disposal system has been approved by the City and the Woodinville Water District or local purveyor as being consistent with applicable State and local design and operating guidelines;

(b) For the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a building permit, the approved public sewage disposal system as set forth in subsection (1)(a) of this section is installed to serve each building or lot;

(c) For recording a final plat, final short plat or binding site plan the approved public sewage disposal system set forth in subsection (1)(a) of this section shall be installed to serve each lot respectively; or a bond or similar security shall be deposited with the Public Works Director for the future installation of an adequate sewage disposal system. The bond may be assigned to a purveyor to assure the construction of such facilities within two years of recording; and 

(d) For a zone reclassification, the timing of installation of required sewerage improvements shall be contained in the approving ordinance.

(2) A private individual sewage system may be approved, if an on-site sewage disposal system for each individual building or lot is installed to meet the requirements and standards of the County Department of Public Health as to lot size, soils, and system design prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a building permit or approval of a preliminary plat or short plat. 

(3) Connection to the public sewage system may be required for expansion of existing developments within 330 feet of the sewage system if the existing development does not have or cannot establish an approved and functioning private septic system. 

(4) New single-family residential subdivisions and short subdivisions that have submitted a complete application on or after February 19, 2013, must connect to the municipal sewer system if the system is within 330 feet of the proposed development; provided, that parcels located in the R-1 Zoning District or greater than 35,000 square feet in area resulting from a single-family residential subdivision or short subdivision shall be exempt from this requirement. The distance from existing sewer service to the subject development shall be measured along the centerline of right-of-way or easement available for the placement of sewer line from the nearest existing sewer main available for connection to the intersection of the right-of-way or easement centerline and extension of the nearest property line. If this distance exceeds 330 feet, a septic system may be allowed as determined by the King County Department of Public Health. (Ord. 647 § 1, 2017; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.81.040 Adequate water supply. 

(1) All new development shall be served by an adequate public or private water supply system as follows: A public water system is adequate for a development proposal; provided, that:

(a) For the issuance of a building permit, preliminary plat approval or other land use approval, the applicant must demonstrate that the existing water supply system serving the site complies with the following: 

(i) Applicable planning, operating and design requirements of the State, the County, coordinated water system plans, and other applicable provisions of the rules and regulations of the City; and any limitation or condition imposed by the City-approved Comprehensive Plan of the water purveyor; and 

(ii) The proposed improvements to an existing water system have been reviewed by the Public Works Director and the local purveyor and determined to comply with the design standards and conditions specified in subsection (1)(a)(i) of this section; or

(iii) A proposed new water supply system has been reviewed by the Public Works Director and the local purveyor and determined to comply with the design standards and conditions specified in subsection (1)(a)(i) of this section;

(b) Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a building permit, the approved public water system and any system improvements set forth in subsection (1)(a) of this section shall be installed to serve each building or lot respectively;

(c) For recording a final plat, final short plat or binding site plan, either the approved public water supply system or system improvements set forth in subsection (1)(a) of this section shall be installed to serve each lot or a bond or similar security shall be deposited with the Public Works Director and may be assigned to a purveyor to assure the construction of required water facilities in Group A systems as defined by Board of Health regulations, within two years of recording; and 

(d) For a zone reclassification, the timing of installation of required water system improvements shall be included in the approving ordinance.

(2) Existing developments seeking building permits for improvements or additions that are served by private water systems are encouraged to hook up to the municipal water system. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.81.050 Surface water management.

All new development shall be served by an adequate surface water management system as follows: 

(1) The proposed system is adequate if the development proposal site is served by a surface water management system approved by the Department as being consistent with the design, operating and procedural requirements of the King County Surface Water Design Manual and the City.

(2) For a subdivision or zone reclassification, the phased installation of required surface water management improvements shall be stated in the approving ordinance. Such phasing may require that a bond or similar security be deposited with the Public Works Director.

(3) A variance request from the requirements of the King County Surface Water Design Manual shall be reviewed by the City’s Public Works Director and does not require a variance from this title unless relief is requested from a building height, setback, landscaping or other development standard set forth in Chapters 21.21 through 21.51 WMC. 

(4) The City encourages low-cost, long-term maintenance methods be incorporated in the design of new or modified stormwater facilities. The Public Works Director may further require enhancement of stormwater facilities to include recreational facilities or other aesthetically pleasing amenities.

(5) In the event that a developer is required to build a stormwater facility of regional and/or area wide significance, the Public Works Director may work with the developer to achieve a means of reimbursement to the developer for shared costs beyond that required to mitigate the development’s impacts. This could be accomplished through a latecomer’s agreement, impact fee program, or other method of collecting funds from other developers or the City or users benefiting from such a facility. 

(6) The dedication of a surface water management system from private ownership to service and ownership by the City of Woodinville shall be reviewed by the Public Works Director. The Public Works Director may accept the dedication of land for a surface water management system when said dedication is required as a condition of development approval and/or permit approval on behalf of the City. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.81.060 Adequate roads. 

(1) All new development shall be served by adequate roads. Roads are adequate if the development’s traffic impacts on surrounding public roads are acceptable under the level of service standards as stated in WMC 21.81.070 and the compliance procedures established in WMC 21.81.080 and 21.81.090. 

(2) The renewal of permits or the issuance of a new permit for existing uses constitutes a new development proposal only if it will generate additional traffic above that currently generated by the use.

(3) A deviation request from the road cross-section or construction standards established by the WMC shall be reviewed as set forth in the City’s adopted street and construction standards in WMC 12.09.010 and does not require a variance from this title unless relief is requested from a building height, setback, landscaping or other development standard set forth in Chapters 21.21 through 21.51 WMC. 

(4) The establishment or acquisition of any new rights-of-way shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 21.51 WMC. The location of new or expanded rights-of-way shall consider the protection of natural systems and provide adequate buffering from surrounding land uses.

(5) The dedication of lands for street frontage improvements and establishment or acquisition of public rights-of-way shall be reviewed by the Public Works Director. The Public Works Director may accept the dedication of land for public rights-of-way or easements when said dedication is required as a condition of development approval and/or permit approval on behalf of the City. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.81.070 Adequate roads – Road capacity level of service (LOS) standard. 

(1) A calculated LOS D or better shall be considered desirable. 

(2) A calculated LOS E shall be considered adequate. 

(3) A calculated LOS F shall be considered inadequate. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.81.080 Adequate roads – Applicability of capacity standard.

The road adequacy standards as stated in WMC 21.81.070 shall apply to all public City, County, or State roads, other than freeways; provided, that: 

(1) No improvements to State roads shall be required unless the State requests such improvements and there is an agreement between the State, City and applicant;

(2) No improvements to County roads shall be required unless the County requests such improvements and an interlocal agreement is adopted by County and City ordinances. An application of different standards than set forth in WMC 21.81.070 may be allowed within the City limits or the City’s planning area, outside the City, through an interlocal agreement if such standards are agreed upon through an interlocal agreement and have been adopted as an official control by City and County ordinance; and

(3) The standard established in WMC 21.81.070 shall be applied to a project unless a different standard as provided in subsection (2) of this section has been adopted prior to the project date, or, in the case of plats, it has been adopted prior to the preliminary plat approval date. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.81.090 Adequate roads – General conditions.

(1) A development proposal which will have a direct traffic impact, as defined by WMC 21.11.060, on a roadway or intersection which results in a calculated LOS F shall not be approved unless:

(a) The nonproject LOS is D or better and the applicant agrees to fund improvements needed to attain LOS D or better;

(b) The nonproject LOS is E or F and the applicant agrees to fund improvements to LOS E or better;

(c) The applicant achieves LOS E by phasing the project or using transportation demand management (TDM) techniques to reduce the number of peak hour trips generated by the project;

(d) The Development Services Director has established a date for final approval of subdivisions to become effective corresponding with the anticipated date of award of a construction contract for City, County, or State improvements needed to provide LOS D or better, or when the calculated nonproject LOS is E or F, to provide LOS E or better; provided such effective approval date may be established only when the anticipated date of award of construction contract is within 12 months of final approval; or

(e) The roadway or intersection has already been improved to its ultimate roadway section and the applicant agrees to use TDM incentives and/or phase the development proposal as determined by the Public Works Director.

(f) The necessary financial commitments are in place to assure the completion of the needed improvements to meet the district’s standard of service within six years of the time that the impacts of development are expected to occur. Necessary improvements are those facilities identified by the district in its capital facilities plan.

(2) Developments proposed which will have a direct impact, as defined by WMC 21.11.060, on City traffic facilities or designated areas pursuant to WMC 21.81.080 may attain the LOS specified in the adopted interlocal agreements rather than meeting WMC 21.81.070.

(3) The Public Works Director may identify by ordinance intersections exempt from the level of service standards where existing levels of service are F and the improvements to the intersection are not financially or environmentally feasible as determined by the Public Works Director. Other mitigation measures may be required as described in the policies under Comprehensive Plan goal T-7.

(4) The developer is required to conduct an evaluation of the impacts of the development via level of service standards. The evaluation shall be reviewed by the Public Works Director. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.81.100 Exceptions.

(1) Exceptions from the standards of WMC 21.81.060 and 21.81.070 may be granted only when extraordinary circumstances make compliance with the standards infeasible or when a traffic impact or mitigation fee is proposed.

(2) For those developments proposed where the Hearing Examiner makes a recommendation to the City Council, the record must reflect the basis for the exception, and the approving ordinance must grant the exception in order for it to be effective. The ordinance approving the proposal shall be determinative and conclusive as to the proposal’s compliance with this chapter.

(3) For developments proposed for which the Hearing Examiner decision is final, the decision of the Hearing Examiner shall be determinative and conclusive as to the proposal’s compliance with this chapter.

(4) For permits which are administrative and ministerial for which no appeal is normally available, the issue of the application of the standards in this chapter to a development proposed may be appealed to the Hearing Examiner for a final decision. Such an appeal together with appeal arguments shall be filed with the Development Services Director within 10 days of decision. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.81.110 Adequate vehicular access.

All new development shall be served by adequate vehicular access as follows: 

(1) The property upon which the development proposed is to be located has direct access to:

(a) A public or private street, other than a half-street, that meets City street standards or is formally declared acceptable by the Public Works Director; or

(b) The property has access to such a street over a private driveway approved by the Public Works Director; 

(2) The proposed circulation system of a proposed subdivision, short subdivision or binding site plan shall intersect with existing and anticipated streets abutting the site at safe and convenient locations, as determined by the Public Works Director; and

(3) Every lot upon which one or more buildings is proposed to be erected or traffic generating use is proposed to be established shall establish safe access as follows: 

(a) Safe passage from the street right-of-way to building entrances for transit patrons and other pedestrians, in accordance with the design standards set forth in Chapter 21.44 WMC;

(b) Direct access from the street right-of-way, fire lane or a parking space to any part of the property as needed to provide public services in accordance with adopted standards (e.g., fire protection, emergency medical service, mail delivery or trash collection); and 

(c) Direct access from the street right-of-way, driveway, alley or other means of ingress/egress approved by the Public Works Director to all required off-street parking spaces on the premises. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.81.120 Adequate fire protection.

All new development shall be served by adequate fire protection as set forth below:

(1) The site of the development proposed is served by a water supply system that provides at least minimum fire flow and a road system or fire lane system that provides life safety/rescue access, and other fire protection requirements for buildings as required by the Uniform Fire Code and Uniform Building Code as adopted by the City; 

(2) For a zone reclassification, the timing of installation of required fire protection improvements shall be stated in the approving ordinance, secured with a bond or similar security, and deposited with the Building Official; and 

(3) A variance request from the requirements established by the Uniform Fire Code shall be reviewed and does not require a variance from this title unless relief is requested from a building height, setback, landscaping or other development standard set forth in Chapters 21.21 through 21.51 WMC. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.81.130 School concurrency – Applicability and relationship with fees.

(1) The concurrency standard set out in WMC 21.81.160 shall apply to applications for preliminary plat which would result in the creation of new residential building lots or mobile home parks or the construction of new dwelling units, requests for multifamily zoning, and building permits for multifamily housing projects which have not been previously evaluated for compliance with the concurrency standard.

(2) The City’s finding of concurrency shall be made at the time of preliminary plat approval, at the time that a request to actualize potential multifamily zoning is approved, or prior to building permit issuance for multifamily housing projects which have not been previously established for compliance with the concurrency standard. Once such a finding has been made, the development shall be considered as vested for purposes of the concurrency determination.

(3) Excluded from the application of the concurrency standard are building permits for individual single-family dwellings (except as required for school impact fees), any form of housing exclusively for the elderly, including nursing homes and retirement centers. Also excluded from the application of the concurrency standard are shelters for temporary placement, relocation facilities and transitional housing facilities. Replacement, reconstruction or remodeling of existing dwelling units is not subject to the provisions of this chapter.

(4) Also excluded from the application of the concurrency standard set out in this chapter are short subdivisions.

(5) All of the development activities which are excluded from the application of the concurrency standard are subject to school impact fees, when established by the City. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.81.140 Findings, recommendations, and decisions regarding school capacities.

(1) The Development Services Director and/or the Hearing Examiner, in the course of reviewing proposals for residential development including applications for plats or multifamily zoning, and multifamily building permits, shall consider the school district’s capital facilities plan as adopted in the City’s Comprehensive Plan.

(2) Documentation which the district is required to submit shall be incorporated into the record in every case without requiring the district to offer such plans and data into the record. The school district is also authorized to present testimony and documents demonstrating a lack of concurrence in the district and the inability of the district to accommodate the students to be generated by a specific development.

(3) Based upon a finding that the impacts generated by the plat or the multifamily development were generally not anticipated at the time of the last City Council review and approval of a school district capital plan and were not included in the district’s long-range forecast, the Development Services Director may require or recommend phasing or provision of the needed facilities and/or sites as appropriate to address the deficiency or deny or condition approval, consistent with the provisions of this chapter, the State Subdivision Act, and the State Environmental Policy Act.

(4) Determinations of the Hearing Examiner or Development Services Director regarding concurrence can be appealed only pursuant to the provisions for appeal of the development permit process for which the determination has been made.

(5) Where the City Council has not adopted an impact fee ordinance for a particular school district, the language of this section shall not affect the authority or duties of the Hearing Examiner or the Development Services Director pursuant to the State Environmental Policy Act or the State Subdivision Act. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.81.150 School concurrency standard.

(1) Schools shall be considered to have been provided concurrently with the development which will impact the schools if:

(a) The permanent and interim school improvements necessary to serve the development are planned to be in place at the time the impacts of development are expected to occur; or

(b) The necessary financial commitments are in place to assure the completion of the needed improvements to meet the district’s standard of service within six years of the time that the impacts of development are expected to occur. Necessary improvements are those facilities identified by the district in its capital facilities plan, as adopted by the City’s Comprehensive Plan.

(2) Any combination of the following shall constitute the “necessary financial commitments” for the purposes of subsection (1) of this section:

(a) The district has received voter approval of and/or has bonding authority;

(b) The district has received approval for Federal, State, or other funds;

(c) The district has received a secured commitment from a developer that the developer will construct the needed permanent school facility, and the school district has found such facility to be acceptable and consistent with its capital facilities plan; and/or

(d) The district has other assured funding, including but not limited to school impact fees which have been paid.

(3) Compliance with this concurrency requirement of this section shall be sufficient to satisfy the provisions of RCW 58.17.060 and 58.17.110. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.81.160 Credit for improvements.

Whenever a development is granted approval subject to a condition that the development proponent actually provide a school facility acceptable to the district, the development proponent shall be entitled to a credit for the actual cost of providing the facility, against the fee that would have been charged. The cost of construction shall be estimated at the time of approval, but must be documented and the documentation confirmed after the construction is completed to assure that an accurate credit amount is provided. If construction costs are less than the calculated fee amount, the difference remaining shall be chargeable as a school impact or mitigation fee. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


Chapter 21.82 DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT PROCEDURE AND CRITERIA

Sections:

21.82.010    Scope.

21.82.020    Purpose.

21.82.030    Authority.

21.82.040    Public hearing and notice.

21.82.050    Real property covered.

21.82.060    Agreement contents.

21.82.070    Decision criteria.

21.82.080    Recording.


21.82.010 Scope.

This chapter establishes the procedure and criteria for development agreements between the City and a person who owns or controls real property, pursuant to RCW 36.70B.170 through 36.70B.210. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.82.020 Purpose.

Certainty in the development review process can significantly encourage development or redevelopment of real property. This certainty is especially important for large-scale or multiphase developments that take years to complete and that require substantial financial commitments at an early stage. The City may, when appropriate, enhance certainty by entering into a development agreement with a project sponsor that addresses the “ground rules” for review of the development application and construction of the project. A development agreement provides the opportunity for the City and the developer to agree on the scope and timing of the project, applicable regulations and requirements, mitigation requirements and other matters relating to the development process. A development agreement promotes the general welfare by balancing the public and private interests, providing reasonable certainty for a development project, and addressing other matters, including reimbursement over time for the financing of public facilities. Development agreements may provide public benefits such as affordable housing, pedestrian-oriented communities, mixed use development and creation of public amenities such as parks and open spaces. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.82.030 Authority.

Pursuant to RCW 36.70B.170 through 36.70B.210, and as a legislative action, the City Council may approve and enter into a development agreement with any person, partnership, corporation or other entity that controls real property. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.82.040 Public hearing and notice. 

(1) Pursuant to WMC 21.83.020, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on a proposed development agreement prior to the City Council acting on the proposed agreement.

(2) A notice of the public hearing on a proposed development agreement shall be prepared and distributed pursuant to Chapter 21.84 WMC. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.82.050 Real property covered.

A development agreement may apply to any real property within the City and to any real property within the City’s urban growth area. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.82.060 Agreement contents.

A proposed development agreement shall, at a minimum, include provisions required by RCW 36.70B.170 through 36.70B.210, and shall set forth the development standards and other provisions that shall apply to and govern the use and development of the real property for the duration specified in the agreement, as the agreement may be amended from time to time, the total duration not to exceed 10 years. An agreement may also contain such other provisions as the City and the property owner or person controlling the property may mutually agree on, such as, but not limited to, the financing for or timing of mitigation and the vesting of development rights. A development agreement shall be consistent with applicable development regulations. Each development agreement shall include findings of consistency for any modification to existing regulations and standards. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.82.070 Decision criteria.

The City Council may approve by resolution and enter into a proposed development agreement if the Council finds, in its sole discretion, that a proposed agreement is consistent with the City’s Comprehensive Plan, the development regulations and the purpose of this chapter and that entering into the agreement is in the City’s best interest. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.82.080 Recording.

The development agreement shall include a provision that requires the applicant to record the agreement with the county auditor of the county in which the subject property is located. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


Chapter 21.83 REVIEW PROCEDURES

Sections:

21.83.010    General provisions.

21.83.020    Permit and procedure types.

21.83.030    Optional consolidated permit processing.

21.83.040    Vesting.

21.83.050    Preapplication meeting.

21.83.060    Determination of completeness.

21.83.070    Decisions.

21.83.080    Project permit expiration.

21.83.090    Hearing procedures.

21.83.100    Administrative interpretations.

21.83.110    Substantial modifications.


21.83.010 General provisions.

(1) Exemptions. The following project permits or approvals are excluded from the procedures set forth in this title:

(a) Landmark designations;

(b) Street vacation;

(c) Street use permits. (Ord. 643 § 10, 2017)


21.83.020 Permit and procedure types.

(1) All development permit applications shall be classified as one of the following: Type 1, Type 2, or Type 3.

(2) Determination by Director. The Development Services Director shall determine the proper procedure for all development applications. If there is a question as to the appropriate type of procedure, the Director shall resolve it in favor of the higher numbered procedure type.

(3) Type 1 Decisions. These are administrative and ministerial actions that do not require public notice or a predecision hearing. Type 1 decisions are categorically exempt from SEPA review, or have had SEPA review completed in connection with another application or permit.

(a) The final decision shall be made by the Director based on decision criteria listed in Table WMC 21.83.020(3).

(b) Administrative appeals of Type 1 decisions shall be made to the Hearing Examiner or City Council following the procedures in Chapter 21.85 WMC. Judicial appeals may be filed through a land use petition within 21 days following the administrative appeal pursuant to Chapter 36.70C RCW.

Table WMC 21.83.020(3) – Type 1 Decisions  

	Project Permit	Decision Criteria	Decision Authority	Appeal Authority

	Building Permit	WMC 21.80.030	Director	City Council

	Boundary Line Adjustment	WMC 21.61.080	Director	Hearing Examiner

	Critical Area Determination	WMC 21.80.070	Director	Hearing Examiner

	Design Review	WMC 21.40.030	Director	Hearing Examiner

	Flood Improvement Permit	WMC 21.51.460	Director	Hearing Examiner

	Site Development Permit	WMC 15.05.060	Director	Hearing Examiner

	Home Occupation Permit	WMC 21.31.080	Director	Hearing Examiner

	Home Industry Permit	WMC 21.31.090	Director	Hearing Examiner

	Master Signage Plan	WMC 21.35.120(2)	Director	Hearing Examiner

	Public Tree Variance	Chapter 2.24 WMC	City Tree Official	Hearing Examiner

	Right-of-Way Permit	WMC 21.80.170	Director	Hearing Examiner

	SEPA Exemption	Chapter 21.52 WMC	Director	Hearing Examiner

	Shoreline Exemption	Shoreline Master Program	Director	Hearing Examiner

	Sign Permit	Chapter 21.35 WMC	Director	Hearing Examiner

	Temporary Use Permit	WMC 21.80.260	Director	Hearing Examiner

	Tree Removal Permit	Chapter 21.50 WMC	Director	Hearing Examiner

(4) Type 2 Decisions. These are administrative actions that require public notice, but do not require a predecision hearing. Type 2 decisions may or may not be categorically exempt from SEPA review.

(a) The final decision shall be made based on decision criteria listed in Table WMC 21.83.020(4).

(b) Administrative appeals of Type 2 decisions shall be made to the Hearing Examiner following the procedures in Chapter 21.85 WMC. Judicial appeals may be filed through a land use petition within 21 days following the administrative appeal pursuant to Chapter 36.70C RCW.

Table WMC 21.83.020(4) – Type 2 Decisions  

	Project Permit	Decision Criteria	Decision Authority	Appeal Authority

	Administrative Interpretation	WMC 21.83.100(4)	Director	Hearing Examiner

	Administrative Conditional Use Permit	WMC 21.80.060	Director	Hearing Examiner

	Binding Site Plan	WMC 21.61.070	Director	Hearing Examiner

	Land Use Project Approval	WMC 21.80.140	Director	Hearing Examiner

	Critical Area Alteration	WMC 21.80.070	Director	Hearing Examiner

	Wireless Service Facility	WMC 21.37.030	Director	Hearing Examiner

	Subdivision – Short	WMC 21.61.030	Director	Hearing Examiner

	Subdivision – Final	WMC 21.61.050	Hearing Examiner	City Council

	Subdivision – Minor Modification	WMC 21.61.090	Director	Hearing Examiner

	Shoreline Substantial Development Permit	SMP Section 7.5.2.2	Director	Hearing Examiner

	SEPA	Chapter 21.52 WMC	Director	Hearing Examiner

(5) Type 3 Decisions. These are quasi-judicial actions that require public notice and a predecision hearing. They may or may not be categorically exempt from SEPA review.

(a) The final decision shall be made based by Hearing Examiner or City Council on decision criteria listed in Table WMC 21.83.020(5).

(b) Public notices shall follow the procedures of Chapter 21.84 WMC.

(c) Judicial appeals may be filed through a land use petition within 21 days of the notice of decision pursuant to Chapter 36.70C RCW.

Table WMC 21.83.020(5) – Type 3 Decisions  

	Project Permit	Decision Criteria	Decision Authority	Appeal Authority

	Conditional Use Permit	WMC 21.80.060	Hearing Examiner	Superior Court

	Critical Area Exception	WMC 21.51.060	Hearing Examiner	Superior Court

	Flood Variance	WMC 21.51.480 and 21.51.490	Hearing Examiner	Superior Court

	Reasonable Use Permit	WMC 21.51.070	Hearing Examiner	Superior Court

	Shoreline Conditional Use Permit	SMP Section 7.5.3.3	Hearing Examiner1	Shoreline Hearings Board

	Shoreline Variance	SMP Section 7.5.4.3	Hearing Examiner1	Shoreline Hearings Board

	Site-Specific Zoning Map Amendment	WMC 21.80.300	Hearing Examiner/City Council2	Superior Court

	Special Use Permit	WMC 21.80.230	Hearing Examiner	Superior Court

	Subdivision – Preliminary	WMC 21.61.040	Hearing Examiner	Superior Court

	Subdivision – Alteration	WMC 21.61.090	Hearing Examiner	Superior Court

	Subdivision – Vacation	WMC 21.61.100	City Council	Superior Court

	Variances	WMC 21.80.280	Hearing Examiner	Superior Court

	1    The Hearing Examiner’s action shall be submitted to the Washington Department of Ecology for approval, approval with conditions, or denial pursuant to WAC 173-27-200.

	2    The Hearing Examiner holds an open-record hearing and makes a recommendation to the City Council. The City Council decides the site-specific rezone at a closed-record meeting.

(Ord. 675 § 13, 2018; Ord. 643 § 10, 2017)


21.83.030 Optional consolidated permit processing.

(1) Process Consolidation. An application that involves two or more project permits may be processed collectively under the highest numbered procedure required for any part of the application. The applicant shall specify whether the application shall be processed collectively or individually.

(2) Hearings. Only one open-record hearing and one closed-record appeal shall be allowed under a consolidated review process. The City may require applications to be reviewed under a consolidated review process if it is found necessary to comply with the one open-record hearing procedures under RCW 36.70B.060.

(3) Decisionmakers. Applications processed in accordance with subsection (1) of this section which have the same highest numbered procedure but are assigned different hearing bodies shall be heard collectively by the highest decisionmaker(s). The City Council is the highest, followed by the Hearing Examiner, and then the Director. Joint public hearings with other agencies shall be processed according to WMC 21.83.090(4). (Ord. 643 § 10, 2017)


21.83.040 Vesting.

(1) Application Vesting.

(a) A complete application for a subdivision or short subdivision shall vest in the zoning code and other local land use controls in effect at the time of such application subject to the terms of this section.

(b) A complete application for a building permit shall vest in the zoning code and other local land use controls in effect at the time of such application subject to the terms of this section.

(c) No applications for land use permits and approvals not listed in subsections (1)(a) and (b) of this section shall result in vesting of the zoning code and other local land use control ordinances.

(2) Vesting pursuant to subsection (1) of this section does not extend to subsequently adopted or revised land use controls or other regulations mandated by State law.

(3) A project does not vest upon submittal of a preapplication request.

(4) Supplemental information required after acceptance and vesting of a complete application, pursuant to WMC 21.83.070, shall not affect the validity of the vesting for such application.

(5) A major modification to the content of an application after issuance, either voluntarily or to conform to applicable standards and requirements, shall be deemed a new application for the purpose of vesting when the modification would result in a substantial increase in the project’s impact as determined by the Director. (Ord. 643 § 10, 2017)


21.83.050 Preapplication meeting.

(1) At the applicant’s request, a preapplication conference may be scheduled for the purposes of acquainting the applicant with permit processes and to discuss issues involving an application or project. A preapplication meeting may be held at any time before an application is submitted.

(2) The City may require a preapplication meeting when a proposal is determined by the Development Services Director to be of a size or complexity to necessitate such a meeting.

(3) A preapplication meeting is not intended to be an exhaustive review of all potential issues and the discussion shall not be binding or prohibit the enforcement of applicable laws. Failure to provide all pertinent information may prevent the City from identifying all of the issues or providing the most effective preapplication meeting.

(4) The applicant should provide a draft site plan, grading plan, storm drainage plan, and building elevations. (Ord. 643 § 10, 2017)


21.83.060 Determination of completeness.

(1) Determination. Within 28 days after receiving a project permit application, the City shall send by mail or personally provide a written determination to the applicant which states either:

(a) The application is complete; or

(b) The application is incomplete and what is necessary to make the application complete.

(2) Complete Application Procedure. A project permit application is complete for purposes of this section when it meets the submission requirements in the table in subsection (8) of this section. This determination of completeness shall be made when the application is sufficient for continued processing even though additional information may be required or project modifications may be undertaken subsequently. The City’s determination of completeness shall not preclude the City from requesting additional information or studies either at the time of the notice of completeness or at some later time, if new information is required or where there are substantial changes in the proposed action.

(3) Incomplete Application Procedure. If the applicant receives a determination from the City that an application is not complete, the applicant shall have 90 days to submit the necessary information to the City. If the applicant either refuses in writing to submit additional information or does not submit the required information within the 90-day period, the application shall lapse.

(a) In those situations where the application has lapsed because the applicant has failed to submit the required information within the necessary time period, the applicant may request a refund of the unexpended application fee by the City’s determination of completeness.

(b) Within 14 days after an applicant has submitted the requested additional information, the City shall make the determination as described in subsection (1) of this section, and notify the applicant in the same manner.

(4) Date of Acceptance of Application. When the project permit application is complete, the Development Services Department shall accept it and note the date of acceptance.

(5) City’s Failure to Provide Determination. A project permit application shall be deemed complete under this section if the City does not provide a written determination to the applicant that the application is incomplete as provided in subsection (1) of this section.

(6) Outside Agencies. To the extent known by the City, the determination of completeness shall identify other agencies that may have jurisdiction over some aspect of the application.

(7) Insufficient Information. If, upon review of a complete application, the City finds that additional information is necessary, or corrections are required to be made to the plans to be consistent with City codes and regulations, the City shall write a letter to the applicant detailing the necessary corrections. The applicant shall have 90 calendar days to submit the necessary information to the City. If the applicant does not submit the required information within 90 calendar days, the Director shall make findings that the application has lapsed for failure to submit the necessary information in a timely manner and close the permit application file. The Director may allow for a time extension to submit the required information, not to exceed an additional 90 days. This section shall apply to permits applied for prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section.

(8) Permit Submittal Tables.

(a) An “X” in the permit submittal table indicates that the item is required for submittal. The Director shall set the number of copies required.

(b) Where appropriate, the Director may establish a supplemental list of information required to be shown on a specific plan or within a report for review.

(c) Preliminary plans, such as building, grading, or drainage plans, are required for land use permits (including shoreline permits, conditional use permits, variances, preliminary subdivisions and short subdivisions). Final plans are required for construction permits.

 

Table 21.83.060(8)A – Permit Submittal Table  

	Submittal Requirements	Building Permit – New	Building Permit – Additions	Building Permit –

Improvements, Alterations	Mechanical or Plumbing

Permits	Demolition Permit	Site Development Permit	Right-of-Way Permit	Tree Removal	Fire Permit	Sign Permit

	General

	Application Form	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X

	Owner Authorization Form	X	X	X	 	 	X	 	 	 	X

	Project Narrative	X	X	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Submittal Fees	X	X	 	 	 	X	 	 	 	 

	Water Availability Certificate	X	X	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Sewer or Septic Certificate	X	X	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Building Plans

	Building/Construction Plans	X	X	X	X	X	 	 	 	X	X

	Structural/Lateral Calculations	X	X	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Isometrics	 	 	 	X	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Asbestos Report	 	 	 	 	X	 	 	 	 	 

	Energy Calculations	X	X	X	X	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Manufacturer’s Specifications	 	 	 	X	 	 	 	 	X	 

	Site/Civil Plans

	Site Plans	X	X	X	 	X	X	X	 	 	X

	Landscaping and Irrigation Plans	X	X	 	 	 	X	 	 	 	X

	Clearing and Grading Plans	X	X	 	 	 	X	 	 	 	 

	Drainage Plans	X	X	 	 	 	X	 	 	 	 

	Erosion Control Plans	X	X	 	 	X	X	 	 	 	 

	Traffic Control Plans	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	 	 

	Topography (survey may be required)	X	X	 	 	 	X	 	 	 	 

	Water/Sewer/Utility Plans	X	X	 	 	X	X	 	 	 	 

	Environmental

	Drainage Study	X	X	 	 	 	X	 	 	 	 

	Geotechnical Report	X	X	 	 	 	X	 	 	 	 

	Critical Areas Study	X	X	 	 	 	X	 	 	 	 

	Mitigation Plans	X	X	 	 	 	X	 	 	 	 

	Tree Plans	X	X	 	 	 	X	 	X	 	 

	Other:

	Electronic Set of All Plans and Reports	X	X	 	 	 	X	 	 	 	X

 

Table 21.83.060(8)B – Permit Submittal Table  

	Submittal Requirements	Land Use Project Approval/

SEPA	Design Review	Boundary Line Adjustment	Critical Area Determination	Critical Areas Alteration/ 

Exception/Reasonable Use	Home Industry/Occupation	Master Signage Plan	Shoreline Permits	Shoreline Exemption

	General

	Application Form	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X

	Legal Description	 	 	X	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Owner Authorization Form	X	X	X	X	X	 	X	X	X

	Project Narrative	X	X	 	X	X	 	X	X	X

	Statement on Decision Criteria	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	X	X

	Submittal Fees	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X

	Water Availability Certificate	X	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	 

	Sewer or Septic Certificate	X	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	 

	Building Plans

	Building/Construction Plans	X	X	 	 	 	 	 	X	 

	Structural/Lateral Calculations	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Design Review Materials

	Design Review Checklist	 	X	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Building Floor Plans	 	X	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Color Renderings/Color Elevations	 	X	 	 	 	 	X	 	 

	Reduced Elevations/Floor Plans	 	X	 	 	 	 	X	 	 

	Site/Civil Plans

	Site Plans	X	 	X	X	X	 	X	X	X

	Survey	 	 	X	X	X	 	 	X	 

	Landscaping and Irrigation Plans	X	X	 	 	X	 	X	X	 

	Clearing and Grading Plans	X	 	 	 	X	 	 	X	 

	Drainage Plans	X	 	 	 	X	 	 	X	 

	Erosion Control Plans	X	 	 	 	X	 	 	X	 

	Topography (survey may be required)	X	 	 	 	X	 	 	X	 

	Water/Sewer/Utility Plans	X	 	 	 	X	 	 	X	 

	Reduced Plans (11" x 17")	X	X	X	X	X	 	X	X	 

	Environmental

	Drainage Study	X	 	 	 	X	 	 	X	 

	Geotechnical Report	X	 	 	X	X	 	 	X	 

	SEPA Checklist	X	 	 	X	X	 	 	X	 

	Critical Area Study	X	 	 	X	X	 	 	X	 

	Mitigation Plans	X	 	 	X	X	 	 	X	 

	Tree Plans	X	 	 	 	X	 	 	X	 

	Traffic Study	 	 	 	 	X	 	 	 	 

	Other

	CC&Rs	X	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Title Report (less than 30 days old)	X	 	X	 	 	 	 	X	 

	Electronic Set of All Plans and Reports	X	X	X	X	X	 	X	X	 

 

Table 21.83.060(8)C – Permit Submittal Table  

	Submittal Requirements	Wireless Service Facility

Permit	Temporary Use Permit	Conditional Use Permit	Special Use Permit	Variance	Binding Site Plan	Short Subdivision	Preliminary Subdivision	Final Plat	Comp. Plan Amendment	Zoning Code/

Map Amendment

	General

	Application Form	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X

	Legal Description	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	 	 	X

	Owner Authorization Form	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	 	 

	Project Narrative	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	 	X	X

	Statement on Decision Criteria	X	X	X	X	X	 	 	 	X	X	X

	Submittal Fees	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X

	Water Availability Certificate	 	 	X	X	 	X	X	X	X	 	 

	Sewer or Septic Certificate	 	 	X	X	 	X	X	X	X	 	 

	Building Plans

	Building/Construction Plans	X	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Structural/Lateral Calculations	X	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Site/Civil Plans

	Site Plans	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	 	 	X

	Survey	 	 	 	 	 	X	 	 	 	 	 

	Landscaping and Irrigation Plans	 	X	X	X	X	 	 	X	 	 	 

	Plat Map	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	 	 

	Clearing and Grading Plans	 	X	X	X	X	 	X	X	 	 	 

	Drainage Plans	 	X	X	X	X	 	X	X	 	 	 

	Erosion Control Plans	 	X	X	X	X	 	X	X	 	 	 

	Topography (survey may be required)	 	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	 	 	 

	Water/Sewer/Utility Plans	 	 	X	X	X	 	X	X	 	 	 

	Reduced Plans (11" x 17")	X	 	X	X	X	X	X	X	 	 	 

	Environmental

	Drainage Study	X	 	X	X	X	 	X	X	 	 	 

	Geotechnical Report	X	 	X	X	 	 	X	X	 	 	 

	SEPA Checklist	X	 	X	X	 	X	X	X	 	X	X

	Critical Area Study	 	 	X	X	X	X	X	X	 	 	 

	Mitigation Plans	 	 	X	X	X	 	X	X	 	 	 

	Tree Plans	 	 	X	X	X	 	X	X	 	 	 

	Traffic Study	 	 	X	X	X	 	X	X	 	 	 

	Noise Study	X	 	X	X	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Other

	CC&Rs	 	 	 	 	 	X	 	X	X	X	 

	Photo Simulation Diagram	X	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Title Report (less than 30 days old)	 	 	 	 	 	X	 	X	X	X	 

	School Safe Walk Form	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	 

	Electronic Set of all Plans and Reports	X	 	X	X	X	X	 	X	X	X	X

(Ord. 643 § 10, 2017)


21.83.070 Decisions.

(1) Decision Authority. The decision authority specified in the tables in WMC 21.83.020 shall decide the corresponding project permit application with criteria established in Chapter 21.80 WMC.

(2) Findings. Decisions regarding the approval or denial of proposals shall be based upon compliance with the required showings of Chapter 21.80 WMC. Type 2 and Type 3 decisions shall include written facts, findings and conclusions based upon the record and demonstrating compliance with the applicable decision criteria in Chapter 21.80 WMC.

(3) Decisions Rendered. The City may approve, approve with conditions, or deny a project permit application based on the appropriate decision criteria for Type 1 and Type 2 decisions. The City may approve, approve in part, approve with conditions, deny, deny in part, or deny with conditions based on the appropriate decision criteria for Type 3 decisions.

(4) Hearings. A decision by a hearing body shall be issued within 10 business days after the conclusion of a predecision hearing, unless a longer period is mutually agreed to between the applicant and the hearing body, and the decision shall constitute the final decision.

(5) No Action Authorized. A decision issued under this chapter shall be given the effect of a final decision. However, action is not authorized until:

(a) Expiration of the administrative appeal period; or

(b) If an appeal is filed, the decision on the administrative appeal is final; or

(c) The administrative appeal period is waived. The Director may grant a waiver of an administrative appeal period only if the following conditions are satisfied:

(i) The decision is a Type 1 or Type 2 decision;

(ii) The only parties with standing to initiate an appeal are the applicant, property owner, and City; and

(iii) The decision is fully compliant with the Woodinville Municipal Code.

(6) Time Limitations. The City shall issue a decision on a project permit application within 120 days from the date the application is determined to be complete pursuant to WMC 21.83.060, excluding the following periods of time:

(a) Any period during which the applicant has been requested by the City to correct plans, perform required studies, or provide additional required information;

(b) Any period during which an environmental impact statement (EIS) is being prepared following a determination of significance;

(c) Any period for administrative appeals of project permits, if an open record appeal hearing or a closed record appeal, or both, is allowed;

(d) Any period of time for an administrative appeal or reconsideration of the hearing examiner’s decision;

(e) Any period a project permit application requires approval of an amendment to the comprehensive plan or development regulation to receive permit approval; and

(f) Any extension of time mutually agreed upon by the applicant and the City.

(7) Notice. If the City is unable to issue a decision within the time period prescribed, the City shall provide written notice to the applicant and any parties of record stating the reasons why and the estimated date of issuance.

(8) Denials. Upon denial by the City of a project permit, no new application for substantially the same proposal shall be accepted within one year from the date of denial. (Ord. 643 § 10, 2017)


21.83.080 Project permit expiration.

(1) The project permit shall be valid as outlined below from the date that the permit is approved. The project is required to have construction permits issued, or have final approval for preliminary and short subdivisions, prior to the end of the approval period.

Table 21.83.080(1) Project Permit Approval Expiration  

	Permit Type	Approval Period	One Extension Allowed

	All Land Use Permits (not otherwise listed)	2 years	1 year

	Conditional Use	5 years	1 year

	Shoreline Permits	2 years	1 year

	Short Subdivisions	5 years	1 year

	Preliminary Subdivisions	5 years	1 year

	Building Permit	Per Chapter 15.04 WMC	Per Chapter 15.04 WMC

	Site Development Permit	Per Chapter 15.05 WMC	Per Chapter 15.05 WMC

(2) Extensions to the approval expiration may be granted by the Director if:

(a) The construction permits can or will be issued within 30 days of the approval expiration; or

(b) The City and/or other public agency’s capital project needs to be completed ahead of the required improvements to allow for logical sequence of construction to prevent damage or disruption to the improvements being made; or

(c) Expiration of the approval will create an unnecessary and unusual hardship to the applicant that is not self-created; and

(d) The need for the extension is not the result of deliberate actions of the applicant; and

(e) The public health, safety, and welfare are not endangered by allowing the extension. (Ord. 643 § 10, 2017)


21.83.090 Hearing procedures.

(1) Number of Hearings. Project permits are allowed only one open-record hearing and one closed-record appeal hearing.

(2) Staff Report. The City shall prepare a staff report on the application, which shall be a single report stating all of the decisions made as of the date of the report, including recommendations on project permits in the consolidated permit process that do not require an open record predecision hearing. The report shall state any mitigation required or proposed under the development regulations or the City’s authority under SEPA. If the threshold determination other than a determination of significance has not been issued previously by the City, the report shall include or append this determination. In the case of a Type 1 or 2 project permit application, this report may be the permit.

(3) Order of Proceedings. The order of proceedings for a hearing will depend in part on the nature of the hearing. The following shall be supplemented by administrative procedures as appropriate.

(a) Before receiving information on the issue, the following shall be determined:

(i) Any objections on jurisdictional grounds shall be noted on the record and, if there is objection, the hearing body has the discretion to proceed or, if the objection is determined to be of merit, terminate proceedings; and

(ii) Any abstentions or disqualifications shall be determined.

(b) The presiding officer may take official notice of known information related to the issue, such as:

(i) A provision of any ordinance, resolution, rule, officially adopted development standard or State law;

(ii) Other public records and facts judicially noticeable by law.

(c) Matters officially noticed need not be established by evidence and may be considered by the hearing body in its determination. Parties requesting that the hearing body take official notice of any matter shall do so on the record. However, the hearing body may take notice of matters listed in subsection (3)(b) of this section if stated for the record. Any matter given official notice may be rebutted.

(d) The hearing body may view the area in dispute with or without notification to the parties, but shall place the time, manner and circumstances of such view on the record.

(e) Information shall be received from the staff and from proponents and opponents. The presiding officer may approve or deny a request from a person attending the hearing to ask a question. Unless the presiding officer specifies otherwise, if the request to ask a question is approved, the presiding officer will direct the question to the person submitting testimony.

(f) When the presiding officer has closed the public testimony portion of the hearing, the hearing body shall openly discuss the issue and may further question a person submitting information or the staff if opportunity for rebuttal is provided.

(g) The hearing body shall issue a written decision within 10 working days after the hearing on the project permit application. The hearing body shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the application. If the hearing is an appeal, the hearing body shall affirm, reverse or remand the decision that is on appeal.

(h) The notice of decision shall be issued within 120 days after the City notifies the applicant that the application is complete.

(4) Joint Hearing. The applicant may request that the public hearing on a project permit be combined as long as the joint hearing can be held within the time periods set forth in this title. The applicant may agree to a particular schedule if additional time is needed in order to complete the hearings. A joint public hearing may be held with another local, State, regional, Federal or other agency and the City, as long as:

(a) The hearing is held within the geographic boundary of the City;

(b) The other agency is not expressly prohibited by statute from doing so;

(c) Sufficient notice of the hearing is given to meet each of the agencies’ adopted notice requirements as set forth in statute, ordinance, or rule; and

(d) Each agency has received the necessary information about the proposed project from the applicant to hold the combined hearing.

(5) Code of Ethics. The hearing body shall be subject to the code of ethics (RCW 35A.42.020), prohibitions on conflicts of interest (Chapter 42.23 RCW), open public meetings (Chapter 42.30 RCW), and appearance of fairness (Chapter 42.36 RCW) as the same now exist or may hereafter be amended.

(6) Ex Parte Communication. No member of the hearing body may communicate, directly or indirectly, regarding any issue in a proceeding before him or her, other than to participate in communications necessary to procedural aspects of maintaining an orderly process, unless he or she provides notice and opportunity for all parties to participate; except as provided in this section:

(a) The hearing body may receive advice from legal counsel;

(b) The hearing body may communicate with staff members (except where the proceeding relates to a code enforcement investigation or prosecution);

(c) If, before serving as the hearing body in a quasi-judicial proceeding, any member of the hearing body receives an ex parte communication of a type that could not properly be received while serving, the member of the hearing body, promptly after starting to serve, shall disclose the communication by placing on the record the following:

(i) All written communications received;

(ii) All written responses to the communication;

(iii) State the substance of all oral communications received and all responses made; and

(iv) The identity of each person from whom the examiner received any ex parte communications.

(d) Upon request made within 10 days after notice of the ex parte communication, any party desiring to rebut the communication shall be allowed to place a rebuttal statement on the record.

(7) Disqualifications. A member of the hearing body who is disqualified shall not be counted for purposes of forming a quorum. Any member who is disqualified may do so only by making full disclosure to the audience, abstaining from voting on the proposal, vacating the seat on the hearing body and physically leaving the hearing.

(a) In the event of a challenge to a member or members of the hearing body which would cause a lack of a quorum or would result in a failure to obtain a majority vote as required by law, any such challenged member(s) shall be permitted to fully participate in the proceeding and vote as though the challenge had not occurred, if the member or members publicly disclose the basis for disqualification prior to rendering a decision.

(b) A member absent during the presentation of evidence in a hearing may not participate in the deliberations or decision unless the member has reviewed the evidence received. (Ord. 643 § 10, 2017)


21.83.100 Administrative interpretations.

(1) Authority. Unless otherwise specified and except for other agencies with authority to implement specific provisions of this title, the Development Services Director is delegated the authority to issue official interpretations of all development regulations.

(2) When Necessary. Interpretations may be made whenever necessary for clarification or resolution of conflicting regulations, so as to provide consistent interpretation and application of this title. Interpretations shall not be made for the purpose of superseding unambiguous language.

(3) Enforcement. A written interpretation shall be enforced as if part of this title.

(4) Analysis. Code interpretations shall be in writing and made based on an analysis of the following:

(a) The defined or common meaning of the words of the regulation;

(b) The general purpose of the regulation as expressed in the provision; and

(c) The logical or likely meaning of the regulation viewed in relation to the Comprehensive Plan, if applicable. (Ord. 643 § 10, 2017)


21.83.110 Substantial modifications.

(1) Substantial Modifications. In reaching a decision on whether a modification is major or minor, the Director may consider the relative and absolute magnitude of the modification; the environmental sensitivity of the site including new impacts to critical areas and their buffers; any changes in location of significant elements of the project and their relationships to public facilities, surrounding lands and land uses; and the review cycle of the proposal.

(2) Minor Modifications. Minor modifications are those alterations to the approved project permit that do not change the original purpose or intent of the application, do not increase the intensity of development, and do not create or increase any adverse impact. Minor modifications may be authorized by the Development Services Director.

(3) Major Modifications. Major modifications shall be approved by following the original review and approval process of the project permit. Major modifications are those alterations that change the original purpose or intent of the application, increase the intensity of development, or create or increase any adverse impact.

(4) Notice. Written notice of such determination of modification shall be provided to the applicant and all parties of record. (Ord. 643 § 10, 2017)


Chapter 21.84 APPLICATION AND NOTICE REQUIREMENTS

Sections:

21.84.010    Notice of application.

21.84.020    Optional public notice.

21.84.030    Notice of final decision.

21.84.040    Notice of public hearing.

21.84.050    Notice methods.

21.84.060    Repealed.

21.84.070    Repealed.

21.84.080    Repealed.

21.84.090    Repealed.

21.84.100    Repealed.

21.84.110    Repealed.

21.84.120    Repealed.

21.84.130    Repealed.


21.84.010 Notice of application.

(1) Issuance of Notice. When required in the project permit framework, the notice of application shall be issued within 14 days after the City has made a determination of completeness of a project permit application. If any open record predecision hearing is required for the requested project permit(s), the notice of application shall be provided at least 15 days prior to the open record hearing.

(2) Contents. The notice of application shall contain the following information:

(a) The file number(s);

(b) The name of the applicant or the applicant’s representative;

(c) The date of application, the date of the notice of completion for the application and the date of the notice of application;

(d) A description of the subject property reasonably sufficient to inform the public of its location;

(e) A description of the proposed project action and list of the project permits included in the application;

(f) A list of any studies requested under RCW 36.70B.070, if applicable;

(g) The identification of other permits not included in the application, to the extent known by the City;

(h) A site plan, if applicable;

(i) The identification of existing environmental documents that evaluate the proposed project;

(j) The location where the application and studies can be reviewed;

(k) A statement of the public comment period, which shall be between 14 and 30 days following the date of notice of application, ending at 4:00 p.m. on the last day of the comment period; and statements of the right of any person to comment on the application, receive notice of and participate in any hearings, request a copy of the decision once made, and any appeal rights;

(l) The date, time, place and type of hearing, if applicable and scheduled at the date of notice of the application;

(m) A statement of the preliminary determination of consistency, if one has been made at the time of notice, and of those development regulations that will be used for project mitigation and consistency as provided in Chapter 21.52 WMC; and

(n) Any other information determined appropriate by the City, such as the City’s threshold determination, if complete at the time of issuance of the notice of application.

(3) SEPA Threshold Determination Issuance and Notice of Application.

(a) The notice shall include identification of the responsible City official;

(b) Except for a determination of significance, the City may not issue its threshold determination or issue a decision or recommendation on a project permit until the expiration of the public comment period on the notice of application;

(c) If the City issues a determination of significance pursuant to Chapter 21.52 WMC concurrently with the notice of application, the notice of application shall be combined with the determination of significance and scoping notice. The determination of significance and scoping notice may be issued prior to the notice of application. (Ord. 643 § 11, 2017; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.84.020 Optional public notice.

(1) As optional methods of providing public notice of any project permits, the City may:

(a) Notify the public or private groups with known interest in a certain proposal or in the type of proposal being considered;

(b) Notify the news media;

(c) Place notices in appropriate regional or neighborhood newspapers or trade journals;

(d) Publish notice in agency newsletters or send notice to agency mailing lists, either general lists or lists for specific proposals or subject areas.

(2) The City’s failure to provide the optional notice as described in this section shall not be grounds for invalidation of any permit decision. (Ord. 643 § 11, 2017; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.84.030 Notice of final decision.

(1) Issuance. A notice of decision is issued at the conclusion of any hearing, procedure, or project permit review.

(2) Format. The notice of decision may be a copy of the report or decision on the project permit application, or it may be a separate written notice.

(3) Contents. The City shall provide a notice of decision that includes the following:

(a) A statement of any SEPA threshold determination, if notice was not previously given;

(b) The administrative appeal process and time period for filing an appeal, if any;

(c) Information on requesting reconsideration of a hearing examiner’s decision, if applicable; and

(d) A statement that affected property owners may request a change in valuation for property tax purposes notwithstanding any program or revaluation.

(4) Mailing. The notice of decision shall be mailed by first class postage, emailed and/or provided by personal service to the following:

(a) The applicant;

(b) Parties of record;

(c) Any person submitting a written request to the City to receive the decision;

(d) King County Assessor’s Office; and

(e) Any other party determined appropriate by the City. (Ord. 643 § 11, 2017; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.84.040 Notice of public hearing.

(1) Contents. The notice of public hearing shall contain the following information:

(a) The file number(s);

(b) The name of the applicant or the applicant’s representative;

(c) The date, time and place of the hearing;

(d) A description of the subject property reasonably sufficient to inform the public of its location;

(e) A description of the proposed project action and a list of the project permits included in the application;

(f) A statement that all interested persons may appear and provide testimony;

(g) The sections of the code that are pertinent to the hearing procedure;

(h) A statement of when and how written comments may be admitted;

(i) The name and contact information of a local government representative from whom additional information may be obtained;

(j) A statement that a copy of the application, all documents and evidence relied upon by the applicant and applicable criteria are available for copy and inspection at no cost;

(k) A statement that a copy of the staff report will be available for copy and inspection at least seven days prior to the hearing at no cost.

(2) Time of Notice of Public Hearing. Notice shall be provided not less than 15 days prior to the hearing date. Any posted notice shall be removed by the applicant within 15 days following the public hearing.

(3) Notice – Exception to Public Hearing Notice Requirements. If testimony cannot be completed prior to adjournment on the date set for a hearing, the presiding official shall:

(a) Announce prior to adjournment the time and place said hearing will be continued; or

(b) Provide mailed notice for a continued hearing to all parties of record, when a new time and place are determined. (Ord. 643 § 11, 2017; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.84.050 Notice methods.

(1) Notice of application, SEPA determination and notice of public hearing shall be noticed in accordance with this section. Notice of final decision shall be noticed in accordance with WMC 21.84.030.

(2) Posting at City-Designated Locations. All notices shall be posted at the designated City Hall and Post Office location and on the City website.

(3) Posting On Site. Posting of the property for site-specific proposals shall be placed on each public right-of-way adjacent to the subject property and clearly visible from the public street or a public area.

(a) When the property does not abut an open public right-of-way, the posting shall be located in an open public right-of-way within 10 feet of where the private lane, shared driveway, or unopened right-of-way connects.

(b) Additional notice boards may be required if the City determines that additional notice boards are necessary to provide adequate public notice.

(c) Removal of the notice board prior to the end of the notice period may be cause for discontinuance of the Department review until the notice board is replaced and remains in place for the specified time period.

(4) Publishing. Published notice shall be published in the official City newspaper or another newspaper of general circulation in the affected area. The newspaper issuing the notice shall issue an affidavit or declaration of publication. The content of the published notice shall include the following:

(a) Project location;

(b) Project description;

(c) Type of permit(s) required;

(d) Comment period dates; and

(e) Location where the complete application may be reviewed.

(5) Mailing. Mailed notice shall be sent by first class postage as follows:

(a) Written notice, at a minimum, shall be sent to the following addresses:

(i) The applicant and/or property owner;

(ii) Any State, Federal, or local agencies with jurisdiction related to the project;

(iii) Owners of property in an area within 500 feet of the site, and to the extent possible to tenants or residents living within 500 feet of the site; provided such area shall be expanded as necessary to send mailed notice to at least 20 different property owners, and tenants or residents.

(b) All mailed notices shall be deemed to have been provided or received on the date the notice is deposited in the mail or personally delivered, whichever occurs first.

(c) The address of the property owner and/or taxpayer of record on file with the King County or Snohomish County Assessor’s Office shall serve as the official record where the notice is mailed. Notice mailed to persons at their known address shall be deemed to have been received by those persons if those persons and their addresses are named in a declaration of mailing. The failure of any person to actually receive the notice shall not invalidate any permit or approval.

(6) Declarations and Affidavits. The person(s) responsible for completing the notices shall sign a written affidavit or declaration affirming the notices were completed in accordance with this section.

(7) Additional Notices. The Director may provide additional notice to persons other than those required to receive notice under the code. (Ord. 643 § 11, 2017; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.84.060 Responsibility of Director and/or his/her designees for hearing.

Repealed by Ord. 643. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.84.070 Conflict of interest, ethics, open public meetings, appearance of fairness.

Repealed by Ord. 643. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.84.080 Ex parte communications.

Repealed by Ord. 643. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.84.090 Disqualification.

Repealed by Ord. 643. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.84.100 Burden and nature of proof.

Repealed by Ord. 643. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.84.110 Order of proceedings.

Repealed by Ord. 643. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.84.120 Decision and notice of decision.

Repealed by Ord. 643. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


21.84.130 Issuance of notice of final decision.

Repealed by Ord. 643. (Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016)


Chapter 21.85 APPEALS

Sections:

21.85.010    Appeal of decisions.

21.85.020    Standing to initiate appeal.

21.85.030    Administrative appeal procedures.

21.85.040    Procedure for closed record decision.


21.85.010 Appeal of decisions.

(1) Project permit applications may be appealed as provided in the project permit application framework in WMC 21.83.020. 

(2) Time to File. Decisions shall be appealed as follows: 

(a) Administrative appeals shall be filed within 14 calendar days following issuance of a notice of decision. Appeals and the appeal fee must be submitted to the City no later than 4:00 p.m. on the last business day of the appeal period. If a determination of nonsignificance (SEPA) with a comment period is issued concurrently with the project decision, the appeal period shall be extended an additional seven days.

(b) Judicial appeals shall be filed in King County Superior Court by filing a land use petition within 21 days pursuant to Chapter 36.70C RCW, or in the case of a shoreline permit, to the Shoreline Hearings Board pursuant to RCW 90.58.140.

(3) Burden of Proof. The appellant shall have the burden of proof by a preponderance of evidence that the decision was not supported by substantial evidence, except SEPA threshold determinations, as to which the appellant shall have the burden of proof by a clearly erroneous standard.

(4) Appeal Submittal Materials. Each appeal shall be in writing, be accompanied by an appeal fee as set forth by the City’s current fee schedule, and contain the following information:

(a) Appellant’s name, address and phone number;

(b) Appellant’s statement describing his or her standing to appeal;

(c) Identification of the application that is the subject of the appeal;

(d) Appellant’s statement of grounds for appeal and the facts upon which the appeal is based;

(e) The relief sought, including the specific nature and extent;

(f) A statement that the appellant has read the appeal and believes the contents to be true, followed by the appellant’s signature.

(5) Effect. The timely filing of an administrative appeal shall stay the effective date of the hearing body’s decision until the appeal is adjudicated by the Council or withdrawn. (Ord. 683 § 2, 2019; Ord. 629 § 1, 2016; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016. Formerly 21.86.010)


21.85.020 Standing to initiate appeal.

(1) Standing. Only parties of record with standing may initiate an administrative appeal.

(a) For a Type I decision, only the applicant, property owner, and the City shall have standing;

(b) For a Type II or III decision, the following parties shall have standing:

(i) The applicant;

(ii) The property owner;

(iii) The City;

(iv) Any person or agency who submitted written comments to the City prior to the close of the public comment period provided in a legal notice; and 

(v) Any person or agency who submitted written comments or provided testimony at a predecision hearing.

(vi) Persons who have only signed petitions or mechanically produced form letters shall be excluded from having standing as a party of record. (Ord. 683 § 2, 2019; Ord. 629 § 3, 2016; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016. Formerly 21.86.030)


21.85.030 Administrative appeal procedures.

(1) Time Limit. Administrative appeals of project permits, whether an open-record appeal hearing or a closed-record appeal, shall be considered and decided within the following time periods. The parties may mutually agree to extend these time periods.

(a) Ninety days for an open-record appeal hearing; and

(b) Sixty days for a closed-record appeal.

(2) Consolidated Appeals. All appeals of project permit application decisions, other than an appeal of determination of significance (DS), shall be considered together in a consolidated appeal. If an appeal of a SEPA threshold determination is filed and action on the project permit involves a predecision hearing, the appeal hearing and predecision hearing shall be combined.

(3) Appeal of SEPA Determination. If an appeal of a SEPA threshold determination is filed and action on the project permit involves an open public record hearing, the appeal hearing and hearing shall be combined.

(4) Appeal Dismissal. The Hearing Examiner may summarily dismiss an appeal in whole or in part without a hearing if the Hearing Examiner determines that the appeal is untimely, incomplete, without merit on its face, frivolous, beyond the scope of the Hearing Examiner’s jurisdiction, or brought merely to secure a delay. Summary dismissal orders shall be issued within 14 days of receipt by the Hearing Examiner of the appeal or a request for dismissal, whichever is later.

(5) Notice of Appeal. The Director shall provide public notice of the appeal as provided in Chapter 2.30 WMC.

(6) Issuance of Decision. The City shall issue a written decision of appeal within 10 business days after the conclusion of the hearing, unless the appellant agrees to an extended time.

(7) Decision. The hearing body may affirm, reverse in whole or in part, or may modify the permit or decision being appealed, or may remand the matter back to City staff with directions for further processing. If the application is remanded back to City staff for further processing, the hearing body’s decision shall not be considered a final decision, except for purposes of application time limitations. If a new decision is issued by the City, a new appeal period shall commence consistent with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 683 § 2, 2019; Ord. 643 § 13, 2017; Ord. 629 § 4, 2016; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016. Formerly 21.86.040)


21.85.040 Procedure for closed record decision.

(1) The provisions of Chapter 21.84 WMC shall apply to a closed record decision hearing, except as noted below.

(2) The closed record decision shall be on the record before the hearing body, and no new evidence may be presented. (Ord. 683 § 2, 2019; Ord. 611 § 8 (Att. A), 2016. Formerly 21.86.050)


Chapter 21.86 TEXT AMENDMENT PROCEDURES

Sections:

21.86.010    Purpose.

21.86.020    Applicability.

21.86.030    Initiation of a text amendment.

21.86.040    Application for a text amendment.

21.86.050    Initiation of review procedures.

21.86.060    Text amendment review procedures.

21.86.070    Exception to review procedures.

21.86.080    Public participation.

21.86.090    Notice.

21.86.100    Approval criteria.

21.86.110    Comprehensive Plan consistency.

21.86.120    Appeal.

21.86.130    Amendments to the Shoreline Master Program.


21.86.010 Purpose.

This chapter establishes a mechanism for amending the text of development regulations as this term is defined in RCW 36.70A.030. (Ord. 683 § 3 (Att. A), 2019)


21.86.020 Applicability.

This chapter applies to amendments that revise the text language of development regulations codified in the Woodinville Municipal Code, or as adopted otherwise by ordinance or resolution, and changes specific standards, procedures, meanings, and other provisions. (Ord. 683 § 3 (Att. A), 2019)


21.86.030 Initiation of a text amendment.

An amendment to the text of a development regulation may be initiated by the City Council, the Planning Commission, City staff, or any resident or property owner of the City of Woodinville. (Ord. 683 § 3 (Att. A), 2019)


21.86.040 Application for a text amendment. 

When a text amendment to a development regulation is initiated by a resident or property owner, an application requesting the text amendment shall be submitted to the Department on a form provided by the City and include the following: 

(1) Name and address of the person or persons requesting the amendment; 

(2) A completed State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA) checklist including Section D: Supplemental Sheet for Non-project Actions; 

(3) A description of the proposed amendment; 

(4) A written statement explaining: 

(a) The purpose for the proposed amendment; 

(b) How the proposed amendment is consistent with the Woodinville Comprehensive Plan; and 

(c) How the proposed amendment is consistent with other applicable City adopted development regulations, plans and policies; and 

(5) Payment of the application fee set forth in the adopted fee schedule, including fees for SEPA. (Ord. 683 § 3 (Att. A), 2019)


21.86.050 Initiation of review procedures. 

(1) Where a text amendment is received pursuant to WMC 21.86.040, the Planning Commission shall review the text amendment and send a recommendation to the City Council that:

(a) The application has merit for further consideration; or

(b) The application does not have merit for further consideration. 

(2) The City Council shall consider the Planning Commission’s recommendation and decide whether to send the text amendment for further review under the procedures in WMC 21.86.060.

(3) Where a text amendment is initiated by the City Council, Planning Commission or City staff, the text amendment may be sent directly for review under the procedures in WMC 21.86.060. 

(4) The Director is authorized to establish administrative procedures for the orderly gathering and submitting of text amendments to the Planning Commission under this section. (Ord. 683 § 3 (Att. A), 2019)


21.86.060 Text amendment review procedures. 

Except for as provided in WMC 21.86.070, the following shall apply to the processing of a text amendment under this chapter: 

(1) The Planning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing on the text amendment; 

(2) After the public hearing and after considering the criteria in WMC 21.86.100, the Planning Commission shall vote and transmit a written recommendation on the text amendment to the City Council; 

(3) The City Council shall consider the Planning Commission’s recommendation and may hold its own public hearing before acting on the text amendment; 

(4) City staff shall prepare a report on the text amendment to be presented to the hearing body considering the amendment; 

(5) Notice of the public hearing shall be provided pursuant to WMC 21.86.090;

(6) The city council may approve, approve with modifications, remand to the Planning Commission for further proceedings, or deny the text amendment. (Ord. 683 § 3 (Att. A), 2019)


21.86.070 Exception to review procedures.

The following are exempt from the procedures set forth in this chapter:

(1) Amendments that correct typographical errors, correct cross-references, make address or name changes, or clarify language in a regulation without changing its effect; or 

(2) Adoption of State Building and Energy Codes pursuant to RCW Title 19. (Ord. 683 § 3 (Att. A), 2019)


21.86.080 Public participation.

The public participation prescribed in WMC 21.88.110 should be considered in processing text amendments to development regulations. (Ord. 683 § 3 (Att. A), 2019)


21.86.090 Notice.

(1) Published notice of a public hearing shall be given in a newspaper of general circulation within the City boundaries at least 15 calendar days prior to the hearing date. However, subsequent hearing dates on the same proposal being considered by the same hearing body do not require additional publication of notice.

(2) Posted notice shall be given in the same manner as Planning Commission and City Council regular meetings.

(3) The content of the notice shall include:

(a) The time and place of the public hearing;

(b) A purpose statement which succinctly describes the proposal;

(c) A statement of the right of any person to submit written comments and to appear at the public hearing and give comments orally; and

(d) A statement of the availability of the official file.

(4) The requirements for notice shall not limit the City’s ability to providing additional means of noticing. 

(5) Notice of the text amendment shall be transmitted to State agencies consistent with RCW 36.70A.106.

(6) If the text amendment imposes a requirement to inform a buyer or tenant of real property pursuant to Chapter 64.06 RCW, the ordinance containing the text amendment must be transmitted to the Municipal Research and Services Center for posting in accordance with RCW 43.110.030(2)(e). (Ord. 683 § 3 (Att. A), 2019)


21.86.100 Approval criteria.

The City Council may amend the text of a development regulation only if it finds:

(1) The proposed amendment is consistent with the goals, policies and provisions of the Woodinville Comprehensive Plan;

(2) The proposed amendment bears a substantial relation to public health, safety, or welfare; and

(3) The proposed amendment advances the public interest of the community. (Ord. 683 § 3 (Att. A), 2019)


21.86.110 Comprehensive Plan consistency.

If a Comprehensive Plan amendment is required to satisfy the approval criteria in WMC 21.86.100, approval of the Comprehensive Plan amendment is required prior to or concurrently with the granting of an approval of a text amendment to a development regulation. (Ord. 683 § 3 (Att. A), 2019)


21.86.120 Appeal.

City Council action on an ordinance to adopt a text amendment to a development regulation is a final decision but may be reviewable by filing a petition for review with the Central Growth Management Hearings Board in accordance with RCW 36.70A.290, except as otherwise provided by law. (Ord. 683 § 3 (Att. A), 2019)


21.86.130 Amendments to the Shoreline Master Program.

This section applies to amendments to the Shoreline Master Program.

(1) Review procedures are prescribed in Chapter 173-26 WAC. A minimum of one public hearing shall be held prior to City Council action on a proposed amendment.

(2) A City Council decision approving an amendment to the Shoreline Master Program shall be transmitted to the Washington State Department of Ecology, which will approve, recommend specific changes necessary to make the amendment consistent with Chapter 90.58 RCW and applicable guidelines, or deny the amendment.

(3) Approval by the Washington State Department of Ecology is required before an amendment to the Shoreline Master Program goes into effect. (Ord. 683 § 3 (Att. A), 2019)


Chapter 21.87 AREA-WIDE ZONING MAP AMENDMENT PROCEDURES

Sections:

21.87.010    Purpose.

21.87.020    Applicability.

21.87.030    Initiation.

21.87.040    Review procedures.

21.87.050    Public participation.

21.87.060    Notice.

21.87.070    Approval criteria.

21.87.080    Comprehensive Plan consistency.

21.87.090    Appeal.


21.87.010 Purpose.

This chapter establishes a mechanism for area-wide reclassification of land from one zoning district to another zoning district. (Ord. 683 § 4 (Att. B), 2019)


21.87.020 Applicability.

(1) This chapter applies to an amendment of the City’s official zoning map adopted pursuant to WMC 21.20.150. This chapter does not apply to a site-specific reclassification of land that is a quasi-judicial rezone subject to WMC 21.80.300.

(2) The review procedures set forth in this chapter shall apply to an area-wide zoning map amendment:

(a) That is consistent with and implements the land use map of the comprehensive plan; and

(b) An amendment to the Comprehensive Plan is not required.

(3) If an amendment to the Comprehensive Plan is required, the City may:

(a) Combine the area-wide zoning map amendment with the Comprehensive Plan amendment under the procedures set forth in Chapter 21.88 WMC; or

(b) Process the area-wide zoning map amendment separately from the Comprehensive Plan amendment, provided WMC 21.87.080 is fulfilled. (Ord. 683 § 4 (Att. B), 2019)


21.87.030 Initiation.

An area-wide zoning map amendment may be initiated by the City Council, Planning Commission, or City staff. (Ord. 683 § 4 (Att. B), 2019)


21.87.040 Review procedures.

The following shall apply to processing an amendment to the official zoning map:

(1) The amendment shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission.

(2) The City staff shall prepare a report on the amendment to be presented to the Planning Commission.

(3) The Planning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing on the amendment. Notice of hearing shall be provided pursuant to WMC 21.87.060.

(4) After consideration of the amendment and the criteria in WMC 21.87.070, the Planning Commission shall vote and transmit a copy of its recommendation to the City Council.

(5) The City Council at a public meeting shall consider the Planning Commission’s recommendation. The City Council may schedule public hearings as necessary to support consideration of the Planning Commission’s recommendation.

(6) The City Council may approve, approve with modifications, remand to the Planning Commission for further proceedings, or deny the amendment.

(7) The procedures in this section shall constitute the minimum necessary and nothing in this section shall prohibit the City from requiring additional procedures to allow for more effective public participation. (Ord. 683 § 4 (Att. B), 2019)


21.87.050 Public participation.

(1) Pursuant to RCW 36.70A.140, the City’s efforts to amend area-wide the zoning map shall include early and continuous public participation.

(2) The City shall provide broad dissemination of proposals and alternatives, opportunity for written comments, public meetings after effective notice, provision for open discussion, communication programs, information services, and consideration of and response to public comments. Notice shall be reasonably calculated to provide notification to property owners and other affected and interested individuals, tribes, government agencies, businesses, school districts, and organizations of proposed amendments to the Comprehensive Plan. (Ord. 683 § 4 (Att. B), 2019)


21.87.060 Notice.

(1) Published notice of a public hearing shall be given in a newspaper of general circulation within the City boundaries at least 15 calendar days prior to the hearing date. However, subsequent hearing dates on the same proposal being considered by the same hearing body do not require additional publication of notice.

(2) Posted notice shall be given in the same manner as Planning Commission and City Council regular meetings.

(3) The content of the notice shall include:

(a) The time and place of the public hearing;

(b) A purpose statement which succinctly describes the proposal;

(c) A statement of the right of any person to submit written comments and to appear at the public hearing and give comments orally; and

(d) A statement of the availability of the official file.

(4) The requirements for notice shall not limit the City’s ability to providing additional means of noticing. 

(5) Notice of the area-wide zoning map amendment shall be transmitted to State agencies consistent with RCW 36.70A.106.

(6) Mailed notice sent by first class postage may be given to all property owners with property being considered for a reclassification of the zoning. (Ord. 683 § 4 (Att. B), 2019)


21.87.070 Approval criteria.

The City Council may amend the official zoning map if it finds:

(1) The proposed amendment is consistent with the goals, policies and provisions of the Woodinville Comprehensive Plan;

(2) The proposed amendment bears a substantial relation to public health, safety, or welfare; and

(3) The proposed amendment advances the public interest of the community. (Ord. 683 § 4 (Att. B), 2019)


21.87.080 Comprehensive Plan consistency.

If a Comprehensive Plan amendment is required to satisfy the approval criteria in WMC 21.87.070, approval of the Comprehensive Plan amendment is required prior to or concurrently with the granting of an approval of an amendment to the official zoning map. (Ord. 683 § 4 (Att. B), 2019)


21.87.090 Appeal.

City Council action on an ordinance to adopt amendments to the official zoning map is a final decision but may be reviewable by filing a petition for review with the Central Growth Management Hearings Board in accordance with RCW 36.70A.290, except as otherwise provided by law. (Ord. 683 § 4 (Att. B), 2019)


Chapter 21.88 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AMENDMENT PROCEDURES

Sections:

21.88.010    Purpose.

21.88.020    Applicability.

21.88.030    Initiation.

21.88.040    Annual amendment process.

21.88.050    Outside the annual amendment process.

21.88.060    Amendment submittal.

21.88.070    Application.

21.88.080    Cumulative effects.

21.88.090    State Environmental Policy Act review.

21.88.100    Review procedures.

21.88.110    Public participation.

21.88.120    Notice.

21.88.130    Approval criteria.

21.88.140    Appeal.


21.88.010 Purpose.

This chapter establishes a mechanism for amending the Woodinville Comprehensive Plan. It provides for simultaneous review of proposals to allow cumulative impact analysis of all applications on a City-wide basis and honors the community’s long-term investment in the Comprehensive Plan, through public participation. (Ord. 683 § 5 (Att. C), 2019)


21.88.020 Applicability.

This chapter applies to text amendments to the language of the Comprehensive Plan and/or to amendments of the Comprehensive Plan land use map. (Ord. 683 § 5 (Att. C), 2019)


21.88.030 Initiation.

An amendment to the text of the Comprehensive Plan or an amendment to the Comprehensive Plan land use map may be initiated by any person or entity. (Ord. 683 § 5 (Att. C), 2019)


21.88.040 Annual amendment process.

The City Council shall consider amendments to the Woodinville Comprehensive Plan no more than once each calendar year, except as provided in WMC 21.88.050. (Ord. 683 § 5 (Att. C), 2019)


21.88.050 Outside the annual amendment process.

The City Council may consider amendments to the Comprehensive Plan outside of the annual amendment process set forth in WMC 21.88.040 for the following:

(1) The initial adoption of a subarea plan that clarifies, supplements, or implements Comprehensive Plan policies and have had cumulative impacts addressed pursuant to WMC 21.88.080;

(2) The adoption or amendment of a shoreline master program under the procedures set forth in Chapter 90.58 RCW;

(3) The amendment of the capital and public facilities element of a comprehensive plan that occurs concurrently with the adoption or amendment of the City’s budget;

(4) The adoption of Comprehensive Plan amendments necessary to enact a planned action under RCW 43.21C.031(2); and

(5) Whenever an emergency exists or to resolve an order from the Central Puget Sound Growth Management Hearings Board or Court. (Ord. 683 § 5 (Att. C), 2019)


21.88.060 Amendment submittal.

(1) Applications to amend the Comprehensive Plan shall be submitted to the City.

(2) Applications shall be assigned to a docket consisting of all comprehensive plan amendment applications received during the preceding 12 months from the date prescribed in subsection (3) of this section. A current copy of the docket shall be maintained by the City and shall be available for public inspection during regular business hours.

(3) An application must be received by the City by the last business day in September to be included in the upcoming annual amendment process. Applications received after this deadline shall be placed on the next docket for the following annual amendment process, except as provided in subsection (4) of this section.

(4) The Director may, at his or her sole discretion, accept applications filed after the deadline if review has not begun on the pending applications and acceptance of the late application will not have a significant impact on the processing of the pending applications. (Ord. 683 § 5 (Att. C), 2019)


21.88.070 Application.

This section shall not apply to Comprehensive Plan amendments initiated by the City Council, Planning Commission, or City staff. All other applicants shall submit an application on a form provided by the City and include the following information:

(1) Name and address of the person or persons proposing the amendment;

(2) A completed environmental checklist (SEPA);

(3) A description and/or map of the proposed amendment;

(4) A written statement explaining the following:

(a) The purpose for the proposed amendment;

(b) How the amendment is consistent with the Washington State Growth Management Act;

(c) How the amendment is consistent with the adopted County-wide planning policies; and

(d) How the amendment furthers the purpose of the City’s Comprehensive Plan.

(5) An application fee set forth in the fee schedule. Additionally, the applicant may be responsible for costs pursuant to WMC 21.88.090. (Ord. 683 § 5 (Att. C), 2019)


21.88.080 Cumulative effects.

Except as otherwise provided in WMC 21.88.050, all proposed annual amendments to the Comprehensive Plan shall be considered concurrently so the cumulative effect of the various proposals can be ascertained. The analysis of the cumulative effects shall be conducted under State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA) review prescribed in WMC 21.88.090. (Ord. 683 § 5 (Att. C), 2019)


21.88.090 State Environmental Policy Act review.

(1) After each January 7th, the City’s responsible official shall review the cumulative environmental effect of all proposed Comprehensive Plan amendments, pursuant to the State Environmental Policy Act (Chapter 43.21C RCW).

(2) If the responsible official determines that a draft final or supplemental environmental impact statement (EIS) or other appropriate environmental review is warranted, applicants may be responsible for a full or proportionate share of the costs to prepare the environmental analysis as determined by the responsible official.

(3) Payment of a full or proportionate share of the costs to prepare the environmental analysis does not guarantee the proposed Comprehensive Plan amendment will be approved. (Ord. 683 § 5 (Att. C), 2019)


21.88.100 Review procedures.

(1) The City staff shall prepare a report on the submitted amendments to be presented to the Planning Commission. Amendments not initiated by the City shall be presented as submitted unless the applicant agrees otherwise.

(2) The Planning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing on the docket of amendments. Notice of hearing shall be provided pursuant to WMC 21.88.120.

(3) After considering each amendment on the docket, the Planning Commission shall vote and transmit to the City Council a written recommendation on each amendment. The Planning Commission may modify City-initiated amendments but may not modify amendments initiated by other entities unless the applicant agrees otherwise.

(4) Within 60 days of receipt of the Planning Commission’s recommendations, the City Council at a public meeting shall consider the same.

(a) The City Council may schedule public hearings as necessary to consider the Planning Commission’s recommendations.

(b) If the City Council makes a substantial modification to the Planning Commission’s recommendation, and the modification was not previously considered by the Planning Commission, at least one public hearing shall be held on the modification prior to the City Council acting on the amendment.

(5) The City Council shall vote to approve, modify and approve, or deny each of the Planning Commission’s recommendations, or the City Council may remand an amendment to the Planning Commission for further proceedings. If an amendment is remanded, the City Council shall specify the time within which the Planning Commission shall report back to the City Council its findings and recommendations on the matters referred to it.

(6) The procedures in this section shall constitute the minimum necessary and nothing in this section shall prohibit the City from requiring additional procedures that allow for more effective public participation. (Ord. 683 § 5 (Att. C), 2019)


21.88.110 Public participation.

(1) Pursuant to RCW 36.70A.140, the City’s efforts to amend the Comprehensive Plan shall include early and continuous public participation.

(2) The City shall provide broad dissemination of proposals and alternatives, opportunity for written comments, public meetings after effective notice, provision for open discussion, communication programs, information services, and consideration of and response to public comments. Notice shall be reasonably calculated to provide notification to property owners and other affected and interested individuals, tribes, government agencies, businesses, school districts, and organizations of proposed amendments to the Comprehensive Plan. (Ord. 683 § 5 (Att. C), 2019)


21.88.120 Notice.

(1) Published notice of a public hearing shall be given in a newspaper of general circulation within the City boundaries at least 15 calendar days prior to the hearing date. However, subsequent hearing dates on the same proposal being considered by the same hearing body do not require additional publication of notice.

(2) Posted notice shall be given in the same manner as Planning Commission and City Council regular meetings.

(3) The content of the notice shall include:

(a) The time and place of the public hearing;

(b) A purpose statement which succinctly describes the proposal;

(c) A statement of the right of any person to submit written comments and to appear at the public hearing and give comments orally; and

(d) A statement of the availability of the official file.

(4) The requirements for notice shall not limit the City’s ability to providing additional means of noticing. 

(5) Notice of the Comprehensive Plan amendment shall be transmitted to State agencies consistent with RCW 36.70A.106. (Ord. 683 § 5 (Att. C), 2019)


21.88.130 Approval criteria.

The City Council may amend the Comprehensive Plan if it finds:

(1) The amendment is consistent with the Growth Management Act (Chapter 36.70A RCW);

(2) The amendment is consistent with County-wide planning policies;

(3) The amendment does not conflict with other goals, policies, and provisions of the Woodinville Comprehensive Plan;

(4) The amendment is compatible with existing or planned land uses and the surrounding development pattern; and

(5) The amendment will result in long-term benefit to the community as a whole and advances the public interest of the community. (Ord. 683 § 5 (Att. C), 2019)


21.88.140 Appeal.

City Council action on an ordinance to adopt amendments to the Woodinville Comprehensive Plan is a final decision but may be reviewable by filing a petition for review with the Central Growth Management Hearings Board in accordance with RCW 36.70A.290, except as otherwise provided by law. (Ord. 683 § 5 (Att. C), 2019)


Chapter 21.89 ANNEXATION PROCEDURES

Sections:

21.89.010    Procedures.

21.89.020    Application fee.

21.89.030    Information required for annexation proposal.

21.89.040    Criteria for annexations.


21.89.010 Procedures.

The procedures for annexation of unincorporated territory to the City of Woodinville are set forth in Chapter 35A.14 RCW as supplemented by this chapter. (Ord. 683 § 6 (Att. D), 2019)


21.89.020 Application fee.

Whenever an annexation is proposed via the petition method, the applicant shall pay the fee adopted in the City’s fee schedule. (Ord. 683 § 6 (Att. D), 2019)


21.89.030 Information required for annexation proposal. 

The following information should be included in an annexation request proposed by the petition method:

(1) Statistical data including, but not limited to, legal descriptions, estimated population, number of residential units and other land uses within the area to be annexed; 

(2) Maps showing the outline boundaries of the area to be annexed; 

(3) An analysis of existing and needed public services;

(4) Information on any special circumstances such as public health or safety problems; 

(5) Cost-benefit analysis of the annexation; and 

(6) Other information requested by the City to help evaluate the annexation proposal. (Ord. 683 § 6 (Att. D), 2019)


21.89.040 Criteria for annexations. 

When considering annexation proposals, the following criteria may be used in evaluating the proposal:

(1) The probability of substantial future financial benefit to the City;

(2) Areas to be annexed are contiguous to current City limits and should have regular, logical boundaries; 

(3) The public health and welfare of areas to be annexed and the City as a whole should be enhanced through annexation; 

(4) There is a capacity to provide the full range of urban services to newly annexed areas in a timely manner without reducing the level of those services to other residents and businesses; and

(5) Existing and proposed uses and development standards for areas considered for annexation should be consistent with adopted City plans and standards. (Ord. 683 § 6 (Att. D), 2019)


Title 22 DEVELOPMENT IMPACTS

Chapters:

22.10    Methods to Mitigate Development Impacts

22.20    Repealed


Chapter 22.10 METHODS TO MITIGATE  DEVELOPMENT IMPACTS

Sections:

22.10.010    Purpose.

22.10.020    Definition of development.

22.10.030    Determination of direct impact.

22.10.040    Costs.

22.10.050    Mitigation of direct impacts.

22.10.060    Methods of mitigation.

22.10.070    Appeals.


22.10.010 Purpose.

It is the purpose of this chapter to provide alternatives for prospective developers of land within the City to mitigate the direct impacts that have been specifically identified by the City as a consequence of proposed development, and to make provisions for, including but not limited to the public health, safety, and general welfare, for open spaces, drainage ways, streets, alleys, other public ways, water supplies, sanitary wastes, parks, playgrounds, and sites for schools and school grounds. (Ord. 30 § 1, 1993)


22.10.020 Definition of development.

For purposes of this chapter, the term “development” shall include, but not be limited to, subdivisions, short subdivisions, binding site plans, building permits, and any other development activity defined by the zoning code. (Ord. 30 § 1, 1993)


22.10.030 Determination of direct impact.

Before any development is given the required approval or is permitted to proceed, the official or body charged with deciding whether such approval should be given shall determine direct impacts, if any, that are a direct consequence of the proposed development and which require mitigation, considering, but not limited to, the following factors:

(1) Predevelopment versus postdevelopment need for services such as City streets, sewers, water supplies, drainage, facilities, parks, playgrounds, recreational facilities, schools, police services, fire services, and other municipal facilities and services. Need shall be measured not only from increased demand created by the development itself, but any reduction in the municipal facilities or services brought about as a direct result of the     development.

(2) Likelihood that a direct impact of a proposed development would require mitigation due to the cumulative effect of such impact when aggregated with the similar impacts of future development in the immediate vicinity of the proposed development;

(3) Size, number, condition and proximity of existing facilities to be affected by the proposed development;

(4) Nature and quantity of capital improvements reasonably necessary to mitigate specific direct impacts identified as a consequence of the proposed development;

(5) Likelihood that the users of the proposed development will benefit from any mitigating capital improvements or programs; and

(6) Any significant adverse environmental impacts of the proposed development identified in the process of complying with the Environmental Policy Ordinance or the State Environmental Policy Act. (Ord. 193 § 1, 1997; Ord. 30 § 1, 1993)


22.10.040 Costs.

The cost of any investigation, analysis or reports necessary for a determination of direct impact shall be borne by the applicant. (Ord. 30 § 1, 1993)


22.10.050 Mitigation of direct impacts.

The official or body charged with granting the necessary approval for a proposed development shall review an applicant’s proposal for mitigation, any identified direct impacts and determine whether such proposal is a reasonable and acceptable mitigation measure considering the cost and land requirements of the required improvement and the extent to which the necessity for the improvement is attributable to the direct impacts of the proposed development. No official or body shall approve a development unless reasonable provisions have been made to mitigate identified direct impacts that are direct consequences of such development. (Ord. 30 § 1, 1993)


22.10.060 Methods of mitigation.

(1) The methods of mitigating identified direct impacts required as a condition of any development approval may include, but are not limited to, dedication of land to any public body, off-site improvement, on-site improvements, and other capital or noncapital methods that may effectively reduce direct impacts. 

(2) In lieu of a dedication of land or to mitigate a direct impact that has been identified as a consequence of a proposed development, the City may approve a voluntary payment agreement with the developer, and shall be subject to the following provisions:

(a) The official or body approving development must find that the money offered will mitigate or is a satisfactory alternative to mitigate the identified direct impact.

(b) The payment shall be held in a reserve account and may only be expended to fund a capital improvement or program agreed upon by the parties to mitigate the identified direct impact.

(c) The payment shall be expended in all cases within five years of collection, unless otherwise agreed to by the developer.

(d) Any payment not expended within five years of collection shall be refunded to the property owners of record at the time of the refund with interest at the rate earned in the City’s reserve account applicable at the time of refund. If the payment is not expended within the five years due to delay attributable to the developer, the payment shall be refunded without interest.

(e) Property owners entitled to a refund and/or interest under the provisions of this chapter may voluntarily and in writing waive their right to a refund for specified period of time in the interest of providing the designated capital improvement or other capital improvement or program identified by the property owner, and acceptable to the City.

(f) The developer may voluntarily and in writing waive, on behalf of the developer and subsequent purchasers, the right to interest and or a refund in order to facilitate completion of an improvement. Under no condition shall such a waiver be required as a condition of approval. Such waiver shall be recorded with the county where the property is situated and shall be binding on subsequent owners.

(3) The developer or applicant may choose to pay a fee in lieu of reservation of all or portions of open space areas required. If the applicant offers to pay money in lieu of open space and if the City accepts the offer, the amount shall be determined based upon the square footage of open space which otherwise would have been required to be provided times the then-current market value per square foot of similarly situated property. (Ord. 30 § 1, 1993)


22.10.070 Appeals.

Any decision of the City official or body made under this chapter, including the determination of direct impact, the type and amount of impact, the extent of the mitigation required, and the selection of the method of mitigation shall be subject to                                             appeal in the same manner and at the same time as appeals of the underlying development permit. Failure to appeal such decision shall prevent the applicant from further judicial review of this issue. (Ord. 193 § 2, 1997; Ord. 30 § 1, 1993)


Chapter 22.20 SCHOOL IMPACT FEES

(Repealed by Ord. 674)


 


Chapter 22.20 SCHOOL IMPACT FEES

(Repealed by Ord. 674)


 


Title 23 (Reserved)


Title 24 (Reserved)



-----------------------------

The Woodinville Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 699, passed July 7, 2020.

Disclaimer: The City Clerk's Office has the official version of the Woodinville Municipal Code. Users should contact the City Clerk's Office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited above.

City Website: https://www.ci.woodinville.wa.us/ City Telephone: (425) 489-2700

Code Publishing Company